Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Human Services - Social Services Administration to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2024 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/25/2025
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=680c08b2243f34dd5f0af795
Extracted: 2025-07-02T15:45:35.550541
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
April 25, 2025
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
House Appropriations Committee
Lowe House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, Maryland 21401
Dear Senator Guzzone and Delegate Barnes:
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has reviewed the actions taken by the
Department of Human Services (DHS) Social Services Administration (SSA) to resolve the 7
repeat audit findings (that were addressed by 13 recommendations) in our June 3, 2021 audit
report. This review was conducted in accordance with a requirement specified in the April 2024
Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR), page 142. The JCR required that, prior to the release of
$250,000 of its administrative appropriation for fiscal year 2025, DHS must take corrective
action on all repeat audit findings on or before November 1, 2024.
The JCR language further provided that OLA submit a report to the budget committees
listing each repeat audit finding along with a determination that each repeat finding was
corrected. The OLA report is required to be submitted to allow 45 days for the budget
committees to review and release the funds prior to the end of the fiscal year.
In accordance with the April 2024 JCR requirement, DHS on behalf of SSA provided a
status report to OLA, dated October 31, 2024, detailing certain corrective actions that had been
completed with respect to all seven repeat audit findings (Exhibit 1). The DHS status report
indicated that corrective actions had been completed for the recommendations on all the repeat
findings (findings 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8).
We reviewed the implementation status for all seven repeat findings that DHS reported as
complete on the status report. Specifically, we reviewed the related documentation, performed

--- Page 2 ---
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Chair -2- April 25, 2025
Delegate Benjamin S. Barnes, Chair
limited tests and analyses of the information, and held discussions with SSA personnel as
necessary to assess the implementation status of the related recommendations. Our review did
not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. As summarized in Exhibit 2, our review determined that SSA took sufficient action
to resolve the recommendations for findings 2, 4 and 7 but had not yet taken sufficient actions to
implement the recommendations for findings 1, 3, 5 and 8. Although SSA had implemented
certain elements of these recommendations, the actions to date did not address the entirety of the
findings as further described in Exhibit 3.
After discussing our review results, SSA generally agreed with the accuracy of the
information presented. We trust our response satisfactorily addresses the JCR requirement.
Please contact me if you need additional information.
Sincerely,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
cc: Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee Members and Staff
Senator William C. Ferguson IV, President of the Senate
Delegate Adrienne A. Jones, Speaker of the House of Delegates
Governor Westley W. Moore
Comptroller Brooke E. Lierman
Treasurer Dereck E. Davis
Attorney General Anthony G. Brown
Secretary Helene T. Grady, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary Rafael J. Lopez, DHS
Marva M. Sutherland, Inspector General, DHS
Shelly-Ann Dyer, Assistant Inspector General, DHS
Alger M. Studstill, Jr., D.B.A, Executive Director, SSA
Tennille R. Thomas, Principal Deputy Executive Director, SSA
Joan M. Peacock, Manager, Audit Compliance Unit, Department of Budget and
Management
Victoria L. Gruber, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Suveksha Bhujel, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Quality Assurance Program
Finding 1
Although the Social Services Administration (SSA) had implemented certain processes to
monitor the administration of child welfare program services by the State’s local
departments of social services (LDSSs), we found they were not necessarily comprehensive
or effective.
Recommendation 1a
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure its
child welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by the LDSSs.
Specifically, we recommend that SSA modify its existing processes to ensure that they
provide comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and functions
to ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies; appropriate and
timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting documentation relating to
services and functions performed (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 1a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
June 2023
11/1/2024
Audit, Compliance, and Quality Improvement (ACQI) was developed
as a result of this finding to monitor federal and state requirements
related to child welfare programs and services administered at the
Local Department of Social Services (LDSS).
ACQI provides weekly reports that encompass several milestone
reports to show what has been completed and what needs to be
completed.
Please provide details On a monthly basis, the ACQI will initiate a notification process for
of corrective action any LDSS that is not meeting established benchmarks and work to
taken. ensure an appropriate plan of action is implemented to address
performance. If an LDSS has an exception request for a specific
benchmark then it is discussed during this monthly meeting.
In August, a new office was created in SSA - Office of Quality, Policy
and Performance Management - to house all Quality Assurance (QA)
functions under one team. SSA is currently in the process of assessing
other state QA models and identifying opportunities to restructure our
QA processes and functions to ensure better efficiency and enhanced
performance outcomes.

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 1b
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure its
child welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by the LDSSs.
Specifically, we recommend that SSA modify its existing processes to ensure that they
provide a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS that addresses all critical
services and functions performed by the LDSSs (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 1b
Status as of Completed Completion Date: December
11/1/2024 2021
ACQI developed and issued a QA process for QA reviews that is
Please provide details completed at the LDSS level on a quarterly basis for all 24
of corrective action jurisdictions. Results are collected and analyzed; any LDSS that does
taken. not meet the identified benchmark for performance must submit a plan
of action to remedy the performance deficiency.
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
Finding 2
SSA had not established effective monitoring of the LDSSs to ensure that foster children
were placed in the least restrictive environment and received
required services.
Recommendation 2a
We recommend that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with foster care
requirements. Specifically, we recommend that SSA ensure the applicable legal
documentation is included in each foster child’s case record in the statewide case
management system (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2a
Status as of Completed Completion Date: February
11/1/2024 2023
At the time of the audit report there was a 100% review of all foster
Please provide details
care cases to ensure compliance with legal requirements. Moving
of corrective action
forward this was incorporated into the ongoing QA process that occurs
taken.
at the local 24 jurisdictions on a quarterly basis.
Recommendation 2b
We recommend that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with foster care
requirements. Specifically, we recommend that SSA ensure the LDSSs place children in
the least restrictive environment and document attempts to place the child with a relative
(repeat).

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Recommendation 2b
Status as of Completed Completion Date: February
11/1/2024 2023
CJAMS was enhanced to require that at every change of placement the
Please provide details
case worker must indicate and provide a narrative description that the
of corrective action
placement was the least restrictive environment at the time of
taken.
placement. This is also reviewed during the quarterly QA process.
Recommendation 2c
We recommend that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance with foster care
requirements. Specifically, we recommend that SSA ensure compliance with medical,
dental, and education requirements by reviewing applicable documentation (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 2c
Status as of Completed Completion Date: February
11/1/2024 2023
Health policy and guidance documents were updated and released as a
result of the audit and were then incorporated in the weekly and
monthly ACQI process to ensure ongoing compliance. Technical
assistance has been provided as needed at the local jurisdiction.
Education policy and guidance documents were updated and released
as a result of the audit. CJAMS was enhanced to make enrollment and
start date mandatory entries for every child that is school age.
SSA hosted a series of webinars with case workers, resource providers,
managed care organizations, and health providers to educate
Please provide details
professionals on the importance of medical documentation and
of corrective action
addressing any challenges and barriers with documentation.
taken.
CJAMS enhancement was implemented to require labeling of
documentation in a standardized format.
DHS is currently in the process of exploring the feasibility of
developing and implementing an electronic health passport that would
create a portal that would allow for caregivers and medical
professionals to submit documentation in real time. Also, DHS in
partnership with MDTHINK is working on creating a data interchange
to ensure that medical and dental documentation is automatically
imported into CJAMS.

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Child Protective Services
Finding 3
SSA’s monitoring process was not effective for both ensuring the timeliness of child abuse
and neglect investigations and for the required assessments of substance-exposed newborns
conducted by the LDSSs.
Recommendation 3a
We recommend that SSA establish effective procedures to ensure that the LDSSs conduct
and complete investigations of allegations of child abuse and neglect and safety and risk
assessments of controlled substance-exposed newborns in a timely manner, as required by
State law and regulations (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3a
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
March 2021
11/1/2024
ACQI provides weekly reports that encompass several milestone
reports to show what has been completed and what needs to be
completed, to include CPS initial face-to-face compliance, case
initiations, timely documentation, and CPS case closures.
On a monthly basis, the ACQI will initiate a notification process for
Please provide details
any LDSS that is not meeting established benchmarks and work to
of corrective action
ensure an appropriate plan of action is implemented to address
taken.
performance. If an LDSS has an exception request for a specific
benchmark then it is discussed during this monthly meeting.
SSA issued guidance and tips sheets to all LDSS on timely CPS case
initiations, initial face-to-face compliance, and case closures. SSA
continues to provide technical assistance to LDSS as needed.
Recommendation 3b
We recommend that SSA enhance the accuracy and completeness of system reports to
ensure they can be reliably used to monitor compliance with these requirements (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 3b
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
March 2021
11/1/2024
SSA developed and implemented the SEN milestone report to allow
for the monitoring and compliance of SEN requirements at both the
Please provide details
LDSS level and SSA. CJAMS enhancements were also completed to
of corrective action
require the identification of reasons for delay in initial contact. This is
taken.
also reviewed during the quarterly QA process with each of the 24
local jurisdictions.

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Finding 4
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were immediately notified of children
born to individuals who previously had their parental rights terminated for abuse or
neglect.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SSA establish adequate controls, such as initiating a supervisory
review over the process, to ensure that LDSSs are promptly notified of children born to
individuals who previously had their parental rights terminated by a court (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 4
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
May 2023
11/1/2024
SSA fully implemented a birth match policy and notification process
Please provide details
with 2nd level oversight completed at SSA.
of corrective action
taken.
Federal Funds
Finding 5
SSA did not have an effective process for ensuring the propriety and timeliness of Title IV-
E eligibility determinations and redeterminations, and had not conducted quality
assurance reviews; both of which resulted in a potential loss of federal funds.
Recommendation 5a
We recommend that SSA ensure federal reimbursement is obtained for all children eligible
for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we recommend that SSA ensure that Title IV-E
eligibility is properly determined for all children (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 5a
Status as of Completed Completion Date: January
11/1/2024 2022
SSA completed a 100% Title IV-E case review of migrated cases. SSA
Revised the IV-E Quality Assurance SOP which requires additional
documentation from workers and increased monthly case reviews. This
was incorporated into the quarterly QA process and feedback is
provided to Title IV-E regional supervisors after the review.
Please provide details
of corrective action
taken.
The Title IV-E team in SSA was granted MDEC access to allow for
timely retrieval of court orders. CJAMS was enhanced to create IV-E
productivity reports to specify delays in case reviews due to system
glitches.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Maryland recently underwent a Federal audit of Title IV-E compliance
and were only found to have 5 errors with one currently under review
for reconsideration which would indicate that Maryland is in
substantial compliance with the federal regulations as it pertains to IV-
E eligibility for children.
Recommendation 5c
We recommend that SSA ensure federal reimbursement is obtained for all children eligible
for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we recommend that SSA review all children who are
currently determined to be ineligible due to a missing court order or who entered care
prior to July 2016 (and received services within the last two years), including the
aforementioned cases, and obtain Title IV-E funds when possible (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 5c
Status as of Completed Completion Date: August
11/1/2024 2023
As a result of the audit, all 3,623 ineligible cases were reviewed and
Please provide details only two GAP determinations were reversed to IV-E eligible. Each
of corrective action case totaled $10,431 for review periods July 2021 - July 2023 with the
taken. total to be claimed to be $20,862. Claim adjustments were logged for
each case.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Finding 7
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance payments funded
entirely by the State were suspended when an adopted child was removed from the
adoptive home.
Recommendation 7a
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to ensure compliance with State regulations
regarding adoption assistance payments being made for a child who has been moved from
the adoptive home to an out-of-home placement (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7a
Status as of Completed Completion Date: October
11/1/2024 2022
CJAMS enhancement was completed to suspend adoption assistance
Please provide details
payments, if state funded, based on a monthly reconciliation of a child
of corrective action
moving from adoptive home to an out-of-home placement. This was
taken.
also added to the quarterly QA process with each LDSS.

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Recommendation 7b
We recommend that SSA review adoption assistance payments made on behalf of children
in out- of-home placement, including the aforementioned 28 children, and recover any
amounts that were inappropriately paid (repeat).
Status of Recommendation 7b
Status as of Completed Completion Date: December
11/1/2024 2021
SSA reviewed the specific 28 children, two additional cases were
identified for recoupment of SSI benefits. Continue to monitor the
Please provide details adoptions subsidy payment report to ensure that adoption subsidy
of corrective action payments are suspended when children re-enter care. Notify the LDSS
taken. within two weeks to take the necessary action to terminate the subsidy
payment when children re-enter foster care.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 8
SSA did not ensure that certain payments made to a State university for three interagency
agreements were adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed,
and were made in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SSA implement a process to ensure the propriety of State university
invoices. For example, obtain and review payroll records or restructure the agreements to
base payment on specific deliverables to be monitored by SSA, or a combination thereof
(repeat).
Status of Recommendation 8
Status as of Completed Completion Date:
June 2024
11/1/2024
Worked with DHS AAG and DBM to revise the IAA template in
November 2023 to align with audit recommendations to include
requirement for effort reporting.
Please provide details
of corrective action
SSA developed a contract monitoring tool in July 2022 to be used
taken.
when reviewing and approving monthly invoice submissions to ensure
the deliverables are in alignment with the scope of work. In 2024, SSA
added effort reporting to the contract monitoring tool.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) June 3, 2021
Audit Report on the Department of Human Services (DHS) –
Social Services Administration (SSA)
DHS Status Based
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings Reported on
Status OLA Review
Quality Assurance Program
1. We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality
assurance processes to ensure its child welfare programs
are effectively and properly administered by the Local
Departments of Social Services (LDSSs). Specifically,
we recommend that SSA modify its existing processes to
Not Resolved
ensure that they provide Completed
(In Progress)
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring
program services and functions to ensure compliance
with applicable laws, regulations, and policies;
appropriate and timely recordkeeping; and the
maintenance of supporting documentation relating to
services and functions performed.
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS
that addresses all critical services and functions Completed Resolved
performed by the LDSSs.
Monitoring Compliance with Foster Care Requirements
2. We recommend that SSA monitor the LDSSs to ensure
compliance with foster care requirements. Specifically,
we recommend that SSA ensure Completed Resolved
a. the applicable legal documentation is included in each
foster child’s case record in the statewide case
management system.
b. the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive
environment and document attempts to place the child Completed Resolved
with a relative.
c. compliance with medical, dental, and education
Completed Resolved
requirements by reviewing applicable documentation.
Child Protective Services
3. We recommend that SSA
a. establish effective procedures to ensure that the
LDSSs conduct and complete investigations of Not Resolved
Completed
allegations of child abuse and neglect and safety and (In Progress)
risk assessments of controlled substance-exposed
newborns in a timely manner, as required by State law
and regulations.
b. enhance the accuracy and completeness of system
reports to ensure they can be reliably used to monitor Completed Resolved
compliance with these requirements.

--- Page 12 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in Office of Legislative Audits’ (OLA) June 3, 2021
Audit Report on the Department of Human Services (DHS) –
Social Services Administration (SSA)
DHS Status Based
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings Reported on
Status OLA Review
4. We recommend that SSA establish adequate controls,
such as initiating a supervisory review over the process, to
ensure that LDSSs are promptly notified of children born
Completed Resolved
to individuals who previously had their parental rights
terminated by a court.
Federal Funds
5. We recommend that SSA ensure federal reimbursement is
obtained for all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Not Resolved
Completed
Specifically, we recommend that SSA (In Progress)
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is properly determined
for all children.
c. review all children who are currently determined to be
ineligible due to a missing court order or who entered
care prior to July 2016 (and received services within the Completed Resolved
last two years), including the aforementioned cases, and
obtain Title IV-E funds when possible.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
7. We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure compliance with State
Completed Resolved
regulations regarding adoption assistance payments
being made for a child who has been moved from the
adoptive home to an out-of-home placement.
b. review adoption assistance payments made on behalf of
children in out-of-home placement, including the
Completed Resolved
aforementioned 28 children, and recover any amounts
that were inappropriately paid.
Interagency Agreements
8. We recommend that SSA implement a process to ensure
the propriety of State university invoices. For example, Not Resolved
Completed
obtain and review payroll records or restructure the (In Progress)
agreements to base payment on specific deliverables to be
monitored by SSA, or a combination thereof.

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Comments on Findings OLA Assessed as Unresolved
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 1
We recommend that the Department of Human Services (DHS) – Social Services
Administration (SSA) establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure
its child welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by the Local
Departments of Social Services (LDSSs). Specifically, we recommend that SSA
modify its existing processes to provide
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and functions
to ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies; appropriate
and timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting documentation
relating to services and functions performed (repeat).
Status as Determined by DHS – Completed
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that SSA had not established comprehensive written procedures for
monitoring the program services and functions administered by the LDSSs. Specifically,
while SSA developed procedures to use reports generated from its Child, Juvenile, and
Adult Management System (CJAMS) to assess the LDSSs’ achievement of established
performance standards, the procedures did not address how specific instances of missing
services (such as health and dental exams) were to be resolved. Furthermore, the
procedures did not address what to do when the underlying support for the CJAMS reports
was determined to be missing or inaccurate. This is significant because SSA routinely
identified instances in which CJAMS indicated services were provided even though no
supporting documentation was uploaded.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 3
We recommend that SSA
a. establish effective procedures to ensure that LDSSs conduct and complete
investigations of allegations of child abuse and neglect and safety and risk
assessments of controlled substance-exposed newborns in a timely manner, as
required by State law and regulation (repeat).
Status as Determined by DHS – Completed
OLA Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that while SSA developed procedures to ensure that the LDSSs
investigated allegations of child abuse and neglect timely, the procedures were not fully
implemented. Specifically, SSA established procedures to assess the LDDSs’ compliance
with the statutory timeframes for initiating and completing investigations of child abuse
and neglect, which included a corrective action process for LDSSs that did not meet these
timeframes. However, our review disclosed that SSA did not always address instances of
noncompliance in accordance with its policy. For example, SSA did not refer 5 LDSSs to

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 3 to April 25, 2025 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Comments on Findings OLA Assessed as Unresolved
the DHS Secretary for additional action when they did not timely initiate investigations for
the entire period from January 2023 to June 2024, as required by the new policy.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 5
We recommend that SSA ensure federal reimbursement is obtained for all children
eligible for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we recommend that SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is properly determined for all children (repeat).
Status as Determined by DHS – Completed
OLA Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that SSA did not ensure that Title IV-E eligibility was properly
determined for all children. Although SSA established a supervisory review process in
response to our prior report to verify the propriety of Title IV-E determinations, these
reviews were not always effective. For example, our test of 18 Title IV-E determinations
made between October 2022 and March 2024 disclosed that 3 children were improperly
determined to be ineligible for Title IV-E which was not detected by the supervisory
review. In addition, as of June 2024, SSA had not determined Title IV-E eligibility for
2,100 children who entered care between May 2020 and May 2024 due to system issues in
CJAMS. As a result, SSA did not obtain federal reimbursement for the cost of these
children’s services.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 8
We recommend that SSA implement a process to ensure the propriety of State
university invoices. For example, obtain and review payroll records or restructure
the agreements to base payment on specific deliverables to be monitored by SSA, or a
combination thereof (repeat).
Status as Determined by DHS – Completed
OLA Assessment of Status – Not Resolved
Our review disclosed that SSA still had not implemented a process to ensure the propriety
of the amounts billed by State universities. Specifically, while SSA obtained certain
payroll records from one university, these records did not detail the actual time spent by
each employee and, therefore, were not sufficient to support the propriety of the related
charges. SSA also did not restructure the related agreements to base payment on specific
deliverables. Under the terms of the current agreements, payments to this State university
were still primarily based on the actual time spent and the salary costs of the applicable
university personnel.