Title: State Treasurer’s Office
Date: 07/09/2025
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=68717d02e176c900505be7bd
Extracted: 2025-07-28T16:38:18.170142
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Treasurer’s Office
July 2025
Public Notice:
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 9, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Treasurer’s Office
(STO) for the period beginning August 1, 2021 and ending August 11, 2024.
STO is responsible for the receipt, disbursement, safekeeping, and investment of
the funds of the State Treasury. STO is also responsible for reconciling the
related bank accounts, procuring banking and financial services for State
agencies, and maintaining an insurance program for State property and personnel.
In addition, STO coordinates the State’s general obligation debt functions for the
Board of Public Works. Finally, effective June 1, 2023, STO is responsible for
managing the Maryland 529 program college savings plans.
Our audit disclosed that STO did not conduct critical assessments (such as
independent verification and validation (IV&V) assessments) to help monitor the
implementation of its new financial and insurance claims management system,
which has experienced significant delays and increased cost. An IV&V is an
independent assessment on the overall health of the project, identifies areas that
need improvement and serves to strengthen the oversight of the project. As of
January 2025 (more than 8 years after the project was initiated), the project was
still not complete and the total estimated cost to complete the project was $37.8
million; a $32.6 million increase from the $5.2 million initially budgeted for the
project. In addition, STO did not always ensure the propriety of payments to the
vendor contracted to implement this system.
Our audit also disclosed that STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid
to the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund (IWIF) for State employee workers’
compensation claims and related administrative costs, a condition that we have
reported upon since 2007. Payments to IWIF totaled $262.3 million for fiscal
years 2023 through 2025.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
STO’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of STO’s responses related to the
cybersecurity audit findings and references to cybersecurity information. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while STO
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response disagree with a report finding and
recommendations. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s comments”
within STO’s response to explain our position. We will advise the Joint Audit
and Evaluation Committee of any outstanding issues that we cannot resolve with
STO.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by STO.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Maryland 529 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Financial and Insurance Claims Management System
Finding 1 – The State Treasurer’s Office (STO) did not conduct 10
critical assessments to help monitor the implementation of the new
financial and insurance claims management system, which has
experienced significant delays and increased costs, and did not
always ensure the propriety of payments to the system
implementation vendor.
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund
* Finding 2 – STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to 12
IWIF for workers’ compensation claims and related costs, and did
not follow up on deficiencies noted in the Maryland Insurance
Administration audits.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 13
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 13
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 13
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Treasurer’s Office (STO) is responsible for the receipt, disbursement,
safekeeping, and investment of the funds of the State Treasury. It is also
responsible for reconciling the related bank accounts, procuring banking and
financial services for State agencies, and maintaining an insurance program for
State property and personnel. STO also coordinates the State’s general obligation
debt functions for the Board of Public Works. As noted below, effective June 1,
2023, STO is responsible for managing the Maryland 529 college savings plan
program.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2024, STO’s expenditures
totaled approximately $109.5 million (see Figure 1). Expenditures have
significantly increased during the audit period (from $56.7 million in fiscal year
2022) primarily due to increased insurance costs and the addition of the Maryland
529 program. During the period June 30, 2022 through June 30, 2024, STO had
vacancy rates that ranged from 11.5 to 18.3 percent. As of June 30, 2024, 12 of
the 96 positions (12.5 percent) were vacant. These vacancies may have
contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
STO Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 84
Vacant 12
Total 96
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 12,273,734
Technical and Special Fees 174,594
Operating Expenses 97,070,632
Total $109,518,960
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 15,954,902
Special Fund 6,582,391
Reimbursable Fund 86,981,667
Total $109,518,960
Source: State financial and personnel records
State law provides that State Treasury investments are limited to secured bank
accounts, full faith and credit obligations of the federal government, obligations
of certain federal agencies or instrumentalities, obligations issued and
unconditionally guaranteed by certain supranational issuers (for example the
World bank), repurchase agreements collateralized by those securities, certain
money market mutual funds, and commercial paper. As of June 30, 2024, the
State Treasury investment portfolio, based on market value, totaled approximately
$20.5 billion (see Figure 2).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2
State Treasury Investment Portfolio
as of June 30, 2024
(in thousands)
Supranational U.S. Treasury
Corporate Note $983,979 $347,399 Other
Federal Agencies
$1,051,792 5% 2% $315,688
(Agricultural and
5% 1%
Home Loan)
$5,008,123
Money Market
24%
Funds
$3,700,297
18%
Repurchase Commercial Paper
Agreements $4,658,902
(REPO) 23%
$4,415,969
22%
Source: Agency records; Inventory by Market Value as of June 30, 2024.
Maryland 529
The Maryland 529 was an independent State agency that provided two separate
college savings plans, the Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer College
Investment Plan, and the Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer Prepaid College
Trust (MPCT), to help individuals save for future college expenses and to reduce
dependence on student loans and other forms of debt. Additionally, Maryland
529 was responsible for the oversight of Maryland Achieving a Better Life
Experience, which allowed individuals to invest funds to help individuals with
disabilities maintain health, independence, and quality of life. Chapter 113, Laws
of Maryland 2023, abolished the Maryland 529 Board and transferred all
Maryland 529 related programs, functions, and operations to STO effective June
1, 2023. Additionally, the law began a phase out of the MPCT, prohibiting any
new MPCT account enrollments as of the aforementioned date.
6

--- Page 9 ---
On February 3, 2025, we issued a fiscal compliance report on Maryland 529 for
the period beginning July 1, 2018 and ending May 31, 2023. Our audit identified
several findings including inadequate oversight of the conversion of MPCT
operations from a third-party administrator (TPA), insufficient action to address
delinquent and expired MPCT accounts, and TPAs not assessing and/or remitting
fees they collected.
Since Maryland 529 is now a unit within STO, report findings and
recommendations were addressed to STO. In response to the report, STO agreed
with the findings and related recommendations. The activities of Maryland 529
subsequent to the aforementioned audit will be subject to review during our next
audit of STO.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 24, 2023. See Figure 3 for
the results of our review.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Office of the State Treasurer (STO) did not adequately
monitor the project administrator responsible for developing
Not Repeated
Finding 1 the new financial and insurance claims system and did not
pursue damages when the project encountered severe
implementation problems, delays, and cost increases.
STO did not sufficiently document several contract
modifications to expand and extend the services of the
Finding 2 vendor providing technical staff on the contract, which Not Repeated
precluded STO from effectively monitoring the contract and
validating the related charges.
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund for the State’s workers’
Repeated
Finding 3 compensation claims and related costs, and did not follow
(Current Finding 2)
up on deficiencies noted in Maryland Insurance
Administration audits.
Finding 4 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted
Finding 5 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted
Finding 6 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted
Finding 7 Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.1 Status Redacted
1 The description of this cybersecurity-related finding and specific information on the current
status of this finding has been redacted from the publicly available report in accordance with
State Government Article, Section 1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Financial and Insurance Claims Management System
Background
In November 2016, the State Treasurer’s Office (STO) initiated a Major
Information Technology Development Project (MITDP) to replace its financial
and insurance claims management system. The replacement system included four
modules; accounting, insurance claims, citizen and agency portal, and banking.
Although the related contract included multi-year renewal options, the system was
intended to be implemented within one year.
In accordance with State law, the Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
has oversight and monitoring responsibilities for MITDPs. As part of this
function, DoIT works with State agencies such as STO to ensure proper project
management practices are in place and that project stakeholders are provided
timely and accurate information showing project status. DoIT designated STO to
administer the project to replace its financial and insurance claims system. STO
ultimately contracted with a project administrator vendor and a system
implementation vendor to design and develop the system.
As noted in our prior audit report, there were issues with the project administrator
vendor hired by STO to develop the system, which resulted in project cost
increases and delays in the implementation. Specifically, the project was initially
estimated to cost $5.2 million and be completed by September 2019, but as of
June 2022, $11.5 million had been expended on the project through six
modifications. At that time, STO had revised the date to complete the project to
December 2023 at an estimated cost of $21.3 million. As a result, STO
terminated the contract with the vendor.
In September 2023, after the original contract including the option years had
expired, STO entered into a new sole source contract with the implementation
vendor to complete the system and assumed the role of administrator for the
project. The new contract, totaling $10.8 million, covered the period from
September 2023 to September 2024 with a one-year renewal option. As of
January 2025 (more than 8 years after the project was initiated), the project is still
not complete and the total estimated cost to complete the project was $37.8
million.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
STO did not conduct critical assessments to help monitor the implementation
of the new financial and insurance claims management system, which has
experienced significant delays and increased costs, and did not always ensure
the propriety of payments to the system implementation vendor.
Analysis
STO did not conduct critical assessments to help monitor the implementation of
the new financial insurance claims management system, which has experienced
significant delays and increased costs. Additionally, STO did not always ensure
the propriety of payments to the vendor for the system implementation.
STO Did Not Conduct Critical Assessments to Monitor the Project
STO did not conduct critical assessments, such as an independent verification and
validation (IV&V) assessment, of the project to help ensure the implementation
was on schedule and the related systems were working as intended. An IV&V is
an independent assessment on the overall health of the project by identifying
strengths and areas that need improvement and serves to strengthen the oversight
of the project.
According to the DoIT Major Information Technology Development Projects –
Standards Manual, an IV&V review may be requested by the agency that owns
the project. It is also expected that results of the IV&V will be used by agency
project management to implement efficient and effective processes, pursue risk
reduction and enable project success. Since STO’s fiscal year 2025 annual
project report to DoIT indicated the project had high risks for funding, resource
availability, interdependencies with other State agencies, implementation, and
technical changes, it should have requested an IV&V as provided for in the
Manual.
The lack of the IV&V is significant since the project is significantly behind
schedule and over budget. Specifically, the accounting and insurance claims
modules were completed in February 2024, which is 53 months after its originally
scheduled completion date of September 2019. The citizen and agency portal and
banking modules were supposed to be completed by the end of 2024, but STO
informed us that the completion date was subsequently extended to December
2025. STO advised us that the extension was due in part to a separate contract
with payments to the vendor totaling $813,000 as of December 2024 to
implement a new college savings program claims system to handle the
management of the Maryland 529 plans that were transferred to STO.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Payments Were Not Always Supported
STO did not always ensure the propriety of payments to the system
implementation vendor. STO’s original contract with the vendor required the
vendor to submit support with their invoices to document the services performed
by the vendor’s employees. Our review of 3 invoices totaling $1.3 million for
services provided between May 2023 and May 2024 disclosed that sufficient
documentation was not provided to support labor charges. Specifically, 21 of the
51 timesheets submitted to support charges totaling approximately $524,000 did
not include the required descriptions of the services performed by the vendor’s
employees to help STO ensure the propriety of the charges.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that STO
a. in conjunction with DoIT, effectively manage the implementation of the
financial and insurance claims management system as currently
scheduled by conducting an IV&V; and
b. ensure the vendor properly documents work performed on vendor
employees’ timesheets submitted with invoices for payment.
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund
Background
Under the terms of a 1990 contract (most recently modified in November 2001),
between the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund (IWIF) and the Board of Public
Works (BPW), IWIF is the third-party administrator2 and provides claims
processing services for workers’ compensation claims filed by State employees,
for which the State is self-insured. The contract provides that STO is responsible
for administering the contract on behalf of BPW.
State law also requires the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) to conduct
audits of IWIF every five years to determine whether the State is receiving
effective administrative services at a reasonable cost. The audit scope used by
MIA with input from STO includes a review of:
 The STO agreement with IWIF,
 Administrative expenses allocated to IWIF to be paid by the State,
2 Effective October 1, 2013, Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company, a private, non-stock,
nonprofit insurer, was established and became the State’s insurer of last resort for workers’
compensation. In accordance with State law, IWIF continues to serve as the third-party
administrator until it no longer has any employees. As of September 2023, IWIF continued to
exist with 126 employees.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 Internal controls over claims processing and the propriety of claim payments,
and
 Subrogation processes.
MIA is required to report the results of the IWIF audit to STO. We were advised
by MIA personnel that the audit primarily focuses on transactions that occurred
within the latest year of the audit cycle.
Finding 2
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF for workers’
compensation claims and related costs, and did not follow up on deficiencies
noted in the MIA audits.
Analysis
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF for the State’s
workers’ compensation claims and related costs, and did not follow up on
deficiencies noted in MIA audits. Payments to IWIF totaled $262.3 million for
fiscal years 2023 through 2025, consisting of claims costs ($215.9 million),
administrative costs ($50.7 million), and other adjustments ($4.3 million).
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF. From June 2023 to
January 2024, STO assigned personnel to perform IWIF claim payment
verifications; however, these reviews were not adequately documented to
determine the propriety of claims payments. For example, the review did not
always document claim payment dates, payment amounts, and review results.
The employee assigned to perform the reviews left STO in January 2024 and
although a new employee was assigned, no reviews were performed from January
2024 through the end of our audit period in August 2024.
STO also had not taken any action to implement eight recommendations made by
MIA in its audit report of IWIF dated June 2022 covering July 2018 through
December 2020, including all six of the recommendations that were repeated from
MIA’s previous audit. For example, MIA recommended that the IWIF contract
be amended to reflect the current cost methodology used by IWIF for calculating
administrative fees, and caps on the fees to ensure that they remain fair and
reasonable. However, STO had not taken any action to ensure the
recommendations were implemented as of the time of our review.
Similar conditions regarding the verification of amounts paid to IWIF were noted
in our six preceding audit reports dating back to 2007 and a similar condition
regarding STO’s follow-up of MIA report recommendations was noted in our
preceding audit report. In response to our preceding report, STO agreed with our
12

--- Page 15 ---
findings and indicated that it would implement the related recommendations to
ensure the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF by June 2023. Although STO
advised us that it obtained certain information from IWIF and attempted to verify
the amounts paid to IWIF, as noted above, this review was not adequately
documented and as of January 2024 was not completed. STO also indicated it
would implement the MIA audit recommendations by June 2024 but as noted
above did not implement the recommendations as indicated in its response.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that STO
a. establish a documented process, such as verifying charges reported by
IWIF to supporting documentation, to determine the propriety of
amounts paid to IWIF for the State’s workers’ compensation claims and
related administrative costs (repeat); and
b. take appropriate action to address recommendations made by MIA in its
audit reports of IWIF, including those noted above (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 3 through 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with STO’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Treasurer’s Office
(STO) for the period beginning August 1, 2021 and ending August 11, 2024. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine STO’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included payroll, procurements, disbursements,
investments, debt management, monitoring of State agency bank accounts,
reconciling the State’s bank accounts, monitoring payments to the Injured
Workers’ Insurance Fund, the State Insurance Program and information systems
security and control. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of August 1, 2021 to August 11, 2024, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of STO’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
14

--- Page 17 ---
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from STO’s automated financial systems for the purpose
of testing banking and insurance transactions. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
STO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to STO, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
15

--- Page 18 ---
adversely affect STO’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to STO that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to STO and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
STO’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise STO regarding the results of our review of its
response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
APPENDIX
Dereck E. Davis
State Treasurer
Jonathan D. Martin
Chief Deputy Treasurer
July 3, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden
Yards 351 West Camden
Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Enclosed, please find the Office of the State Treasurer’s (STO) responses to certain findings identified in
the Financial and Insurance Claims Management System, Injured Workers' Insurance Fund (IWIF), and
the Information Systems Security and Control audit. This audit covered the period from August 1, 2021,
through August 11, 2024.
If you have any questions, please contact Jonathan Martin, Chief Deputy Treasurer at
jmartin@treasurer.state.md.us.
Sincerely,
Dereck E. Davis
State Treasurer
LOUIS L. GOLDSTEIN TREASURY BUILDING, 80 CALVERT ST., ROOM 109, ANNAPOLIS, MD 21401
410-260-7533 DIRECT (cid:31) 800-322-4296 TOLL FREE (cid:31) 800-735-2258 TTY
410-260-7160 TREASURER (cid:31) 410-260-7080 CHIEF DEPUTY TREASURER
https://treasurer.state.md.us

--- Page 20 ---
State Treasurer’s Office
Agency Response Form
Financial and Insurance Claims Management System
Finding 1
STO did not conduct critical assessments to help monitor the implementation
of the new financial and insurance claims management system, which has
experienced significant delays and increased costs, and did not always ensure
the propriety of payments to the system implementation vendor.
We recommend that STO
a. in conjunction with DoIT, effectively manage the implementation of the
financial and insurance claims management system as currently
scheduled by conducting an IV&V; and
b. ensure the vendor properly documents work performed on vendor
employees’ timesheets submitted with invoices for payment.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide STO has had oversight on this Major IT project from the inception of the
additional comments as project. The responsibility of oversight for such projects is charged to
deemed necessary. the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) and not the
individual agency. However, the agency works in collaboration with
DoIT to support the project.
Recommendation 1a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of STO does not believe that it should be blamed or disciplined for a
corrective action or responsibility that it is compensating another agency to perform. From
explain disagreement. an agency perspective, DoIT is responsible for the oversight and the
implementations of necessary IV&V. STO will further note that the cost
of IV&V was deducted from our project appropriations and staff was
told that DoIT would implement such services. It is important to note
that when the project was introduced in 2018, it was grossly
underestimated and has grown significantly in scope, approved by way
of the DoIT required Rebaseline process.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) is correct that details of work
corrective action or completed was not properly documented on timesheets from one
explain disagreement. particular vendor employed by our Prime Contractor. However, as
discussed with the staff auditors during the audit, the work completed
and accuracy of the deliverables is documented daily via standup
meetings with the project team. The STO Project Manager attended
these daily meetings to stay abreast of the progress. Additionally, the
Project Manager uses an electronic task tracking board. Each project
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
State Treasurer’s Office
Agency Response Form
team member updates their work on assigned tasks and reviews their
following day assignments. There are also Bi-Weekly sprint planning
and demo meetings that both the STO Project Manager and IT Project
Managers are involved in. These meetings document staff availability
and allocated time to work on certain tasks as well as demonstrate the
work completed in the previous iteration. This provides visibility for the
STO Project Manager to review time off either planned or unplanned
and to track the daily work detail. STO feels that the process explained
above is a much better assessment of work completed and a tighter
control on progress than that of written detail on a timesheet. However,
as was recommended verbally to our team during the audit, we have
instructed the vendor to include project staff timesheets that include the
description of tasks going forward and will refrain from approving
invoices that lack the appropriate detail until such issues can be resolved.
Auditor’s Comment: STO disagrees with the factual accuracy of our finding by
stating the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) has the oversight
responsibility and STO works in collaboration with DoIT to support the project.
However, as noted in the finding background comment, STO’s role is to
administer the implementation of the project and DoIT’s role is to oversee and
monitor STO’s administration of the project. STO’s administration of the project
includes the responsibility to monitor the vendor implementing the financial and
insurance claims management system to ensure it is delivered on schedule and on
budget.
Additionally, STO disagrees with recommendation (a) since it believes DoIT is
responsible for conducting an IV&V assessment. However, as noted in the
finding, according to DoIT’s Major Information Technology Development
Projects – Standards Manual, an IV&V assessment may be requested by the
agency that owns the project (in this case STO). Therefore, we stand by the
accuracy of our finding and recommendation and continue to believe that STO
should work in conjunction with DoIT to conduct an IV&V assessment.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
State Treasurer’s Office
Agency Response Form
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund
Finding 2
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF for workers’
compensation claims and related costs, and did not follow up on deficiencies
noted in the MIA audits.
We recommend that STO
a. establish a documented process, such as verifying charges reported by
IWIF to supporting documentation, to determine the propriety of
amounts paid to IWIF for the State’s workers’ compensation claims and
related administrative costs (repeat); and
b. take appropriate action to address recommendations made by MIA in its
audit reports of IWIF, including those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide N/A
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of A process has been established for the Workers’ Compensation Program
corrective action or Administrator to independently verify/audit Injured Workers Insurance
explain disagreement. Fund (IWIF) financial transactions on a monthly basis. These audits
include claim payments for medical services, prescriptions, awards and
administrative services. The process begins with an evaluation of IWIF’s
claim register. At least two random claims are selected to be reviewed
monthly. During the audit, invoices in the claim files are reviewed to
ensure that all payments align with the records in each file. These
verifications will also ensure that payments will only be processed once
the required documentation has been attained. All discrepancies are
referred to IWIF for explanation and correction until the issues are
resolved.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
State Treasurer’s Office
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of Several recommendations were made by Maryland Insurance
corrective action or Administration (MIA) with regard to IWIF. Below we have listed MIA’s
explain disagreement. recommendations and provided explanation of the action taken by STO:1
1) Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
2) Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
3) IWIF improperly charged the State $82,777 for federal
longshore workers’ compensation coverage, but the federal
law generally excludes government employees; recommend
crediting the State.
 Previously provided to OLA (September 26, 2024)
documentation from USL&H regarding the adjustment;
IWIF/Chesapeake was provided evidence that the State is
credited the amount of $82,777 assessed by the US
Department of Labor under the Longshore and Harbor
Workers' Compensation Act.
4) IWIF/Chesapeake has experienced some issues allocating
costs in part because of its legacy billing application/system;
recommend reviewing the allocation process and having
allocations be reviewed by a supervisor to ensure accuracy.
 STO will discuss billing issues with Department of
Budget & Management in an effort to correct the cost
allocation issues.
5) Review of annual administrative costs revealed that fees
appear to be fair and reasonable; recommend memorializing
the Intercompany Agreement and the 23% cap in the
agreement.
 The above referenced MOU addresses the fee structure,
now a flat fee of $14,500,000 per year and not a
percentage of claims.
6) In 2020, the State paid $3.47 million in reinsurance fees for
catastrophic losses, but IWIF has not had a claim that
“pierced the reinsurance level” since 1989; recommend the
State consider the costs and benefits of catastrophic loss
coverage and include the desired level of coverage in the
agreement.
 IWIF’s reinsurance program renewed with a higher
attachment point ($10M), which resulted in a substantial
reduction to the State’s proportion of the cost of
reinsurance/catastrophic loss coverage.
1 Certain elements of the following response have been redacted from this publicly available report in
accordance with State Government Article, Section 1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
State Treasurer’s Office
Agency Response Form
7) IWIF has submitted the annual financial report late. The
State and IWIF have relaxed the July 15 deadline because the
reports have become increasingly complex and claim volume
has increased over time; recommend that IWIF comply with
the deadline or that the agreement be updated to specify new
due dates.
 The 2023 Annual Audit performed by Johnson Lambert
dated September 19, 2024, was presented to their Board
of Directors on October 28, 2024, and copies are
requested by the Treasurer’s office on an annual
basis. The Workers Compensation Program
Administrator receives internal monthly financials from
IWIF, which include paid claims, administrative charges
and reinsurance.
8) The State is getting substantial value from its relationship
with IWIF, but many services are not reflected in the
agreement; recommend updating the agreement to include
these services.
 The above referenced MOU has been finalized which
includes the scope of services for IWIF. STO is happy to
forward a copy of the executed MOU as needed.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 25 ---
State Treasurer’s Office
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 3 through 5 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with STO’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, STO’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Kevin M. Billard
Samantha J. Rhea
Etai D. Stern
Stacey D. Streett
Staff Auditors
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditor