Title: Financial Management Information System - Centralized Operations
Date: 03/13/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d72456067447b
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:59:46.243579
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Financial Management Information System
Centralized Operations
April 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 11, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit pertaining to information system
security and operational controls over the centralized operations of the Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) for the period beginning April 28, 2020
and ending August 31, 2024. FMIS is administered by the Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) and the Comptroller of Maryland ’s General
Accounting Division (GAD). FMIS is used to support the State’s purchasing,
accounting, and payment functions. According to the State’s accounting records,
expenditures processed through FMIS in fiscal year 2024 totaled approximately
$65.4 billion.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DoIT
and GAD.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
General Information
The Financial Management Information System (FMIS) is an integrated database
system that runs on the Comptroller of Maryland’s Annapolis Data Center’s
computers. FMIS supports purchasing functions through the Advanced
Purchasing and Inventory Control System (ADPICS), and supports accounting
operations through the Relational Standard Accounting and Reporting System
(R*STARS). Certain entities (such as the University System of Maryland and the
Maryland Department of Transportation) have independent accounting systems to
process procurement, disbursement, and financial information which interface
with FMIS for recordation, payment processing, and reporting. According to the
State’s accounting records, expenditures processed through FMIS (including
interfaced transactions) for fiscal year 2024 totaled approximately $65.4 billion.
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) and the Comptroller of
Maryland (COM) have responsibility for separate aspects of FMIS.1 Specifically,
DoIT is responsible for daily FMIS administration, including maintenance,
operation, security, and back-up of related database records and the computer
programs that perform online and overnight processing. The COM’s General
Accounting Division (GAD) is responsible for R*STARS operations, security,
and reporting.
This audit of the centralized FMIS operations included elements of FMIS
operations relative to overall internal control, such as database and security
controls. In addition, this audit included a review of the controls and processing
of interfaced data from the point of interface through transaction processing and
recordation.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the one finding contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 10, 2020. See Figure 1 for the results
of our review.
1 We conduct separate audits of DoIT and the COM’s GAD to address their other activities. In
addition, the scope of our audit of individual agencies includes a review of certain agency-
specific FMIS controls.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DoIT’s procedures for logging and monitoring critical
Finding 1 database and mainframe security events were not Not repeated
sufficient.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of DoIT’s and GAD’s internal controls with respect to FMIS operations. Our
audit also did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Less significant findings were
communicated to DoIT and GAD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to DoIT and COM. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, written responses were not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit pertaining to information system
security and operational controls over the centralized operations of the Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) for the period beginning April 28, 2020
and ending August 31, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the elements of
FMIS operations relative to the State’s overall internal controls (for example,
database and security controls) and to evaluate compliance with applicable State
laws, rules, and regulations not included in our individual audits of other State
agencies.
4

--- Page 7 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included central FMIS security administration and
maintenance, and the component operations of the Advanced Purchasing and
Inventory Control System (ADPICS) and of the Relational Standard Accounting
and Reporting System (R*STARS). Our information systems security and control
review addressed general controls, security software controls, and database
security. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding
audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 28, 2020 to August 31, 2024, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and, to the extent practicable, observations of FMIS operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk. As a matter of course, we do not normally use sampling in our
tests, so, unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-
statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore,
unless sampling is specifically indicated in a finding, the results from any tests
conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to project those results to the entire
population from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from FMIS.
The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by
the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine
data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Department of Information Technology and the Comptroller of Maryland –
General Accounting Division are responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control over FMIS operations. Internal control is a process
designed to provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations,
including safeguarding of assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
5

--- Page 8 ---
regulations are achieved. As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there
are five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment,
control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the
five components, when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to
FMIS centralized operations, were considered by us during the course of this
audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Wells, Jr., CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditor