Title: Department of Juvenile Services
Date: 11/01/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d724560674495
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:09:35.952312
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Juvenile Services
November 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Youth Care Services
Finding 1 – Certain youth care services were procured in a manner that 6
did not provide assurance that these services were obtained at the
best value to the State, and DJS did not ensure that the related
services were received.
Finding 2 – Financial examinations of youth care service providers 8
conducted by DJS were not sufficient to ensure funds were spent on
allowable costs and excess payments were recovered.
Procurements
* Finding 3 – DJS artificially divided procurements for goods and services, 10
circumventing State procurement regulations. Certain of these
procurements appeared questionable.
Budgetary Closeout
Finding 4 – DJS improperly retained approximately $9.7 million in 11
unspent general fund appropriations at the end of fiscal year 2015.
Federal Funds
Finding 5 – DJS did not maximize recoveries of available federal funds, 12
resulting in the use of State funds to cover the cost of services that
were eligible for federal reimbursement.
Confidential Juvenile Information
Finding 6 – DJS did not protect the personally identifiable information 14
and other confidential information of juveniles under its supervision.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Restitution
* Finding 7 – DJS had not established sufficient controls over the 16
restitution process to ensure all transactions were properly recorded,
disbursements were properly made, and accounts were properly
monitored.
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 8 – The Automated Statewide System of Information Support 20
Tools database was not properly secured and related logging and
monitoring controls were not adequate.
Finding 9 – The Department of Information Technology maintained 21
appliances that provided firewall and intrusion detection prevention
system services for DJS but were not configured to adequately secure
the DJS network.
Finding 10 – Malware protection was not sufficient to provide DJS with 22
adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Equipment
Finding 11 – DJS did not maintain complete and accurate detail records 23
and properly account for its equipment.
Payroll
Finding 12 – Overtime paid to employees was not always preauthorized 24
and approved.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 26
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) is the central administrative agency
for juvenile intake, detention authorization, probation, protective supervision, and
aftercare services. In addition, DJS provides residential care, diagnoses, training,
education, and rehabilitation to juveniles in State facilities, and supervises
community facilities operated under contractual agreements. DJS’
responsibilities also include the collection and disbursement of restitution
payments on behalf of individuals or organizations that have sustained damages
caused by juvenile offenders. According to State records, during fiscal year 2016,
DJS had approximately 2,041 permanent and 178 contractual positions and
expenditures totaled approximately $278.6 million.
DJS has a headquarters office located in Baltimore City and 32 field offices
located in six regions throughout the State. According to DJS’ records, the
number of intake cases (including detention programs, committed programs,
probation, and aftercare) during fiscal year 2016 totaled 22,429. In addition, the
average daily population of youths under its supervision (in both State and
contractual facilities) totaled approximately 1,098 for the same period.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 12 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated May 15, 2014. We determined that DJS
satisfactorily addressed 9 of these findings. The remaining 3 findings are
repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Youth Care Services
Background
The Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) enters into numerous contracts with
entities to provide services (such as education, mental health, therapy, vocational
services, and counseling) to adjudicated juveniles placed in non-residential or
residential facilities (such as treatment foster care). These youth care service
providers are private entities as well as non-private entities, such as core service
agencies (CSAs) and local management boards (LMBs). CSAs are the local
mental health authorities responsible for administering the Maryland Public
Mental Health System. LMBs are entities established and maintained by each
county to ensure the implementation of a local interagency service delivery
system for children, youth, and families. DJS executes intergovernmental
agreements with these non-private entities, which are not subject to certain State
procurement requirements.
According to its records, during fiscal year 2015, DJS was under contract with 40
private and 41 non-private youth care service providers, valued at approximately
$48.7 million and $14.3 million for that year, respectively.
Finding 1
Certain youth care services were procured in a manner that did not provide
assurance that these services were obtained at the best value to the State, and
DJS did not ensure that the related services were received.
Analysis
Certain youth care services were procured in a manner that did not provide
assurance that these services were obtained at the best value to the State, and DJS
did not ensure that the related services were received. Under certain
intergovernmental agreements, the non-private entities subcontracted all youth
care services to other providers. DJS had not provided direction to the non-
private entities related to the procurement of these services, determined that these
arrangements were cost-effective, nor ensured that non-private entities were
fulfilling their contractual requirements to monitor subcontractors.
Our test of 12 of these intergovernmental agreements with non-private entities
that were executed during our audit period, valued at approximately $20.6
million, disclosed the following conditions:
6

--- Page 9 ---
 For 6 of these 12 intergovernmental agreements with two CSAs and three
LMBs, valued at approximately $7.6 million, all youth care services were
subcontracted to private or public entities. According to the agreements,
certain of these subcontractors had been providing these services for several
years, including one that was procured by the LMB in 2009. DJS lacked a
formal or documented methodology for determining that these arrangements,
which are not subject to State procurement regulations, represented the most
cost-effective method to obtain these services. Furthermore, the agreements
did not require subcontractor services to be obtained through a competitive
procurement process, which is the preferred method under State procurement
regulations. In this regard, DJS had obtained similar services from both
private and public entities using competitive procurements.
 The six agreements required DJS to pay the CSAs and LMBs administrative
fees totaling approximately $523,000 to monitor the subcontractors to ensure
the required services were provided. However, the agreements did not include
the specific monitoring steps and requirements for reporting the monitoring
results to DJS, nor did DJS exercise oversight to ensure the services were
provided. For example, the agreement with one LMB included an
administrative fee of $42,500 (11 percent of the total value) to monitor a
subcontractor that was providing psychiatric assessments at DJS facilities.
The agreement did not specify how the LMB would ensure the assessments
were being appropriately and timely performed and did not require any
documentation of the LMB’s monitoring efforts. As a result, there is a lack of
assurance that the administrative fees were proper and the services were
appropriately delivered.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DJS
a. establish a methodology to ensure youth care services are procured in a
manner that provides the best value to the State;
b. amend the existing intergovernmental agreements to include
requirements for competitive procurement of subcontractors and specific
subcontractor monitoring efforts to be performed by the CSAs and
LMBs, and to require these monitoring efforts be documented and
reported to DJS; and
c. exercise oversight to ensure youth care services are provided as required.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 2
Financial examinations of youth care service providers conducted by DJS
were not sufficient to ensure funds were spent on allowable costs and excess
payments were recovered.
Analysis
Financial examinations of youth care service providers were not conducted by
DJS in a manner sufficient to ensure funds were spent only on allowable costs and
excess payments were recovered. DJS reimbursed the youth care service
providers for allowable costs throughout the year and performed annual financial
examinations, consisting of desk reviews, to ensure the amounts paid were proper.
Our review of the examinations performed during fiscal year 2016 for 12 youth
care services providers (8 private and 4 non-private) that received approximately
$20.7 million in payments during fiscal year 2015 disclosed the following
conditions:
 DJS allowed four private providers to retain excess payments totaling
approximately $380,000 without adequate justification. These retained
payments were identified during its examinations and represented the amounts
by which funds received by the providers exceeded funds spent on agreed-
upon services. In three of the four instances, these excess funds represented
less than 10 percent of the total payments to the providers, which DJS
management advised us it routinely allowed the private providers to retain for
use in the following year. State law provides that DJS shall recover excess
payments unless doing so would seriously impair the financial condition of
the provider. DJS did not have any documentation that the collection of these
funds would impair the financial condition of the four providers or to justify
the basis for not recovering these excess payments. The other four private
providers tested did not receive excess payments during fiscal year 2015.
 In some instances, DJS personnel relied on unaudited financial records when
conducting financial examinations of private youth care service providers.
The agreements with the private providers required them to obtain an annual
certified audit of their financial records, including sufficient schedules to
allow DJS to evaluate the results of the services provided directly to DJS
separately from the provider’s overall operations. We noted that the
supplemental schedules of expenditures obtained for four of the eight private
providers that received $8.3 million in payments from DJS were not audited.
Consequently, for these providers, DJS lacked assurance that all expenditure
activity was accounted for.
8

--- Page 11 ---
DJS also did not reconcile any of the supplemental schedules (audited and
unaudited) used in its examinations with the State’s accounting records, and
our comparison disclosed differences that were not identified by DJS.
Specifically, total DJS revenue reported by four private providers was
$240,100 less than the amount reflected in the State’s records, and total
revenue reported by the remaining four private providers was $105,700 more
than the amount recorded in the State’s records. Absent such reconciliations,
there is a lack of assurance that all funds have been accounted for in the
reporting process.
 DJS did not obtain and review source documents for significant costs when
conducting examinations of non-private providers. Under the terms of the
related intergovernmental agreements, payments to non-private providers
were based on an approved line-item budget which primarily included costs
for employee salaries, but also included costs for consultants,
pharmaceuticals, and training. Our test of four non-private agreements that
received $5.6 million in payments from DJS during fiscal year 2015 disclosed
that DJS did not receive or review any documentation to support the provider
expenditures. For example, DJS did not obtain payroll records to substantiate
that the payroll costs actually incurred were in accordance with the approved
budgets. Rather, DJS compared a schedule of payments based on provider
invoices with the approved budget to ensure all the charges did not exceed the
budget.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DJS
a. recover all excess payments identified from its financial examinations,
including those noted above, unless the private providers provide
documentation that repayment would seriously impair their financial
condition;
b. ensure that all private providers obtain annual audits that include
audited schedules of the provider’s services for DJS that are separate
from the provider’s overall operations;
c. conduct financial examinations of private youth care service providers
using audited financial schedules that have been reconciled to the State’s
records; and
d. obtain and review source documents when conducting examinations of
non-private providers.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Procurements
Finding 3
DJS artificially divided procurements for goods and services, circumventing
State procurement regulations. Certain of these procurements appeared
questionable.
Analysis
DJS circumvented State procurement regulations by artificially dividing
procurements to certain vendors so that each was $15,000 or less. Specifically,
during fiscal years 2014 through 2016, DJS made payments to 22 vendors totaling
approximately $9 million, of which approximately $7.5 million related to
procurements of $15,000 or less. For example, during that period, one vendor
received 204 payments totaling approximately $1.5 million, of which 202 were
for $15,000 or less. Several of these purchases occurred over short periods. For
example, 25 purchase orders for $15,000 or less were issued to this vendor for
similar services over a three-day period in July 2014. As a result, DJS did not
maximize the State’s purchasing power to obtain enhanced pricing for volume
discounts and circumvented State procurement regulations, including provisions
requiring control agency approvals. DJS employees were able to directly solicit,
receive, and evaluate bids, and select a vendor without extensive involvement of
DJS procurement personnel in the related procurement process.
Certain of these procurements also appeared questionable. For example, our
review disclosed that DJS accepted bids for 19 procurements of routine services
from two companies; however, the two companies were owned by the same
individuals. Payments for these procurements totaled approximately $264,000
during fiscal years 2014 through 2016. For 18 of these procurements, with related
payments totaling approximately $219,000, these two companies were the only
bidders. Furthermore, these companies were awarded contracts to provide
services in areas that were a great distance (up to 470 miles roundtrip) from the
company’s base of operations. Given the routine nature of the services provided,
the lack of bids from local vendors is questionable. Since these procurements
were not publicly solicited, the DJS employees would have had to directly solicit
these procurements and should have been aware of the relationship between these
companies.
State procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement and publication of the solicitation and related awards on eMaryland
Marketplace for procurements over $15,000 and Board of Public Works (BPW)
and/or control agency approvals for larger procurements. Purchases expected to
cost between $5,000 and $15,000 require at least two bids, which can be solicited
10

--- Page 13 ---
in writing or orally directly from vendors at the discretion of the agency’s
purchasing agent. The regulations also prohibit procurements from being
artificially divided to circumvent procurement requirements. Similar conditions
regarding the artificial dividing of procurements and failure to consolidate
procurements to maximize purchasing power were noted in our preceding audit
report.
Certain of the aforementioned questionable purchases were reviewed based on
referrals from our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. Based on these questionable
procurements, as well as other activity we observed that raised questions about
the propriety of certain procurements, we referred this matter to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division. A referral to the Criminal Division does
not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be
filed.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DJS
a. discontinue the practice of artificially dividing procurements (repeat);
b. obtain BPW and/or control agency approval for any future
procurements, as required;
c. establish procedures to monitor procurements to identify opportunities
for consolidation of similar goods and services to enhance State
purchasing power, competition, transparency, and the overall integrity of
the procurement process; and
d. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
before taking any actions related to the questionable purchases noted.
Budgetary Closeout
Finding 4
DJS improperly retained approximately $9.7 million in unspent general fund
appropriations at the end of fiscal year 2015.
Analysis
DJS improperly retained unspent general fund appropriations totaling
approximately $9.7 million. At the end of fiscal year 2015, DJS recorded
encumbrances totaling approximately $13.3 million. Our test of approximately
$10.7 million of these encumbrances disclosed that approximately $9.7 million
could not be supported. Specifically, DJS encumbered these funds for various
projects to address safety and security issues at DJS facilities; however, as of June
30, 2015, DJS did not have any obligations, such as approved contracts, to
11

--- Page 14 ---
support the encumbrance of these appropriations. Consequently, the
encumbrances should not have been recorded and the related appropriations
should have been cancelled to allow the funds to revert to the General Fund.
This practice violated the yearly closing instructions of the Comptroller of
Maryland – General Accounting Division since the encumbrances did not
represent actual fiscal year-end commitments by the State for goods and services.
The aforementioned improper encumbrances were subsequently cancelled in
fiscal year 2016 in response to our February 2016 report entitled Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2015.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DJS comply with the aforementioned closing
instructions and record encumbrances only when adequately supported by
actual commitments for good or services.
Federal Funds
Finding 5
DJS did not maximize the recovery of available federal funds, resulting in the
use of State funds to cover the cost of services that were potentially eligible
for federal reimbursement.
Analysis
DJS did not maximize recovery of available federal funds, resulting in State funds
being used to cover the costs of certain residential rehabilitation services and
treatment foster care that were potentially eligible for federal reimbursement.
According to State records, in fiscal year 2015 DJS received federal fund
reimbursements totaling approximately $3.4 million under Title IV-E of the
Social Security Act and approximately $2.6 million under the Medical Assistance
program (Medicaid).
Title IV-E of the Social Security Act
Our tests disclosed that DJS did not request federal reimbursement under Title IV-
E for all eligible treatment foster care expenditures incurred by juveniles at
residential facilities, and certain of these costs may no longer be available for
recovery. DJS is allowed to recover 50 percent of all eligible costs (such as food,
shelter, clothing, and certain administrative expenses) incurred during a juvenile’s
stay at these facilities.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Our test of federal recoveries for payments totaling approximately $453,000 made
for 14 juveniles residing in eligible facilities between October 2013 and
November 2015 disclosed that, for 3 juveniles, DJS did not request federal
reimbursement for approximately $38,700, representing 50 percent of eligible
expenses for 338 days. Since federal regulations require requests to be submitted
within two years after the calendar quarter of the date of service, as of July 2016,
approximately $24,500 of these expenses were no longer available for recovery
and, therefore, federal revenue will not be received to recover the State funds used
for these costs. While DJS procedures included a supervisory review of these
federal reimbursement requests, in all 3 instances in which federal reimbursement
was not requested, an independent review was not performed.
Medical Assistance Program
As a member of the State’s Rate Setting Reform Stakeholders Workgroup,1 DJS
did not revise its rates paid for residential rehabilitation services as recommended
by a federal audit. This precluded federal reimbursement of those costs under
Medicaid, and resulted in the use of State funds for services that are potentially
eligible for federal reimbursement.
In its August 2011 audit report on the State’s Medicaid claims, the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) concluded that the State’s use
of a flat per diem rate for Medicaid claims for all residential rehabilitation
services from October 1, 2005 through September 30, 2007, regardless of the
specific services received by each client, made it unclear whether such services
were eligible for Medicaid reimbursement. These Medicaid claims were for
residential rehabilitation services costs incurred by the Department of Juvenile
Services and the Department of Human Services. In response to the HHS audit
report recommendations, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), which
administers the State’s Medicaid program, agreed to pursue changes to the State’s
methodology for setting per diem rates for residential rehabilitation services and
to ensure claims were properly documented in accordance with that methodology.
This issue was referred to the State’s Rate Setting Reform Stakeholders
Workgroup in the fall of 2011. The Workgroup determined that most services
included in the per diem rates, such as room and board and recreation, were not
Medicaid-covered services. Therefore, the Workgroup concluded that the small
portion of Medicaid-covered services (such as mental health counseling by a
1 The Workgroup was created under the State’s Interagency Rates Committee. The
State’s Interagency Rates Committee was established to improve the rate-setting
process for residential child care and comprises the Maryland Department of Health and
the Departments of Human Services, Juvenile Services, Budget and Management, and
Education, as well as the Governor’s Office of Children.
13

--- Page 16 ---
licensed clinical social worker) should be recovered directly by the providers as
fee-for-service claims and a reduced State per diem rate should be established for
the non-Medicaid eligible services.
However, as of March 2017, DJS and the Workgroup had made limited progress
in determining a new reduced per diem rate for the non-Medicaid eligible
services. Effective July 1, 2015, DJS is no longer recovering any federal funds
for residential rehabilitation services and continues to pay providers using the
original per diem rate methodology. As a result, costs associated with these
services that are potentially eligible for Medicaid reimbursement are now being
funded solely by the State’s General Fund. DJS was unable to provide us with an
estimate of the amounts that have not been recovered.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DJS
a. submit all eligible Title IV-E claims for reimbursement within the
required two-year period;
b. ensure supervisory reviews are performed to confirm the completeness of
all federal reimbursement requests;
c. as a member of the Rate Setting Reform Stakeholders Workgroup,
ensure that a methodology is established for a per diem residential
rehabilitation services rate that includes only non-Medicaid services, and
that Medicaid-eligible services are billed separately by the providers as
fee-for-service claims; and
d. determine the feasibility of identifying and recovering allowable
Medicaid-eligible services costs and pursuing retroactive federal
reimbursement.
Confidential Juvenile Information
Finding 6
DJS did not protect the personally identifiable information (PII) and other
confidential information of juveniles under its supervision.
Analysis
DJS did not protect confidential PII of juveniles, such as names, social security
numbers and/or dates of birth, in both hardcopy and electronic formats. PII is
commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft and is required to be
safeguarded in accordance with both State law and policy.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Specifically, DJS allowed certain private youth care service providers to include
confidential PII on invoices. Based on our review, the PII did not need to be
included on the invoices because the providers already included the unique
identification number assigned to each juvenile. Since these invoices were
routinely submitted via unsecured methods, such as mail and fax, and DJS had no
established procedures for securing the invoices upon receipt, the information was
susceptible to unauthorized disclosure. In addition, the invoices also disclosed
that the named juveniles were detained in a juvenile facility—information that is
also considered confidential under State regulation. Approximately 2,100
juveniles received youth care services from private providers in fiscal year 2015.
In addition, PII was stored in clear text within the Automated Statewide System of
Information Support Tools (DJS’ juvenile case management system) and the
Restitution Tracking System databases and was not protected by other substantial
mitigating controls. Specifically, we determined that, as of June 2016, these
databases contained 145,226 unique social security numbers in clear text along
with full names and, in most cases, dates of birth. Furthermore, we were advised
that DJS did not have data mitigation policies and procedures in place to
periodically determine whether it was necessary to continue storing this PII and to
remove any PII determined to be no longer needed.
State law requires all agencies to protect personal information from unauthorized
access, use, modification, or disclosure by implementing reasonable security
procedures and practices that are appropriate to the nature of the personal
information collected and the nature of the agency and its operations. State
regulation requires all records about any youth to be maintained and properly
secured to preserve their confidentiality. Finally, according to the State of
Maryland’s Information Security Policy, agencies are responsible for protecting
all confidential information using encryption technologies and/or other substantial
mitigating controls.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DJS properly protect personally identifiable
information of juveniles under its supervision. Specifically, we recommend
that DJS
a. instruct youth care providers to refrain from including confidential
information on invoices;
b. establish procedures for identifying, securing, and storing any
confidential juvenile information from provider invoices currently on
hand at DJS;
c. perform an inventory of its information systems, identify all sensitive PII,
and delete all unnecessary PII; and
15

--- Page 18 ---
d. ensure that all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or other
substantial mitigating controls, and use approved encryption methods to
encrypt all sensitive PII not otherwise properly protected.
Restitution
Finding 7
DJS had not established sufficient controls over the restitution process to
ensure all transactions were properly recorded, disbursements were properly
made, and accounts were properly monitored.
Analysis
DJS had not established sufficient controls over the restitution recording,
collection, and disbursement processes to ensure the propriety of transactions and
related records. Furthermore, one headquarters employee performed, or was
capable of performing many of these processes, and the related transactions were
not subject to independent review by either headquarters or regional personnel.
Certain aspects of the restitution process were the responsibility of headquarters
personnel, while other aspects were the responsibility of regional personnel.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2015, restitution collections and
disbursements totaled approximately $528,000 and $464,000, respectively.
Headquarters Responsibilities
 DJS did not ensure that the Restitution Tracking System (RTS) was accurate,
and assurance was lacking that all transactions had been properly recorded in
the detailed restitution accounts. According to DJS’ records, as of February
19, 2016, there were approximately 17,600 open restitution accounts totaling
approximately $10.2 million. However, we were advised by DJS
management that the account balance was not accurate. Specifically, we were
advised that RTS includes all accounts added into the system since its
inception.
Various recordkeeping deficiencies noted in this report and our previous DJS
reports have adversely impacted the accuracy of RTS. For example, as
commented upon in our four preceding audit reports, DJS had not reconciled
its record of unmatched collections on RTS with the corresponding balance on
the State Comptrollers’ records since January 1997. The unmatched
collections balance represents lockbox payments that could not be readily
identified to a specific restitution account. As of December 31, 2015, the fund
balance of unmatched collections on the Comptroller’s records (approximately
$162,400) exceeded the balance on RTS (approximately $91,500) by $70,900.
16

--- Page 19 ---
According to RTS, the balance of the unmatched collections comprises 1,012
payments dating back to December 7, 1993. As a result, the accuracy of RTS
account balances is questionable, and DJS cannot know for certain if each
account is active, delinquent, or has already been paid and should have been
closed.
 One headquarters employee had full, unrestricted access to RTS and was
primarily responsible for recording changes to restitution orders entered into
RTS and processing restitution payments. The employee also had the
capability to record new restitution orders, although this was not a normal part
of the employee’s job duties. This was a significant deficiency because, as
further detailed below, these transactions were not subject to independent
supervisory review. A similar condition has been commented upon in our
four preceding audit reports. DJS management advised us that RTS does not
allow user access to be restricted in such a way as to provide an appropriate
separation of critical duties. In response to our preceding audit report, DJS
implemented procedures to review non-cash adjustments to account balances
made by this headquarters employee, but did not implement independent
reviews of other transactions made by this employee.
 DJS did not have a process to verify the propriety of disbursements to victims,
which were processed by the aforementioned headquarters employee. DJS
generated biweekly RTS reports of restitution payments due to victims based
on restitution payments posted to the juveniles’ accounts. DJS also obtained
monthly reports from the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) of delinquent
restitution payments it recovered. This employee initiated the disbursement
request based on collection information from RTS and CCU reports and
released the related transactions in the State’s accounting system to process
the disbursements to victims. However, an independent DJS headquarters
employee did not review these entries to ensure the amounts and recipients of
the payments agreed with RTS and CCU reports.
Regional Responsibilities
 Procedures were not in place to ensure that all new restitution orders and
court-ordered changes to restitution orders had been properly recorded in
RTS. Certain DJS regional personnel recorded new juvenile cases and
changes to restitution orders in the DJS juvenile case management system
called the Automated Statewide System of Information Support Tools
(ASSIST) while other regional employees recorded the restitution information
in RTS. However, regional personnel did not use available ASSIST reports to
confirm that all orders or changes in orders were promptly and accurately
recorded in RTS.
17

--- Page 20 ---
We tested 10 new fiscal year 2015 juvenile cases recorded in ASSIST with
restitution orders totaling approximately $11,000. Our test disclosed that, as
of April 7, 2016, the restitution orders for 3 cases totaling approximately
$4,100 had not been recorded in RTS and, for 2 cases, the restitution orders
totaling approximately $1,800 were recorded in RTS more than a year after
the restitution had been ordered. DJS subsequently recorded these 3
unrecorded orders into RTS after we notified them of the omissions.
 DJS did not require the regional offices to ensure that restitution payments,
which were received through a bank lockbox account, were properly credited
to juvenile accounts in RTS. Restitution payments were initially credited to a
holding account until they were matched and credited to the applicable
juvenile accounts in RTS by regional personnel. Our site visits conducted at
two regional offices disclosed that neither region had procedures to ensure the
payments were properly credited to the respective juvenile’s account by their
caseworkers.
 DJS did not require the regional offices to use available output reports of
accounts with no payment activity to monitor and identify delinquent
restitution accounts. Rather, caseworkers were individually responsible for
ensuring that juveniles complied with restitution orders and were referred to
CCU if necessary. Our review of procedures at two regions disclosed that one
region did not use these available reports to identify accounts that were not
being paid timely by the offenders or by the offenders’ legal guardians.
According to DJS records, there were 378 accounts statewide created during
the audit period, totaling approximately $200,000 that had no payments for at
least five months and were not referred to CCU as of March 24, 2016. CCU
regulations generally require that three written demands for payment be made
on accounts at 30-day intervals and, if no payments are received, the accounts
be considered delinquent and immediately referred to CCU for collection
assistance.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DJS
a. ensure that RTS reflects the current balance of outstanding restitution
accounts;
b. ensure that an independent employee conducts reconciliations of
unmatched restitution collections on RTS with corresponding State
accounting records, and investigates and resolves any differences
(repeat);
18

--- Page 21 ---
c. establish independent supervisory review procedures to ensure all new
restitution orders and changes to restitution orders were promptly and
accurately recorded in RTS, restitution payments were posted to the
proper juvenile accounts, and amounts and recipients of victim
disbursements agree with supporting reports of restitution payments
received (repeat); and
d. ensure that regional offices monitor overdue accounts and refer any
delinquent accounts to CCU on a timely basis.
Information Systems Security and Control
Overview
DJS’ Office of Information Technology (OIT) was solely responsible for the
Department’s information technology support. However, beginning in March
2016, DJS began a conversion to use of the State of Maryland Department of
Information Technology’s (DoIT) IT support services, which ultimately will
include the following functions:
 Network and Information Technology Security Services (including firewall
and intrusion detection prevention systems operations and maintenance and
malware protection)
 IT Service Desk
 Hardware Support
 Software Support
 Web and Geographic Information Services
 IT Procurement Services
Through the summer of 2016, DJS continued to operate a statewide network that
connected DJS’ local offices and the DJS headquarters. The statewide network
provides DJS users access to various information technology applications and
services including ASSIST, CM, RST, network services, email services, and
Internet access. However, as of September 30, 2016, DoIT was beginning to
maintain and operate this statewide network.
As of September 30, 2016, OIT was operating several critical computer
applications and related databases on DJS maintained servers. These applications
included the:
 Automated Statewide System of Information Support Tools (ASSIST) which
is the DJS juvenile case management system that tracks vital legal, judicial
19

--- Page 22 ---
and demographic information pertaining to the youth who are under the DJS’
jurisdiction
 Cost Management (CM) application which assists with tracking expenditures
of funds for youth placements, and
 Restitution Tracking System (RTS) which tracks restitution payments
received from juvenile offenders and payments to victims of their crimes
Finding 8
The ASSIST database was not properly secured and related logging and
monitoring controls were not adequate.
Analysis
The ASSIST database was not properly secured and related logging and
monitoring controls were not adequate.
 A default user group on the server hosting the production ASSIST database
was improperly granted modification access to several critical system and
database files. As a result of this condition, in excess of 2,500 active accounts
were improperly granted this modification access.
 Sixteen accounts (used by at least 14 separate individuals) were improperly
assigned as local administrators on the server hosting the ASSIST database
and were unnecessarily given a powerful system privilege. As a result of
these conditions, these individuals had full control and modification access
over the ASSIST database. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
 Certain critical database privileges (for example insert any table) and
operations were not logged for subsequent review. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
As a result, unauthorized or inappropriate activities affecting the integrity of the
production database information could occur and go undetected by management.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy states that agencies must
ensure that only authorized individuals (employees or agency contractors) have
access to confidential information and that such access is strictly controlled,
audited, and configured to achieve a “least privilege” security strategy that grants
privileges only needed to perform assigned tasks.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DJS
a. restrict access to critical files to only those individuals who need such
access to perform their job duties (repeat),
b. limit administrator access to critical servers to only those individuals who
need such access (repeat), and
c. enable logging of the use of all critical database privileges and operations
(repeat) and perform a documented review of the logged activities.
Finding 9
DoIT maintained appliances that provided firewall and intrusion detection
prevention system services for DJS but were not configured to adequately
secure the DJS network.
Analysis
DoIT maintained appliances that provided firewall and intrusion detection
prevention system (IDPS) services for DJS but were not configured to adequately
secure the DJS network.
 Our November 2016 test of the advanced security appliances used by DoIT to
provide network and information technology security services to DJS
determined that DoIT did not fully use the expanded capabilities of these
appliances to provide enhanced security for the DJS network. Specifically,
we noted that four available features (including the ability to allow or deny
traffic based on the application traversing the network) that would provide
enhanced network security for DJS were not used.
 IDPS was not applied to untrusted traffic entering the DJS internal network.
On behalf of DJS, DoIT maintained and operated appliances that included an
integrated IDPS which could either block potentially malicious traffic or alert
firewall administrators of such traffic. However, the appliances were not
configured to apply IDPS protection to any of the 26 firewall rules allowing
traffic from untrusted sources to the DJS internal network. Thus, traffic
entering the DJS internal network from the Internet, the Statewide Intranet,
and other untrusted sources was not covered by IDPS. DoIT personnel
advised us that no other network or host-based form of IDPS protection had
been implemented. Accordingly, DJS had no IDPS protection relative to
untrusted third-party traffic entering its internal network.
21

--- Page 24 ---
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that agency systems
shall be configured to monitor and control communications at external
boundaries.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DJS, in conjunction with DoIT
a. fully uses the expanded capabilities of the advanced security appliances to
properly secure the DJS network,
b. applies IDPS coverage to all inbound untrusted traffic, and
c. configures its IDPS to block high-risk traffic and continuously log lower-
risk traffic for review and possible investigation.
Finding 10
Malware protection was not sufficient to provide DJS with adequate
assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Analysis
Malware protection was not sufficient to provide DJS with adequate assurance
that its computers were properly protected.
 Assurance was lacking that, on an ongoing basis, malware protection software
was installed, up-to-date and operational on all DJS computers. DoIT used an
automated malware protection console to manage the malware protection
software installed on DJS computers. However, we identified 120 computers
(out of 1,362 active DJS computers) that were not listed on the console.
 Our November 2016 test of the aforementioned DoIT automated malware
protection console identified 229 DJS computers that did not have current
malware signatures. We noted that these malware signatures (which are used
to identify malware) were from seven days to at least two months older than
the current signatures. The malware protection software vendor updates these
signatures every day unless an emergency exists which mandates a quicker
release of new signatures. These signature updates should generally be
installed immediately but, at a minimum, should be installed within a week of
release.
 Numerous DJS workstations had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, DoIT had not
updated the DJS workstations for these patches. Specifically, we identified
22

--- Page 25 ---
over 1,200 workstations that were running older versions of three commonly
vulnerable applications.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy, states that agencies, at a
minimum, must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by
implementing protections (anti-virus, anti-malware) that, to the extent possible,
include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DJS, in conjunction with DoIT,
a. ensure the computers are running current versions of the malware
protection software,
b. install malware signatures provided by the malware protection software
vendor immediately upon release, and
c. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for
commonly vulnerable applications on all DJS-managed workstations.
Equipment
Finding 11
DJS did not maintain complete and accurate detail records and properly
account for its equipment.
Analysis
DJS did not maintain accurate detail records and properly account for its
equipment in accordance with the Department of General Services (DGS)
Inventory Control Manual. According to DJS records as of June 30, 2015, its
equipment was valued at approximately $18.8 million.
 The detail equipment records were not complete and accurate. Our review of
the detail records as of June 30, 2015 disclosed that purchase prices were not
recorded for 1,628 computer equipment items and approximately 1,400
inventory tag numbers were assigned to more than one piece of equipment. In
addition, our test of 12 surveillance equipment items totaling approximately
$1 million purchased in December 2014 disclosed that none was recorded in
the detail records until after our inquiry in April 2016. Finally, our test of 20
equipment items included in the detail records valued at approximately
$216,000 disclosed that one item purchased for approximately $142,000 had
not been removed from the detail records as of June 30, 2015 even though it
had been returned to the seller in November 2005.
23

--- Page 26 ---
 DJS did not investigate missing items noted during its fiscal year 2015
physical inventory. Specifically, as of April 2016, the status of approximately
1,000 missing equipment items valued at approximately $607,000 had not
been resolved.
 Three employees had inappropriate access to the equipment database allowing
them the capability to add or delete records without approval. Two of these
employees conducted the physical inventory of the related equipment; the
third employee did not need the access to the equipment database to perform
the employee’s work duties.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that State agencies maintain their
equipment records in accordance with prescribed standards, and any missing
items be investigated and reported to DGS. The Manual also requires that the
duties of record keeping and conducting physical inventories be segregated when
practical or economically feasible.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DJS comply with the aforementioned requirements of
the DGS Inventory Control Manual.
Payroll
Finding 12
Overtime paid to employees was not always preauthorized and approved.
Analysis
Overtime paid to employees was not always preauthorized and approved by
supervisory personnel. According to State records during calendar year 2015,
DJS paid approximately $10.8 million in overtime compensation to 1,345
employees. Total compensation for employees who were eligible for overtime
compensation was approximately $46.5 million during this period.
Our test of 74 biweekly overtime payments totaling approximately $157,900, paid
primarily during calendar year 2015, disclosed that 20 payments totaling
approximately $43,900 were made for overtime hours worked that did not have a
written justification for the overtime on the employee’s timesheet approved by
supervisory personnel. Three of these 20 timesheets also had not been signed by
supervisory personnel. We also noted 12 additional payments totaling
approximately $28,400 for which some overtime hours worked did not have
written justification for the overtime on the employee’s timesheet approved by
24

--- Page 27 ---
supervisory personnel. Finally, we also noted that one employee had improperly
received overtime compensation totaling approximately $3,200 during fiscal year
2015. The employee became ineligible to receive overtime in July 2014 because
of a change in employment classification but continued receiving overtime
through May 2015.
State regulations requires authorization for any overtime to be in writing.
Although not formalized, we were advised that DJS policy required that
justification for overtime be documented on the employee’s timesheet and be
approved by supervisory personnel.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that DJS
a. formalize its policy requiring justification for overtime,
b. ensure that the overtime justification is documented on the timesheet and
approved by supervisory personnel,
c. ensure that overtime compensation is paid only to eligible employees, and
d. recoup the overtime compensation paid in error to the aforementioned
employee.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Juvenile
Services (DJS) for the period beginning November 5, 2012 and ending December
15, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DJS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, payroll,
equipment, federal fund reimbursements, human services contracts, restitution
accounts, and critical information systems. Beginning in March 2016, the
Department of Information Technology began taking responsibility for providing
certain information technology support services to DJS. We have included
functions performed by DoIT within the scope of our audit due to their
significance to DJS’ operations. We conducted our review at DJS’ headquarters
location and the field offices located in the central and metro regions. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of DJS’ compliance with those laws and regulations because the State
of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DJS.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DJS’ operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
26

--- Page 29 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from DJS’ case management system and
restitution tracking system for the purpose of testing disbursements related to
youth care and restitution payments. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DJS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DJS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other findings were
communicated to DJS that were not significant, and consequently did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
27

--- Page 30 ---
DJS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DJS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
28

--- Page 38 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Wesley M. Elder, CPA
Winnie J. Tenekam
Richard Tran
Staff Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Staff Auditor