Title: Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund
Date: 11/04/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744f7
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:22:43.433507
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund
November 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
November 4, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF) for the period
beginning December 13, 2005 and ending March 3, 2009. MAIF’s primary
responsibilities are to provide automobile insurance policies for those residents of
Maryland whose applications have been declined by private insurers and to
administer and pay claims to residents of Maryland who are involved in accidents
in Maryland with motorists who are uninsured.
Our audit disclosed that, in June and December of 2008, MAIF’s Board of
Trustees approved changes to certain critical requirements of MAIF’s calendar
year 2008 employee bonus program. We question the timing and appropriateness
of these changes, without which the majority of that year’s approximately $1.4
million in bonuses would not have been paid. We also noted certain expenditures
for consulting, marketing, and lobbying services, as well as certain outreach costs,
that may not be consistent with MAIF’s primary mission as a State-created insurer
of last resort. Due to their nature, we believe certain expenditures should be
subject to disclosure to the legislature’s budget committees to ensure that such
expenditures are consistent with the legislature’s intended mission for MAIF.
Our audit also disclosed that certain procurement transactions were not consistent
with MAIF’s established procurement procedures and that documentation of
expenditures could be improved. Finally, we noted that payments made to private
attorneys were not always reported in accordance with regulations of the Internal
Revenue Service.

--- Page 4 ---
MAIF’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish
to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by
MAIF.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Analysis Conducted by the Maryland Insurance Administration 4
Financial Statement Audits 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Employee Bonuses
Finding 1 (Policy Issue) – During Calendar Year 2008, Changes Were Made 6
to Critical Provisions of MAIF’s Employee Bonus Program, without
Which the Majority of the $1.4 Million in Bonuses Paid for the Year
Would Not Have Been Paid
Disclosure of Certain Expenditures to Budget Committees
Finding 2 (Policy Issue) – Certain Expenditures Should Be Disclosed to the 7
Legislative Budget Committees as Part of the Annual Budget Submission
Process
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3 – Certain Procurement Transactions Were Not Consistent 9
with MAIF’s Established Procedures
Finding 4 – Sufficient Documentation to Support Expenditures Was 10
Not Always on File or Properly Reviewed
Attorney Payments
Finding 5 – Certain Payments to Plaintiff Attorneys Were Not Reported 11
in Accordance with Internal Revenue Service Regulations
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF), which consists of an Insured
and an Uninsured Division, operates under the provisions of Title 20 of the
Insurance Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The Insured Division’s
purpose is to provide automobile liability and property damage insurance
coverage on personal vehicles and, to a lesser extent, commercial vehicles to
Maryland residents who are unable to obtain coverage from private insurance
carriers. The Uninsured Division is responsible for paying claims to eligible
victims of traffic accidents caused by operators of uninsured or unidentified
vehicles provided that the victim does not have recourse through an insurance
policy which would cover any related loss. According to its records, during
calendar year 2008, MAIF processed and issued claims payments that totaled
approximately $108 million. In addition, total MAIF operating expenditures were
approximately $50.6 million during that period.
Analysis Conducted by the Maryland Insurance Administration
State law stipulates certain eligibility requirements for individuals applying for
insurance coverage from MAIF. These include a requirement that an applicant
has attempted in good faith to obtain automobile liability insurance required by
law from at least two other insurers, but has been rejected or refused a policy for
any reason other than nonpayment of premiums. An applicant may also have had
their policy with another insurer canceled or not renewed for any reason other
than nonpayment of premiums. We were advised by Maryland Insurance
Administration management personnel that the Administration recently conducted
an analysis of the requirement for an applicant to have been rejected by two
insurers as a prerequisite for obtaining coverage from MAIF. We were also
advised that this analysis covered the period June 1, 2005 to May 31, 2009, and
that, as of October 14, 2009, the results of the analysis had not yet been finalized.
Financial Statement Audits
MAIF engaged an independent accounting firm to audit the statutory-basis
financial statements of the Insured Division. In the related audit reports for
calendar years 2006, 2007, and 2008, the firm stated that the financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Insured
Division, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then
ended in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the
Maryland Insurance Administration.
4

--- Page 7 ---
In addition, MAIF engaged the same accounting firm to audit the financial
statements of the Uninsured Division for the calendar years 2006, 2007, and 2008.
In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position, results of operations and cash
flows of the Uninsured Division for the years then ended in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 25, 2006. We determined that MAIF
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Employee Bonuses
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
During calendar year 2008, changes were made to critical provisions of the
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund’s employee bonus program, without
which the majority of the $1.4 million in bonuses paid for the year would not
have been paid.
Analysis
During calendar year 2008, the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund’s (MAIF)
Board of Trustees approved changes to certain critical requirements of MAIF’s
Gain Sharing Program (bonus program) that allowed for the payment of employee
bonuses for this year totaling approximately $1.4 million, the majority of which
would not have been paid without those changes.
Specifically, in June 2008, the Board revised the financial goal, which served as
the basis for 75 percent of the calendar year 2008 bonuses paid to non-
management employees. The goal was based on certain financial results
experienced by MAIF for the year, such as premiums earned and expenses
incurred. By making this change, bonuses could be awarded for lower financial
results, such as lower premium income, higher claim losses or expenses, or
combinations thereof. Bonuses paid to non-management employees totaled
approximately $1 million for calendar year 2008. If the change to the goal had
not been made, employees would only have been entitled to bonuses of
approximately $250,000 based on certain non-financial performance results.
Similarly, in December 2008, the Board essentially waived the program’s
previously existing requirement that MAIF have an annual net income gain (that
is, a profit) for calendar year 2008 before bonuses could be paid to approximately
30 management and executive employees. At the time of the Board’s decision, it
was anticipated that MAIF would end calendar year 2008 with a net loss and,
according to MAIF’s audited financial statements for the year, MAIF did have a
net loss of approximately $19.6 million. Although the Board reduced the bonus
amounts from what employees would have received if a net income gain had
occurred, payments to these employees still totaled approximately $407,0001.
1 For example, certain bonuses were reduced from 15 to 11.25 percent and others were reduced
from 20 to 13.25 percent of annual salaries.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Regarding these changes, MAIF’s management personnel advised the Board that
the change to the goal for non-management employees was necessary because
certain current economic trends were competing and undercutting the
appropriateness of that goal as it then stood. For example, management stated
that current attempts to maintain low insurance rates may aid in MAIF’s efforts to
keep motorists insured, but may also have a negative effect on this financial goal.
In addition, management noted that MAIF’s net loss for the year was not the
result of underperformance on the part of management employees, but the result
of “deliberate decision making on the part of management in response to radically
altered corporate imperatives” as well as the effects of the worldwide financial
crisis (recession).
According to State law, the Executive Director has the authority to set employee
compensation with the approval of the Board of Trustees. Furthermore, the Board
retains the prerogative to amend the goals and all aspects of the bonus program
whenever it decides that circumstances warrant such change. However, we
question whether such significant changes to critical program requirements were
appropriate since the changes occurred during the applicable year, after it had
become apparent that the original requirements would not be met, and especially
in light of the size of the net loss ($19.6 million) incurred by MAIF and the
financial stress being experienced by the State as a whole.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Board of Trustees not significantly revise or waive
critical requirements of the bonus program to allow for the payment of
bonuses after the requirements have been approved and the applicable year
has begun.
Disclosure of Certain Expenditures to Budget Committees
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
Disclosure of certain expenditures should be made as part of the annual
budget submission to legislative committees.
Analysis
During our audit period, we noted certain expenditures which appeared to be
inconsistent with the mission of a State-created entity designated as an insurer of
last resort. Specifically, these expenditures appeared to be more indicative of a
private insurer which, as authorized under State law, is a role that MAIF also
performs in certain circumstances. These dual roles create some ambiguity with
respect to MAIF’s activities and the appropriateness of the aforementioned
7

--- Page 10 ---
expenditures. Specifically, according to the Insurance Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the purpose of MAIF is to provide automobile insurance to
eligible Maryland residents who are unable to obtain insurance in the private
market. However, this Article also entitles a MAIF policyholder, after three
continuous years of MAIF coverage and meeting certain requirements2, to
continuation of coverage from MAIF at rates that are reasonably comparable to
those charged by standard insurers. This effectively puts a segment of MAIF’s
business relating to certain preexisting customers in competition with other
insurers. Consequently, we believe that, due to their nature, certain expenditures
should be subject to disclosure to the legislative budget committees to ensure the
expenditures are consistent with the legislature’s intended mission for MAIF and
the nature of MAIF’s business.
For example, during calendar years 2008 and 2009 (through May 31), we noted
that expenditures included approximately $96,000 for strategic consulting
services; $81,000 for marketing, public relations, and advertising; and $74,000 for
lobbying services. In addition, we noted expenditures for producer (agent)
appreciation events, such as $15,000 for catering and space rental, and at least
$9,000 for corporate sponsorships. MAIF is a non-budgeted fund agency (and, as
such, does not receive any State general funds) that currently submits its budget to
the General Assembly for informational purposes only. Those budgets do not
include the type of detailed expenditure data noted here.
The law does not prohibit these expenditures, and MAIF management considers
such expenditures necessary to help MAIF successfully fulfill its mission.
Specifically, management has advised that it considers MAIF a business, albeit
one created by the State, and that it is appropriate and necessary to incur certain
expenditures to promote MAIF within the public and business community, and to
promote certain MAIF initiatives within the legislature. Management believes
that these expenditures are in keeping with efforts to help ensure that all motorists
in the State are insured, and to help control costs for all Maryland motorists.
However, management also agrees that certain provisions of the law, as now
written, effectively ensure that MAIF will not go out of business regardless of its
financial results.
We recognize the unique position of MAIF in relation to State government, and
that the law has provided latitude to MAIF management in performing MAIF
operations. However, MAIF is ultimately accountable to the State of Maryland.
2 For example, having not been charged with a moving traffic violation and assessed more than
one point by the Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Therefore, we believe that it should disclose more detailed expenditure data to the
legislature, including the aforementioned items, to ensure that these transactions
are in accordance with the intended purpose of MAIF.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MAIF report the detailed budget and expenditure data
for consulting and lobbying services, marketing and public relations costs, as
well as expenditures for producer related events, corporate sponsorships,
and other similar outreach costs, to the legislative budget committees.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
Certain procurement transactions processed by MAIF were not consistent
with its Procurement Procedures Manual.
Analysis
Certain procurement transactions processed by MAIF were not consistent with its
Procurement Procedures Manual. Specifically, we examined eight service
agreements with purchase orders issued totaling approximately $1.9 million. Our
review disclosed that written documentation justifying the use of the sole source
procurement method was not on file, as required, for three contracts that,
according to MAIF personnel, were procured in this manner. Expenditures for
these contracts, which were for certain consulting and marketing services, totaled
approximately $287,000 for the period from January 1, 2007 to May 31, 2009. In
addition, MAIF did not have a written contract on file for certain maintenance
services, which MAIF had been receiving for approximately 11 years. Payments
to this vendor in calendar year 2008 totaled approximately $20,000.
MAIF’s Procurement Procedures Manual requires written justification for sole
source procurements. Furthermore, the Manual provides for written contracts
establishing specific deliverables and terms for ongoing services.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MAIF
a. maintain documentation justifying use of the sole source procurement
method, and
b. ensure written contracts are established with all vendors providing
ongoing services.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 4
Documentation sufficient to support expenditures was not always on file, or
was not always reviewed by personnel responsible for processing
expenditures.
Analysis
Sufficient documentation was not always obtained to support credit card
expenditures incurred, and vendor documentation that was obtained for other
MAIF expenditures was not always reviewed by those employees responsible for
processing these transactions.
• Our review of 61 credit card expenditures totaling approximately $17,300,
incurred during six months in calendar year 2008, disclosed 51 expenditures
totaling approximately $14,100 for which detailed supporting receipts were
not on file. In the absence of a detailed receipt, MAIF used the applicable
credit card statement as support for the expenditure. These expenditures
included, for example, two restaurant billings totaling approximately $4,000.
Credit card expenditures totaled $173,000 in calendar year 2008.
• Our review of 23 other MAIF expenditures totaling approximately $115,000
disclosed 8 expenditures totaling $22,000, which were processed by MAIF’s
fiscal unit without reviewing the related vendor invoice. Although we verified
that the invoices had been obtained by MAIF for these expenditures, which
included catering and hotel billings, the approved invoices were not submitted
to the fiscal unit. Rather, the fiscal unit instead relied on a memo submitted
by authorized personnel requesting payment.
MAIF’s Expense Account Rules and Regulations generally require adequate
receipts to support such expenditures. Although other documentation may be
used in certain circumstances, credit card statements do not provide sufficient
detail to properly evaluate the propriety of such expenditures. In addition,
controls over expenditures should allow fiscal personnel to obtain reasonable
assurance that expenditures were proper before payment.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that
a. MAIF require detailed receipts to support credit card expenditures, and
b. fiscal personnel responsible for processing expenditures examine
approved vendor invoices to help verify the accuracy and propriety of
those expenditures.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Attorney Payments
Finding 5
Certain payments made to plaintiff attorneys were not reported in
accordance with Internal Revenue Service regulations.
Analysis
Certain payments made to plaintiff attorneys were not reported in accordance with
regulations of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Those regulations require
payers to use IRS Form 1099 to report payments to attorneys, including payments
made for the benefit of the attorney’s client. However, our test of five such
payments made by the Uninsured Division during calendar year 2008 totaling
approximately $100,000 disclosed that the required Form 1099 had not been
issued for any of the payments.
We were advised that this occurred because complete vendor coding information
had not been recorded in the automated claims records for these payments.
Consequently, a corresponding Form 1099 had not been generated. Our review of
the Division’s automated records for attorney payments during calendar year 2008
disclosed payments totaling approximately $560,000 for which there was a
similar lack of complete vendor coding information. Consequently other
payments, in addition to the five mentioned above, may not have been properly
reported. Attorney payments by the Division totaled $1.3 million for the year.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MAIF
a. ensure that vendor coding information is properly recorded and that all
applicable payments to plaintiff attorneys are reported as required by
IRS regulations; and
b. determine if previous payments not reported on Form 1099, such as those
noted in our test work, need to be reported and, if so, report these
previous payments to the IRS.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Automobile Fund (MAIF) for the period
beginning December 13, 2005 and ending March 3, 2009. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MAIF’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. The areas addressed by the audit
included claims processing, cash receipts, procurements and disbursements, and
accounts receivable. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of MAIF’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
MAIF’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
12

--- Page 15 ---
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MAIF’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MAIF that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MAIF’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MAIF regarding the results of
our review of its response.
13

--- Page 18 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Jean M. Cubello
Michael J. Murdzak
Staff Auditors