Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Montgomery County
Date: 10/15/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ccc9d724560674342
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:16:23.569491
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Montgomery County, Maryland
January 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Montgomery County and its incorporated municipalities, and subsequently
distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2015
revenues totaled $61,812,216. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $1,752,616 was distributed to Montgomery County and its incorporated
municipalities, and
 $60,059,600 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the
State for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The Office’s fiscal year 2015 operating expenses, which were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation, totaled $11,532,324.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust and special purpose funds that,
according to its records, had balances totaling $22,662,749 as of June 30, 2015.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 9, 2013. We determined that the
Office satisfactorily addressed these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Trust Funds
Finding 1
The Office did not properly perform bank reconciliations for its trust fund
checking account and unexplained differences were not researched. For
other accounts, reconciliations were not prepared for more than one year.
Analysis
The Office did not reconcile trust fund checking and individual escrow accounts,
known as registry accounts, with the corresponding bank records. The registry
accounts are individual savings accounts used for specific court cases in which
funds are mandated to be held by the court pending the resolution of the cases.
The Office also maintains a checking account which is used to disburse the funds
related to the individual registry accounts when the court cases are finalized.
According to the bank’s records, as of June 30, 2015, the registry checking
account balance was $455,577 and the balance of the 154 registry escrow
accounts totaled $18,086,834.
 The Office did not properly prepare reconciliations of its checking account.
Specifically, the Office inappropriately used the adjusted book balances from
the prior reconciliations as the beginning balance instead of using the
checking account balance from its records. Furthermore, the Office’s
reconciliations for the period from January through June 2015 contained
unexplained differences between the Office’s records and the bank balances of
the checking account in all six reconciliations. For example, after all
reconciling items had been noted for the June 2015 reconciliation, the
reconciliation reflected an unexplained difference of $386,000, in which the
bank balance was greater than the book balance. Five of the reconciliations
prepared between January and June 2015, including the aforementioned June
2015 reconciliation, had been reviewed and approved by a supervisor despite
the discrepancies noted; the remaining reconciliation was not approved.
 As of July 2015, reconciliations of the 154 registry escrow accounts had not
been prepared since June 2014. We attempted to perform a reconciliation of
the aggregate total of all accounts, which resulted in a difference of
approximately $37,000 in which the Office’s records exceeded the bank
balance. Office management could not readily explain this difference.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Although these registry accounts have limited activity, complete and timely bank
reconciliations are a necessary control to reduce the risk that unauthorized
transfers could occur without timely detection.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. perform complete monthly reconciliations of the registry checking and
escrow accounts and ensure the reconciliations are adequately reviewed
and approved, and
b. investigate and resolve the aforementioned differences noted in the
registry checking and escrow reconciliations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Montgomery County, Maryland for the period beginning May 31, 2012
and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions) and bank accounts. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as payroll and invoice processing and maintenance of budgetary accounting
records) are included within the scope of our audits of the Judiciary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
5

--- Page 8 ---
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Judiciary’s response, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review and its response.
6

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker
Staff Auditor