Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Office of the Secretary and Other Units


NOTE 1: Effective July 1, 2009, the Office of Health Care Quality within DHMH - Office of the Secretary was transferred to the newly created Regulatory Services.

NOTE 2: For the audit period beginning October 15, 2009 a separate audit of DHMH - Vital Statistics Administration (VSA) will be conducted. Previously, VSA was audited and reported on as part of our audit of DHMH - Office of the Secretary.
Date: 08/09/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d724560674440
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:51:57.286863
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
August 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Organizational Changes 7
Electronic Vital Record System Contract 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Division of Vital Records
* Finding 1 – DHMH Lacked Adequate Procedures and Controls Over 9
Vital Records, Related Certificates, and Collections
* Finding 2 – DHMH Did Not Properly Monitor Local Health Department 11
(LHD) Procedures and Controls Over Birth and Death Certificates
Division of Cost Accounting and Reimbursements
Finding 3 – DHMH Did Not Timely Conduct and Properly Review 13
Financial Investigations of Patients Enrolled in State Facilities
Finding 4 – DHMH Did Not Adequately Pursue Collection of 14
Delinquent Accounts Receivables
Pharmacy Claim Audits
Finding 5 – DHMH Did Not Expand Testing or Take Corrective Action 15
When Significant Errors Were Identified During Pharmacy Audits
Network Information Systems
* Finding 6 – Security Reporting and Monitoring of a Critical System and 17
Database Were Not Adequate
Finding 7 – Network Access to Critical Internal Network Devices Was Not 17
Properly Restricted or Monitored
Finding 8 – Controls Over a Virtual Server Environment Were Not 18
Adequate
Payroll
Finding 9 – DHMH Did Not Maintain Signature Cards for Authorized 19
Approvers of Critical Personnel and Payroll Transactions and Did Not
Monitor its Employees Who Also Worked at Other State Agencies
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 10 – Adequate Controls Were Not Established Over Corporate 20
Purchasing Cards and Certain Transactions Were Not Always
Approved and Supported
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 23
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Office of the Secretary
and Other Units
August 2011
 DHMH lacked adequate procedures and controls over vital records,
resulting in a lack of assurance that all birth record information recorded
on the vital records system was accurate and that related certificates were
only issued to authorized recipients. Also, DHMH did not reconcile the
number of certificates issued to the related fees collected and deposited
and did not generate output reports of certificates issued for use in such
reconciliations.
DHMH should periodically verify the accuracy of recorded birth information
and establish adequate procedures and controls over the issuance of
certificates and related collections.
 DHMH did not properly monitor local health department (LHD)
procedures and controls over birth and death certificates. Critical vital
record and cash receipts duties were not properly segregated at certain
LHDs, and an employee at one LHD allegedly issued birth certificates for
which the related collections had not been recorded and/or accounted for,
resulting in a DHMH investigation and referral of the case to the Office
of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division.
DHMH should perform periodic reviews of LHD procedures to ensure that
proper controls are established over the issuance of birth and death
certificates.
 DHMH did not timely conduct nor properly review financial
investigations of patients enrolled in State facilities to determine their
ability to pay for the cost of care and/or to identify other liable parties.
The cost of services provided cannot be billed to the patients or to
appropriate liable third parties, when appropriate, until the financial
investigations are completed.
DHMH should ensure that financial investigations are completed on a timely
basis and resultant billings are processed.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 DHMH did not always adequately pursue delinquent accounts receivable
for collection and/or transfer the accounts to the Department of Budget
and Management’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) as required.
DHMH should ensure delinquent accounts receivable are adequately pursued
for collection and transferred to CCU as required.
 DHMH did not expand testing of pharmacy claims and take sufficient
corrective action when significant errors were identified during
pharmacy audits.
DHMH should expand testing when significant errors are identified during a
pharmacy review and should require corrective action and/or impose
sanctions.
 Internal control and recordkeeping deficiencies were noted in the areas of
network information systems, personnel, payroll, and corporate
purchasing cards.
DHMH should take the recommended actions to improve controls in these
areas.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) is responsible for
promoting the health of the public and for strengthening partnerships between
State and local governments, the business community, and all health care
providers in Maryland regarding health care. This audit report includes the
operations of the following five units:
Office of the Secretary (excluding Health Professional Boards and
Commission)
Deputy Secretary for Operations
Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services
Deputy Secretary for Behavioral Health and Disabilities
Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2010, expenditures for these
five units totaled approximately $86.3 million.
Organizational Changes
Chapter 484, Laws of Maryland 2009, effective July 1, 2009, created Regulatory
Services as a separate budgetary unit within DHMH and transferred the
responsibilities for the Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) from the DHMH
Office of the Secretary to the newly created Unit. Our current audit of DHMH
Office of the Secretary includes the financial activity of OHCQ for the period
September 1, 2006 to June 30, 2009. The activity subsequent to this period was
subject to audit during our separate audit of Regulatory Services.
Chapter 661, Laws of Maryland 2008, effective July 1, 2008, created the Deputy
Secretary for Behavioral Health and Disabilities and the Deputy Secretary for
Operations within the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. This law also
transferred the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration and the Mental Hygiene
Administration from the authority of the Deputy Secretary for Public Health
Services to the newly created Deputy Secretary for Behavioral Health and
Disabilities.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Electronic Vital Record System Contract
DHMH executed a contract for the development and implementation of an
Electronic Vital Record System (EVRS) in September 2007 for $3.9 million and,
as of October 27, 2010, had paid $1.7 million to the vendor under the contract.
The contract stipulated that the five system components would become
operational by certain dates (for example, the birth module was to be completed
by January 1, 2009), and liquidated damages would be assessed for every day
delivery was delayed beyond those dates.
The contractor did not complete implementation of the birth module of the system
(used to collect and processes birth certificate information) until January 4, 2010,
approximately one year after the deadline in the contract. DHMH management
advised us that the delay was caused, in part, by the vendor’s failure to meet
national standards provided for in the contract and because of numerous problems
with the system software, and was not the result of DHMH actions.
DHMH management considered assessing liquidated damages against the
contractor but did not do so based on the recommendations of the DHMH
Procurement Director, the Department of Information Technology (DoIT), and
the Office of the Attorney General. Subsequently, in a letter dated February 10,
2011, DHMH advised the contractor that, given its performance and a number of
operational issues with the birth module, it had decided not to exercise the options
for the remaining four system modules under the contract. The contractor
disputed any responsibility for alleged system deficiencies and requested payment
of $472,500 due for work it had completed to date, and indicated it may terminate
further services and system maintenance support if payment was not made. As of
July 19, 2011, the situation remained unresolved and DHMH, in conjunction with
the Office of the Attorney General, continues to assess its options under the
contract, including potential compensation for damages.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 13 of the 14 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 8, 2007. The status of the
remaining finding, as a result of the aforementioned organizational change, was
reviewed during our audit of Regulatory Services. We determined that DHMH
satisfactorily addressed 10 of the findings. The remaining 3 findings were not
resolved and are repeated in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Division of Vital Records
Background
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Division of Vital
Records (DVR) issues certified copies of birth, death, and marriage certificates.
Information for births since 1939 is maintained on DHMH’s Electronic Vital
Record System (EVRS), which resides on the Comptroller of Maryland’s
Annapolis Data Center. All death and marriage records, as well as birth
information prior to 1939, are manually maintained (that is, a paper copy of the
record is maintained on file). Applicants for certified copies of birth, death, or
marriage certificates are required to pay a fee for each copy and to provide
sufficient identification and other relevant information. Birth certificates and/or
certain death certificates are also available at 22 of the 24 local health
departments (LHDs). According to its records, DVR collected approximately $7
million in vital record fees during fiscal year 2010 for the issuance of
approximately 600,000 certified copies of certificates; approximately $2.1 million
of this was collected by LHDs for the issuance of 185,000 certificates.
The control and accountability of these documents, especially birth certificates, is
critical because false identification could be a major factor in many types of
crimes, including illegal immigration and flight from justice. Also, falsified or
stolen vital statistics could allow the holder to obtain other critical documents
(such as passports and driver’s licenses) and improper benefits (such as Social
Security benefits and temporary financial assistance).
Finding 1
DHMH lacked adequate procedures and controls over vital records and
related collections, resulting in a lack of assurance that all vital record
information recorded on EVRS was accurate, that certificates were properly
issued, and that certificates and related collections were accounted for.
Analysis
DHMH lacked adequate procedures and controls over the automated vital records
system, the blank certificate inventory, the distribution of the certificates, and
certificate fee collections. According to DVR’s records, during fiscal year 2010,
DVR headquarters collected approximately $4.9 million for the issuance of
approximately 413,000 certified copies of certificates. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
9

--- Page 12 ---
 DHMH did not verify birth data entered into EVRS by hospital personnel with
supporting documentation. DVR management advised us that a process was
in place whereby an employee verified the validity of the birth information
entered on EVRS to hospital records on a test basis. However, these reviews
were not documented and as of April 2010, no verifications had been
performed since the employee that performed the verifications left State
service in the fall of calendar year 2008. As a result, there is a lack of
assurance as to the validity and accuracy of the birth information recorded.
According to DVR’s records, during fiscal year 2009, there were
approximately 75,000 live births recorded.
 Changes made to existing birth records in the EVRS were not periodically
reviewed for propriety by independent personnel. Changes are made by DVR
personnel to vital records for various reasons including spelling errors and
name changes resulting from updated paternity information. As a result of the
aforementioned conditions, there is a lack of assurance as to the validity and
accuracy of the changes. According to DVR’s records, during fiscal year
2010, DVR staff made 3,160 birth record corrections. We were advised by
DVR that, as of March 17, 2010, there were 17 DVR employees who were
authorized to make changes to birth records.
 DHMH did not review output reports of certified birth certificates issued to
ensure that they were supported by properly completed applications. This is
significant because there were numerous DHMH employees that could print
certificates without any independent approval, and certain of these employees
had incompatible duties. For example, we were advised that 26 users could
create and print a birth certificate, one of which had access to the related blank
certificates and 2 of which had access to the related collections. As a result,
these users could issue fictitious birth certificates and this would not be
readily detected.
 DHMH did not adequately control and account for pre-numbered blank
certificate forms. For example, the employee who maintained the issuance
records of the blank certificate forms had routine access to the blank
certificates, could print certificates, and had access to related collections. In
addition, there was no periodic inventory conducted of the blank certificates to
ensure they were all accounted for, and access to the blank certificates was not
adequately controlled. In that regard, we were advised by DVR personnel
that, as a result of their job duties, a number of employees had routine access
to the areas where the blank certificate stock was stored.
10

--- Page 13 ---
 DHMH did not reconcile the number of certificates issued to the related fees
collected and deposited. Additionally, output reports of certificates issued for
use in such reconciliations were not generated. In this regard, DHMH ran a
report, at our request, but the resulting report appeared to include duplicate
listings and, therefore, could not be reconciled to related collections. For
example, according to the report, on March 25, 2010, DVR headquarters
issued 3,736 certificates with related collections of $43,404, while collections
actually deposited for this day totaled only $21,552. DHMH could not readily
explain the discrepancy.
The lack of controls over pre-numbered certificate forms has been commented
upon in our preceding audit reports since 1999.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHMH
a. verify birth information entered by hospital staff to the related hospital
records, at least on a test basis;
b. review reports of birth record changes and birth certificates issued and
verify them to appropriate support;
c. separate duties of certificate issuance, access to blank certificates, and
access to cash receipts;
d. ensure that an independent employee accounts for all pre-numbered
certificate forms as to issued, voided, or on hand (repeat), and;
e. reconcile certificates issued to related collections and investigate any
discrepancies (repeat).
Finding 2
DHMH did not properly monitor LHD procedures and controls over the
issuance of birth and death certificates, resulting in the failure to identify and
correct numerous deficiencies.
Analysis
DHMH did not properly monitor LHD procedures and controls over the
processing of birth and death certificates. Specifically, DVR did not perform
periodic comprehensive documented reviews of LHD procedures and controls
over the issuance of birth and death certificates, resulting in the failure to identify
and correct numerous deficiencies. For example, our review of procedures and
controls at four LHDs that issued 65,519 birth and death certificates during fiscal
year 2009, with related collections of $724,776, disclosed the following
conditions:
11

--- Page 14 ---
 Critical vital record and cash receipts duties were not properly segregated at
all four of the LHDs reviewed. Specifically, at the four LHDs, employees
unilaterally issued birth certificates and processed the related collections. As
a result, these employees could process transactions and misappropriate the
related funds and it would not be readily detected.
 LHD employees had system capabilities that were not necessary to perform
their job duties. Specifically, 10 employees at the aforementioned LHDs
unnecessarily had the ability to print birth certificates, which could be used for
illegitimate purposes.
Similar conditions were noted in our two preceding audit reports. In response to
our prior audit report, DVR personnel conducted training with the LHDs on
establishing controls over the issuance of vital records.
The occurrence of similar conditions at another LHD contributed to one employee
allegedly issuing certificates and misappropriating the related collections, and this
situation was not readily detected. During the course of our audit, DHMH
management advised us that there was an ongoing investigation related to the
issuance of birth certificates at this LHD. The allegation involved one employee
who had unilateral control over the birth certificate issuance process including the
collection of certificate fees and the printing and distributing of the related
certificates. In October 2009, the DHMH Office of the Inspector General notified
the Office of the Attorney General-Criminal Division about this incident, who
advised us that, as of April 11, 2011, the case was still ongoing.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHMH
a. perform periodic comprehensive documented reviews of LHD procedures
and controls over the issuance of birth and death certificates (repeat);
and
b. take appropriate follow-up action to ensure that the aforementioned
deficiencies are corrected.
Division of Cost Accounting and Reimbursements
In accordance with State law, DHMH’s Division of Cost Accounting and
Reimbursements (DCAR) conducts financial investigations of all patients
admitted to the State’s mental health, intellectual disability, and chronic disease
facilities to determine their ability to pay for the cost of care and/or to identify
other liable parties (such as Medicaid, Medicare, third party insurance, or other
legal guardians). DHMH policy requires DCAR’s financial agents at the various
12

--- Page 15 ---
State facilities to complete the investigations within six months from the first date
of service, because State regulations only allow them to bill for services
retroactively for six months from the date of the completion of the financial
investigation.
Based on the completed financial investigations, DCAR establishes an accounts
receivable on the DHMH Hospital Management Information System and bills and
collects the amounts due. According to DCAR’s records, cost recoveries for
fiscal year 2009 totaled approximately $102.6 million, and consisted primarily of
Medicaid and Medicare collections, with $3.5 million being collected from
patients, legally responsible persons, and private insurance. For the same period,
DCAR determined that services valued at $234.4 million were provided to
recipients for which the related costs were not recoverable from any source.
During fiscal year 2009, 2,390 patients were admitted to the State’s mental health,
intellectual disability, and chronic disease facilities.
Finding 3
Financial investigations of patients enrolled in State facilities were not always
properly and timely conducted and were not subject to independent
supervisory review and approval.
Analysis
Financial investigations of patients enrolled in State facilities were not always
properly and timely conducted, in accordance with DHMH policy, and were not
subject to required independent supervisory review and approval. According to a
September 30, 2009 report on the status of open investigations, provided by
DCAR management, there were 596 patient accounts for which DCAR had not
determined the amount due and/or billed for the services provided, of which 86
(14 percent) were more than six months old. Our review of 10 of these accounts,
as of January 27, 2010, disclosed the following results:
 For one account for a patient admitted to a State health facility in February
2009 (based on documentation in the case file), DHMH had not completed the
financial investigation 11 months after the patient had been admitted. For the
remaining 9 accounts where the financial investigations were subsequently
completed, the financial investigations for 6 accounts were not completed
until 9 to 15 months after the patients had been admitted. A financially
responsible party was identified for 3 of the 9 completed financial
investigations, while for the remaining 6 it was determined that the related
costs were not recoverable from any source.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 Additionally, 5 of the 9 completed financial investigations were not subject to
required supervisory review and approval. This is significant as there are a
number of information verifications that can be performed (wages, assets,
insurance) but, depending on the circumstances, not all of them are required
and the financial agent should receive direction from the supervisor regarding
what is needed. For example, for 4 of these 5 accounts, patient tax returns or
affidavits that a return was not filed, were not obtained as required by law.
Further, an approved waiver form was not on file to excuse the case from that
requirement, as required by DHMH policy. Finally, for one of these 4
accounts, there was little evidence of a financial investigation effort (no wage
screens, no third-party queries), and the decision that there were no liable third
parties to be billed appeared questionable considering that there was a
Medical Care Program card for the patient in the file.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure that future financial investigations are properly and timely
conducted; and
b. ensure that independent supervisory personnel review and approve the
financial investigations, including the investigations for the accounts
noted above.
Finding 4
DHMH did not adequately pursue collection of delinquent DCAR accounts
receivables.
Analysis
Delinquent accounts receivable were not always adequately pursued for collection
and/or transferred to the Department of Budget and Management’s Central
Collection Unit (CCU) by DCAR, as required. Our test of 10 accounts totaling
$2.8 million that were outstanding for more than 120 days disclosed that 6
accounts were not adequately pursued for collection. For example, 4 commercial
insurance accounts, with outstanding claim balances totaling $1.4 million, were
initially denied due to various paper work discrepancies, such as incomplete
patient medical records, and have remained unpaid for periods ranging from 18
months to four years but had not been referred to CCU for collection. DHMH
asserts these claims are valid but has been unable to resolve the issues with the
commercial insurance companies.
According to DHMH accounts receivable records as of March 31, 2010, there
were 1,400 outstanding accounts totaling approximately $15 million, of which
672 accounts totaling approximately $10 million were outstanding for more than
14

--- Page 17 ---
120 days. We were advised by DCAR management that staffing limitations had
impacted its ability to monitor and pursue delinquent accounts and, as a matter of
policy, it did not transfer delinquent insurance accounts to CCU. DCAR’s policy
was contrary to CCU regulations, as amended for DHMH, which provide that
delinquent balances be referred 120 days after the first billing except estate and
insurance accounts; insurance accounts should be referred, regardless of age,
when the claim is valid and once the insurer denies DHMH’s initial request for
payment.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DHMH ensure delinquent accounts receivable are
adequately pursued for collection and transferred to CCU as required.
Pharmacy Claim Audits
Finding 5
DHMH did not expand testing of pharmacy claims and/or take sufficient
corrective action when significant errors were identified during pharmacy
audits.
Analysis
The DHMH Office of the Inspector General-Division of Investigations and
Clinical Support (OIG-DICS) did not expand testing of pharmacy claims and/or
take sufficient corrective action, as is required by DHMH procedures, when
significant errors were identified during pharmacy audits. Specifically, our
review of 11 of the 161 pharmacy audits performed during fiscal year 2009
disclosed that, for 8 of the audits, the pharmacies could not provide proper
support (such as a signed prescription) for between 10 and 80 percent of the
claims tested and testing was not expanded to determine the extent of the
problems. Collectively, the recommended recoveries for these 8 audits was
$18,661. For example, the audit of 20 claims at one pharmacy disclosed that the
pharmacy could not provide proper support for 16 of the claims tested. Although
DHMH invoiced the pharmacy and recovered $4,402, it did not expand testing to
determine the extent of the problem, to identify and recover additional
unsupported claims paid, and to determine if additional action should be taken,
such as referral to the Office of the Attorney General-Medicaid Fraud Control
Unit (OAG-MFCU).
Annually, OIG-DICS performs audits of a selection of the pharmacies
participating in the Maryland Pharmacy Program to determine if the providers
maintained prescriptions and adequate records as required by State regulations.
15

--- Page 18 ---
OIG-DICS’ written procedures for conducting the audits provide that, if 10
percent or more of the claims selected for testing during an audit are found to be
improperly paid, the investigation is to be expanded to review additional similar
claims. Furthermore, State regulations provide DHMH the authority to suspend a
provider, withhold payment, remove a provider, or disqualify a provider from
future participation in the Pharmacy Program if the provider fails to comply with
federal and State laws and regulations. According to DHMH records, during
fiscal year 2009, 1,120 pharmacies were paid $271 million for claims and OIG-
DICS audited 161 pharmacies and recommended recoveries of approximately
$43,000.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHMH
a. expand testing when a significant percentage of errors are identified
during a pharmacy audit, in accordance with OIG-DICS procedures; and
b. take additional action as deemed appropriate, such as requiring
corrective action, imposing sanctions, and referring pharmacies with a
significant errors to the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA)
and the OAG-MFCU, where warranted.
Network Information Systems
Background
DHMH’s Information Resources Management Administration (IRMA) is
responsible for the overall management and direction of the DHMH information
systems. These systems include, but are not limited to, the server-based
Electronic Vital Records System (EVRS), the Hospital Management Information
System (HMIS), the National Electronic Disease Surveillance System (NEDSS),
and the mainframe-based Medicaid Management Information System II (MMIS
II). These systems, and many more, are supported by the DHMH’s network
infrastructure. The DHMH operates a wide area network with approximately
9,000 user connections across the State. This wide area network has connections
to local health departments, State hospitals, health clinics, the DHMH
headquarters facility, the Statewide Government Intranet (SwGI), and the Internet.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 6
Security reporting and monitoring of the HMIS system and the EVRS
database were not adequate.
Analysis
Security reporting and monitoring of the HMIS system and the EVRS database
were not adequate. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Several critical security-related reports for the HMIS system either were not
reviewed at all or were only reviewed for certain types of events (for example,
account deletions) but not for more significant changes, such as account
additions and modifications. Accordingly, errors or unauthorized changes
affecting HMIS data (such as patient hospital billings and receivables) could
occur without detection by management. A similar condition was commented
upon in our two preceding audit reports.
 Certain critical security-related events affecting the EVRS database were not
logged. For example, events relating to granting and revoking database
privileges, and modifying and stopping auditing were not logged, although the
database had the capability to log these events. In addition, although failed
sign-on attempts were logged, they were not reviewed. Accordingly,
significant database security violations could go undetected thereby
potentially affecting the integrity of the EVRS data.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHMH
a. review, on a regular basis, all HMIS critical security-related reports for
all significant security events (repeat);
b. log and review critical security and audit events applicable to the EVRS
database; and
c. document and retain these reviews for audit verification purposes.
Finding 7
Network access to critical internal network devices was not properly
restricted or monitored.
Analysis
Network access to critical internal devices was not properly restricted or
monitored.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 Numerous rules on several of DHMH’s firewalls protecting the internal
network allowed unnecessary access to critical devices on the internal
network. Specifically, rules on the firewalls protecting the NEDSS system
and the firewalls protecting the internal network from the Internet allowed
numerous unnecessary connections to internal network devices. In addition,
numerous outdated rules existed on these firewalls and the firewalls that
protected the internal network from SwGI access.
 Internet firewall log messages were not regularly reviewed and administrators
were not automatically alerted to the occurrence of high severity security
events on the Internet firewalls. As a result of these conditions, firewall
operations and security could be impacted without management’s knowledge.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHMH adequately configure and monitor its firewalls
to properly protect critical network devices. We made detailed
recommendations to DHMH which, if implemented, should provide for
adequate security over the aforementioned firewalls.
Finding 8
Controls over the EVRS virtual server environment were not adequate.
Analysis
Controls over the EVRS virtual server environment were not adequate. Software
developed in recent years allows for a single physical host server’s resources (that
is, memory, CPU, and storage) to be defined and subdivided into multiple virtual
servers which can each operate as a separate unique server. In its EVRS system,
DHMH was utilizing 3 physical host servers that hosted 17 virtual servers.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 A physical host server had not been properly secured at the host server level.
Our testing revealed that numerous host server security configuration settings
were not adequate. For example, problems were noted with password and
logging controls.
 Certain network security option settings on the host system’s virtual server
software were not properly configured in accordance with the software
vendor’s recommended security settings. As a result, network-level security
for the virtual servers configured on these host servers was weakened.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHMH
a. properly secure all of the EVRS host servers against attack, and
b. configure the software on its EVRS host servers in accordance with the
vendor’s recommendations to help ensure adequate security over the
resident virtual servers.
Payroll
Finding 9
DHMH did not maintain signature cards for authorized approvers of critical
personnel and payroll transactions and did not monitor its employees who
also worked at other State agencies.
Analysis
DHMH did not maintain signature cards for authorized approvers of critical
personnel and payroll transactions and did not use available reports from the
Comptroller of Maryland’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) to monitor its
employees who also worked at other State agencies. According to DHMH’s
records, payroll expenditures for the 37 units, which included approximately
5,600 employees, for which the DHMH Office of the Secretary provided support
services totaled approximately $374 million for fiscal year 2010. Our review
disclosed the following conditions:
 Signature cards were not maintained for authorized approvers of critical
personnel and payroll transactions (such as timesheet approvals and requests
from the various DHMH units to add or delete employees) from any of the 37
units receiving centralized personnel and payroll services from the DHMH
personnel and payroll office. Consequently, DHMH lacked assurance that
these transactions were approved by authorized personnel.
 DHMH could not document that it investigated the Department employees
working at other State agencies identified on quarterly CPB reports and that
the required secondary employment agreements were on file. For example,
we identified 28 employees on DHMH June 2009 payrolls that were also
working at other State agencies, but DHMH could not document that it had
investigated the employees to ensure they were not claiming hours for
multiple jobs during the same time periods. Additionally, for our test of seven
of these employees, DHMH could not provide the required secondary
employment agreements for any of the employees. While our limited test of
these payrolls disclosed no overlapping hours, without a thorough review,
DHMH cannot ensure these payments are proper. In this regard, we were not
able to determine the propriety of the hours worked by certain of the
19

--- Page 22 ---
employees (including one who was paid on three payrolls) due to the lack of
detailed time records at the other agencies.
State regulations provide that an individual may be employed in two
capacities in State government only with the agreement, before the second
employment begins, of the appointing authorities of the units that will employ
the individual. In addition, starting in fiscal year 2006, CPB began issuing
quarterly reports to State agencies that identify employees on multiple State
payrolls and directed agencies to investigate each employee to make sure that
they were not claiming hours for multiple jobs during the same time periods.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHMH
a. maintain and use signature cards to verify, at least on a test basis, that
critical personnel and payroll transactions were approved by authorized
personnel;
b. review the quarterly CPB reports, properly investigate all employees on
multiple payrolls, and take appropriate corrective action when
overlapping hours are identified; and
c. use the CPB reports to ensure that the required secondary employment
agreements are completed.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 10
Adequate controls were not established over corporate purchasing cards and
related transactions were not always properly approved and supported.
Analysis
DHMH lacked adequate controls over its corporate purchasing cards (CPC).
According to the issuing bank’s records, as of March 2010, corporate purchasing
cards had been issued to 342 Department employees, and the related expenditures
totaled approximately $13.5 million during fiscal year 2009. Our review
disclosed the following conditions:
 CPC activity logs were not always approved and properly supported as
required. Specifically, our review of 30 monthly activity logs during fiscal
years 2009 through 2010 with purchases totaling $239,568 disclosed that 9 of
the logs with purchases totaling $99,306 were not properly approved by both
the fiscal officer and the cardholder’s immediate supervisor, as required (that
is, only one approval was obtained).
20

--- Page 23 ---
 Supervisory personnel sometimes approved CPC activity logs that were not
accompanied by required supporting documentation. Specifically, our test of
69 purchasing card transactions totaling $59,591 selected from the
aforementioned 30 logs disclosed that 26 purchases totaling $20,334 lacked
itemized receipts to support the transactions. The 8 logs that included the
unsupported purchases were all approved by the employee’s supervisor, and 6
of the 8 were also approved by the applicable fiscal officer. As a result, there
is a lack of assurance that the expenditures were properly reviewed and
represent legitimate purchases.
 DHMH did not adequately monitor cardholder credit limits. Specifically, our
review of 92 cards that were active throughout fiscal year 2009, with monthly
spending limits of $10,000 to $68,000, disclosed that the average monthly
expenditures for 66 of the cards was less than half of the related monthly
credit limits. For example, for two cards with monthly credit limits of
$60,000 and $40,000, the highest monthly spending during fiscal year 2009
was $6,885 and $13,059, respectively.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual requires agencies to establish reasonable credit limits. The
Manual also requires that cardholder activity logs be reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel and the agency’s fiscal officer, and that documentation be
maintained for all transactions.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure activity logs are approved by both the fiscal officer and the
cardholder’s immediate supervisor, as required;
b. ensure that all corporate card purchases are supported by appropriate
documentation;
c. verify the propriety of the aforementioned purchases and obtain
reimbursement for any purchases that cannot be properly supported;
and
d. establish cardholder credit limits commensurate with actual card usage,
and periodically review and adjust credit limits as necessary.
21

--- Page 24 ---
22

--- Page 25 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the following units of the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene (DHMH) for the period beginning September 1, 2006 and ending
October 14, 2009.
Office of the Secretary (excluding Health Professional Boards and
Commission)
Deputy Secretary for Operations
Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services
Deputy Secretary for Behavioral Health and Disabilities
Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHMH’s
financial transactions, records, and internal controls, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included vital records, health care facility quality of care
inspections, financial investigations and related accounts receivable records for
patients in State facilities, pharmacy claims reviews, and corporate purchasing
card, payroll, procurement and accounting support services provided by the units
under audit. Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel,
inspections of documents and records, and observations of DHMH’s operations.
We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for
background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not
independently verified.
Our audit included various support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by
DHMH’s Office of the Secretary and related units to the other units of DHMH.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of DHMH’s compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to these programs because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including DHMH.
DHMH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DHMH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHMH that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
DHMH’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHMH regarding the
results of our review of its response.
24

--- Page 28 ---
cc: Thomas Kim, Deputy Secretary of Operations, DHMH
Thomas V. Russell, Inspector General, DHMH
Ellwood L. Hall, Jr., Assistant Inspector General, DHMH
Pamela Owens, Assistant Inspector General, DHMH
Wendy Kronmiller, Chief of Staff to the Office of the Secretary, DHMH
Isabelle Horon, Director, Vital Statistics Administration, DHMH
Robert Sutton, Chief, Division of Reimbursements, DHMH
Saleem Sayani, Chief Information Officer, DHMH
Janet Nugent, Director, Office of Human Resources, DHMH
Irma Bevans, Director, Fiscal Services Administration, DHMH

--- Page 29 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
DHMH lacked adequate procedures and controls over vital records and related collections,
resulting in a lack of assurance that all vital record information recorded on EVRS was
accurate, that certificates were properly issued, and that certificates and related collections
were accounted for.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHMH
a. verify birth information entered by hospital staff to the related hospital records, at least
on a test basis;
b. review reports of birth record changes and birth certificates issued and verify them to
appropriate support;
c. separate duties of certificate issuance, access to blank certificates, and access to cash
receipts;
d. ensure that an independent employee accounts for all pre-numbered certificate forms
as to issued, voided, or on hand (repeat), and;
e. reconcile certificates issued to related collections and investigate any discrepancies
(repeat).
Department’s Response:
a. The Administration concurs that birth information entered by hospital staff should be
verified. For nearly a year, the position of the Medical Services Reviewing Nurse was vacant
and the Administration did not have staff with the clinical background required to review
hospital medical records in order to verify birth information. This position was filled in April
2010 and beginning in July 2010, an average of two hospital audits per month is being
conducted.
b. The Administration concurs, and beginning in September 2011, will audit a sample of
records on a quarterly basis to verify that any changes made to the records were made by
appropriate staff and that supporting evidence to make the changes was provided.
c. The Administration concurs that there should be a separation of duties relating to certificate
issuance, access to blank certificates and access to cash receipts, to the extent possible.
Beginning in September 2011, only four senior staff, which requires the ability to perform
multiple duties in the event of an emergency, will have the ability to perform more than one
of these duties.
d. The Administration concurs with the recommendation that an independent employee should
account for all pre-numbered certificate forms as to issued, voided or on hand. Beginning in
September 2011, and occurring quarterly, a staff member of the Division of Health Statistics,
who does not have access to EVRS, will conduct an independent physical inventory of all
1

--- Page 30 ---
security paper on hand at DVR, and issued by DVR to central office units and local health
departments to account for all pre-numbered paper as to issued, voided and on-hand.
e. The Administration concurs with the recommendation to reconcile certificates issued to
related collections and investigate any discrepancies. The audit period of 2006-2009
preceded the implementation of EVRS in 2010. Now that EVRS is in use, functionality
exists that allows DVR to account for pre-numbered forms that have been issued, voided, or
provided to a unit of DVR or to a local health department for future use. Effective
September 2011, DVR will prepare a quarterly reconciliation of certificates issued to the
related receipts.
Finding 2
DHMH did not properly monitor LHD procedures and controls over the issuance of birth
and death certificates, resulting in the failure to identify and correct numerous deficiencies.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHMH
a. perform periodic comprehensive documented reviews of LHD procedures and controls
over the issuance of birth and death certificates (repeat); and
b. take appropriate follow-up action to ensure that the aforementioned deficiencies are
corrected.
Department’s Response:
a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation that the Department should perform
periodic comprehensive documented reviews of LHD procedures and controls over the
issuance of birth and death certificates and take appropriate follow up action. Beginning in
September 2011, DVR will audit LHDs annually to ensure that duties are segregated to the
degree possible, staff has access to only those functions needed to perform their job
responsibilities, and certificates are issued only to authorized applicants.
b. The Administration concurs that appropriate follow-up action should be taken to ensure that
deficiencies are corrected. The 10 LHD employees who had access to EVRS system
capabilities that were not necessary to perform there job duties have had access to these
capabilities removed. Due to the small number of staff that can be assigned to vital records
activities, particularly in small counties, LHDs are not able to completely segregate duties.
However, with the implementation of EVRS, the Department is able to regularly monitor
activity at LHDs in order to detect and respond to concerns more quickly than was possible
during the audit period.
2

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 3
Financial investigations of patients enrolled in State facilities were not always properly and
timely conducted and were not subject to independent supervisory review and approval.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure that future financial investigations are properly and timely conducted; and
b. ensure that independent supervisory personnel review and approve the financial
investigations, including the investigations for the accounts noted above.
Department’s Response:
a. The Department concurs with the finding. We will ensure that future financial investigations
are conducted in a timely manner. Using the monthly admission aging reports generated by
the Hospital Mangagement Informations System, the Financial Agent Operations Chief will
compare and verify that the admissions are being conducted timely.
b. The Department concurs with the finding. We will perform an independent supervisory
personnel review and approve the financial investigations, including the investigations for the
accounts noted above. The Financial Agent Operations Chief will follow up on all patient
financial investigations to assure that the account investigations were handled timely and
were thoroughly completed. The Operations Chief will review and approve the completed
Billing Information Forms to verify that the rates were established timely and accurately and
submit same to the fiscal unit in the Central Office for final review.
Finding 4
DHMH did not adequately pursue collection of delinquent DCAR accounts receivables.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DHMH ensure delinquent accounts receivable are adequately pursued
for collection and transferred to CCU as required.
Department’s Response:
The Department concurs with the Auditor’s recommendation. The Division of Cost Accounting
and Reimbursements (DCAR) will refer all delinquent accounts within the guidelines, as
established by CCU, with exception of those accounts covered by waivers approved by the CCU.
Those accounts covered by the CCU waivers will be transferred to the CCU at the appropriate
time as noted in the waiver. All patient accounts subject to delinquency will be monitored by
DCAR agents and referred at the appropriate time.
3

--- Page 32 ---
Accounts that have been billed to the Federal government programs such as Medicare and
Medicaid will not be referred to CCU. These accounts will be pursued by the Agency until such
time as the Federal programs either pay the claims or deny payments. Because the Federal
government protects the rights of beneficiaries of these programs, the beneficiaries can not be
assessed for any unpaid or denied claims. These claims will be handled internally, since there is
no financial advantage to the State to pursue payment for these claims.
Finding 5
DHMH did not expand testing of pharmacy claims and/or take sufficient corrective action
when significant errors were identified during pharmacy audits.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHMH
a. expand testing when a significant percentage of errors are identified during a pharmacy
audit, in accordance with OIG-DICS procedures; and
b. take additional action as deemed appropriate, such as requiring corrective action,
imposing sanctions, and referring pharmacies with a significant errors to the Medical
Care Programs Administration (MCPA) and the OAG-MFCU, where warranted.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the finding and concurs in part with the recommendation.
The procedures under which the pharmacy reviews were conducted for the audit period were
written in June of 2008. Under those procedures, if a 10% or greater error rate is found, the
investigation was to be expanded to review similar claims. As with all other preliminary
investigations conducted by this unit, the OIG’s plan called for those pharmacies that need an
expanded audit (in this case, those with a 10% or greater error rate) to be transferred from the
Investigations Unit to the OIG’s Provider Audit Unit. In fact, each of the pharmacies noted
by OLA as having not been expanded was on the list of potential audits to be conducted by
the Audit Unit. However, though these pharmacies had been referred for an expansion, they
had not been subject to an expanded audit. The OIG receives a number of referrals and
complaints, and generates a significant number of potential audit targets through data mining
every year.
Current Practice
The OIG has updated the procedure used for reviewing pharmacies. First, the OIG was able
to hire a pharmacist in July of 2010. With this staff addition, the OIG has been able to
develop general pharmaceutical algorithms to review pharmacies that having billing pattern
anomalies, volume anomalies, and high payment anomalies. Additionally, the OIG
4

--- Page 33 ---
pharmacist is currently working on targeted runs to review specific groups of drugs such as
opiods, depressants, and stimulants.
When making a determination as to whether a pharmacy review will be expanded, the OIG
now relies on several criteria rather than merely a 10% error rate. These criteria can be
found on page 4 of the OIG’s Pharmacy Investigations Protocol (Draft 4) 2011 which has
been provided to the Office of Legislative Audits. They are claims/billing anomalies, high
error rate, facility inadequacies, procedural improprieties, compromised medication
maintenance or storage issues, insufficient documentation, or evidence of fraud, abuse or
waste.
In addition to the Investigations Protocol, the OIG has also completed a “Framework for
Scheduling Pharmacy Reviews”. This Framework was used to develop the first year of a
five-year plan of site reviews for the OIG investigators and pharmacists. Each of these
documents has been provided to OLA for review.
b. The Department concurs with the finding to the extent that potential fraud cases meet the
criteria defined by both the OIG and MFCU and concurs in part with the recommendation. A
10% error rate alone is insufficiently indicative of potential fraud to refer a provider to
MFCU. Rather the OIG uses certain criteria, developed jointly between the OIG and MFCU,
to make referrals. If a pharmacy meets those criteria, the OIG will refer the provider to
MFCU for prosecutorial review. The criteria have been provided to the OLA for review.
Finding 6
Security reporting and monitoring of the HMIS system and the EVRS database were not
adequate.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHMH
a. review, on a regular basis, all HMIS critical security-related reports for all significant
security events (repeat);
b. log and review critical security and audit events applicable to the EVRS database; and
c. document and retain these reviews for audit verification purposes.
Department’s Response:
a. The Department concurs with this recommendation. An established HMIS monitoring
process, using multiple Audit Reports and file review, is followed for deletions, additions and
updates. Additionally, all reviews of aforementioned reports are documented and retained
for audit purposes.
b. We concur with the finding to define and log critical database security and audit related
events (including failed logon attempts) for the EVRS database.
5

--- Page 34 ---
c. We concur with this recommendation. Appropriate application system and independent QA
staff will routinely review and document their review of audit logs, security reports, and key
files, and retain for audit verification. These reviews will be routinely scheduled and tracked
by the OIT Quality Assurance team with secured audit records printed or maintained in
secured, non-reputable electronic format for authorized review/audit.
Finding 7
Network access to critical internal network devices was not properly restricted or
monitored.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHMH adequately configure and monitor its firewalls to properly
protect critical network devices. We made detailed recommendations to DHMH which, if
implemented, should provide for adequate security over the aforementioned firewalls.
Department’s Response:
We concur with the finding and recommendations and have amended our current Firewall Policy
in our IT Security Policy framework to comply with OLA recommendations (State IT policy),
with specific detailed guidance and statements (e.g. “least privilege access,” “necessary and
specific destination,” etc.) for definition of firewall rule bases, including disposition of types of
traffic, traffic flow, and firewall traffic behaviors to control and secure network level access.
Additionally, we have revised the IT Security Policy and set an internal business practice under
the management of OIT/IND establishing a change management process that sets a 90 day
review interval of both Internal (OIT) and External (business unit) rules to assure currency. The
review and rule validation process will be conducted and tracked by the OIT Quality Assurance
team with secured audit records printed or maintained in secured, non-reputable electronic
format for authorized review/audit.
6

--- Page 35 ---
Finding 8
Controls over the EVRS virtual server environment were not adequate.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHMH
a. properly secure all of the EVRS host servers against attack, and
b. configure the software on its EVRS host servers in accordance with the vendor’s
recommendations to help ensure adequate security over the resident virtual servers.
Department’s Response:
a. We concur with the finding and recommendation and have assisted Vital Statistics
Administration, in consultation with our primary vendor and their subcontractor, who has
securely configured the environment in accordance with the vendors and manufacturers
recommendations.
b. We note that an independent security review of this system was conducted with all detected
faults corrected prior to acceptance using the aforementioned security hardening guide as an
index reference.
OIT Security Division will continue to work closely with this application’s responsible staff
in the business unit to validate this mitigation was completed and assure updates to the
environment and application occur within a structured change management process e.g
updates, patches, firewall rules, and access management.
Finding 9
DHMH did not maintain signature cards for authorized approvers of critical personnel and
payroll transactions and did not monitor its employees who also worked at other State
agencies.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHMH
a. maintain and use signature cards to verify, at least on a test basis, that critical
personnel and payroll transactions were approved by authorized personnel;
b. review the quarterly CPB reports, properly investigate all employees on multiple
payrolls, and take appropriate corrective action when overlapping hours are identified;
and
c. use the CPB reports to ensure that the required secondary employment agreements are
completed.
7

--- Page 36 ---
Department’s Response:
a. The OHR Payroll Division acknowledges the legislative auditors’ concern over authorization
of payroll actions such as timesheets. The Division audits over 5,000 timesheets. At least
1/3 of the 5,000 employees are in a supervisory capacity. Because the Division would not
be staffed to maintain 1,600 or more signature cards, in addition to auditing the timesheets,
we agree to perform, on a quarterly basis, an audit of 10% of the timesheets received from
administrations. We will copy these documents and email them to the signatories to ensure
that they have approved the time submitted to payroll. To address the issue of verifying the
appointing authority signature, the Employment Services Division will provide copies of
commitment letters, reclassification approvals, program code changes and other transactions
to the respective appointing authority and personnel liaison for their verification. The
Employment Services Division will keep a copy of the document and the email verification
that the document was sent to the appropriate person. Random samples documentation will
also be retained.
b. With regard to secondary employment, OHR concurs with the recommendations of the
legislative auditors and agrees to review the quarterly CPB reports, to report employees on
multiple payrolls to the appointing authority for investigation of any possible overlapping
hours, and take appropriate corrective actions. Payroll will maintain secondary employment
sign-off from the respective appointing authority.
c. In addition, Payroll will use the CPB reports to ensure that the required secondary
employment agreements are completed.
Finding 10
Adequate controls were not established over corporate purchasing cards and related
transactions were not always properly approved and supported.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure activity logs are approved by both the Fiscal Officer and the cardholder’s
immediate supervisor, as required;
b. ensure that all corporate card purchases are supported by appropriate documentation;
c. verify the propriety of the aforementioned purchases and obtain reimbursement for
any purchases that cannot be properly supported; and
d. establish cardholder credit limits commensurate with actual card usage, and
periodically review and adjust credit limits as necessary.
8

--- Page 37 ---
Department’s Response:
a. The Department concurs with the auditors’ finding. The Fiscal Services Administration
(FSA) will remind units that both the cardholder’s immediate supervisor and the Fiscal
Officer must sign all pages of the activity log. Units are reminded monthly, through the
required submission of a monthly certification, of the above and other Corporate Purchasing
Card (CPC) requirements. In addition, the Department will periodically select activity logs
and related documents for review and units will be advised that appropriate action will be
taken if it is determined that they are not in compliance with prescribed policies and
procedures.
b. The Department concurs with the auditors’ finding. The Fiscal Services Administration will
remind employees responsible for reviewing and approving CPC Activity Logs that
documentation must be present to support all transactions appearing on the accompanying
bank statements.
c. The Department concurs with the auditors’ finding. Fiscal Services Administration has
obtained all missing documentation and has since provided it to the auditor. FSA will remind
Fiscal Officers that policy dictates that specific documentation is to be obtained, reviewed for
propriety, and retained by the Fiscal Officer. Units will be advised that DHMH will seek
reimbursement of expenditures which are either undocumented or do not further the business
of the State.
d. The Department concurs with the auditors’ finding. The Fiscal Services Administration has
started to compare each cardholder’s spending history to their credit limit and will take
appropriate action to adjust credit limits by August 15, 2011.
9

--- Page 38 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Kevin J. Mercer
Belinda L. Morales
Ramin M. Niknava
W. Thomas Sides
Henry H. Startzman, IV
Staff Auditors
Eric Alexander
Michael K. Bliss
Information Systems Staff Auditors