Title: Comptroller of the Treasury - Central Payroll Bureau
Date: 05/04/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742c4
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:44:20.328686
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of the Treasury
Central Payroll Bureau
May 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 4, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Comptroller of the Treasury – Central Payroll Bureau (CPB)
for the period beginning January 1, 2006 and ending January 13, 2009. CPB is
primarily responsible for processing and issuing payroll checks and direct deposit
advices for the regular State payroll and the payrolls of the Maryland Department
of Transportation and the University System of Maryland.
Our audit disclosed that CPB’s procedures and controls over the State payroll
system needed improvement. Specifically, we noted that a number of employees
had access to a critical automated payroll processing function that could allow
them to process unauthorized adjustments to direct deposit data.
The Office of the Comptroller’s response, on behalf of CPB, to this audit is
included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us during the course of this audit by CPB.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Central Payroll Bureau (CPB), a unit of the Comptroller of the Treasury, is
primarily responsible for processing and issuing payroll checks and direct deposit
advices on a bi-weekly basis for the regular State payroll, and the payrolls of the
Maryland Department of Transportation and the University System of Maryland.
According to CPB’s records, the payrolls collectively totaled approximately $6.4
billion during calendar year 2008. CPB is also responsible for processing payroll
deductions, employee withholding statements for certain employees, and other
payroll reports for State government. According to the State’s accounting
records, CPB’s operating expenditures totaled approximately $2.3 million during
fiscal year 2008.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 9, 2006. We determined that CPB
satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
State Payroll System
Finding 1
A number of CPB employees had access to a critical automated payroll
processing function that could allow them to process unauthorized payroll
transactions.
Analysis
Improper access to a critical automated payroll processing function had been
granted to a number of CPB employees that could allow them to initiate and
process unauthorized payroll transactions. Specifically, we noted that 12
employees had the ability to initiate and approve adjustments to direct deposit
payroll data. Furthermore, although these adjustments were manually reviewed
and approved after being processed, the review and approval function was
performed by three supervisors who could also initiate such adjustments.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend
a. that CPB not grant employees user access privileges that allow them to
both initiate and approve adjustments to direct deposit payroll data, and
b. that related supervisory review and approval of the adjustments be
performed by independent employees.
Computer Security
Finding 2
Adequate access and logging controls were not established.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not established over critical production data files. CPB
uses the Comptroller of the Treasury’s Annapolis Data Center to process the
State’s payroll. The Data Center's computer system contains a security software
system capable of restricting and logging direct modification access to CPB’s data
files. However, numerous individuals had unnecessary but logged, direct
modification access to critical production payroll data files. In addition, seven
individuals had necessary but unlogged, direct modification access to critical
payroll data files. These conditions could result in the improper modification of
critical payroll data. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend
a. that CPB restrict direct modification access to critical production data
files to users who require such access (repeat), and
b. that all direct modifications of critical payroll files be logged by the
security software and reviewed and approved by management (repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Comptroller of the Treasury – Central Payroll Bureau (CPB)
for the period beginning January 1, 2006 and ending January 13, 2009. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
4

--- Page 7 ---
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CPB’s financial
transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of CPB’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to CPB by the
Comptroller of the Treasury – Office of the Comptroller. These support services
(such as processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller. Our audit also did not include certain support services provided to
CPB by the Comptroller of the Treasury – Information Technology Division
related to the procurement and monitoring of information technology equipment
and services. These support services are included in the scope of our audits of the
Information Technology Division.
CPB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report include findings related to conditions we consider to be significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect CPB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and
efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit
did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
The Office of the Comptroller’s response, on behalf of CPB, to our finding and
recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise CPB regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Peter J. Klemans, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
James Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Amanda L. Trythall
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Julia M. Keefer
Staff Auditor