Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Western Maryland Region
Date: 10/16/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745bc
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:29:40.322250
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Western Maryland Region
October 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 16, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Western Maryland Region of the Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services, which comprises the Western Correctional
Institution and the North Branch Correctional Institution, for the period beginning
September 6, 2005 and ending April 13, 2008.
Our audit disclosed that the Region did not have adequate controls over its cash
receipts, materials and supplies, and vendor payments. For example, the Region
did not periodically account for pre-numbered cash receipts forms as to issued,
voided and on-hand.
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services’ response to this
audit, on behalf of the Region, is included as an appendix to this report. We wish
to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by
the Region.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Cash Receipts
Finding 1 – Cash Receipts Were Not Adequately Controlled 5
Materials and Supplies
Finding 2 – The Region Lacked Sufficient Controls Over Materials 5
and Supplies
Disbursement Processing
Finding 3 – Vendor Invoices Were Not Properly Reviewed Prior to 6
Payment
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 4 – The Region Lacked Adequate Procedures for the Issuance 7
of Corporate Purchasing Cards
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 8
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Western Maryland Region is a separate budgetary unit within the Division of
Corrections of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services and
consists of two facilities for adult male offenders.
Facilities Within the Division of Correction’s Western Maryland Region
Inmate
Security Population as
Facility Location
Level of March 31,
2008
Western Correctional Medium
Cumberland, MD 1,714
Institution Security
North Branch Correctional Maximum
Cumberland, MD 579
Institution Security
Total 2,293
According to the State's records, the Region’s expenditures totaled approximately
$63 million during fiscal year 2007. In addition, the Region's fiscal year 2008
appropriation provided for 967 positions, including 750 correctional officers.
The Western Correctional Institution is accredited by the American Correctional
Association’s Commission on Accreditation for Corrections.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
We reviewed the status of the one finding from our preceding audit report dated
February 15, 2006. We determined that the Region satisfactorily addressed that
finding.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Region lacked adequate controls over cash receipts.
Analysis
The Region lacked adequate controls over cash receipts. Specifically, while
collections were recorded on pre-numbered cash receipt forms, the Region did not
periodically account for these forms as to issued, voided, and on hand. As a
result, recorded cash receipts could be misappropriated and not timely detected.
According to the State’s accounting records, the Region’s cash receipts totaled
approximately $2.2 million during fiscal year 2007, and consisted primarily of
funds received on behalf of inmates.
The Comptroller of the Treasury’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
there should be an accounting for the numerical sequence of pre-numbered cash
receipt forms as to issued, voided, and on hand.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Region periodically account for all pre-numbered
cash receipts forms as to issued, voided, and on-hand.
Materials and Supplies
Finding 2
Controls over the Region’s materials and supplies were inadequate.
Analysis
Controls over the Region’s materials and supplies were inadequate. We noted the
following conditions:
• For the two institutions, copies of completed requisition forms were not
provided to employees who received inmate and officer clothing items. This
occurred because the Region used a two-copy requisition form when issuing
these items rather than the required three-copy form, which was used for other
issuances. Furthermore, the storeroom custodian controlled both copies of the
form prior to forwarding one copy to the employee who maintained the related
inventory records. As a result, the storeroom custodian could alter the
5

--- Page 8 ---
requisitions after the issuance of the related goods and misappropriate items
from the storeroom without detection.
• For issuances that used the three-copy requisition form, since September
2007, the Region had not compared copies of completed requisition forms
used to post its perpetual inventory records to the related requisition forms
signed by employees who received the goods.
The Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual requires that a
copy of the completed requisition form be retained by the employee receiving the
goods. The Manual also requires that the record keeper compare, at least on a test
basis, copies of requisition forms used to post the perpetual inventory records
with those forms retained by the employee who received the goods.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2007, the Region’s
expenditures for materials and supplies totaled approximately $3.8 million,
including $400,000 for inmate and officer clothing.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Region comply with the applicable requirements of
the Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual.
Disbursement Processing
Finding 3
Vendor invoices were not adequately reviewed prior to payment.
Analysis
The Region did not adequately control disbursements made via the State’s
Financial Management Information System (FMIS). Specifically, the employee
who approved vendor invoices and released the related disbursement transactions
to the Comptroller of the Treasury - General Accounting Division for payment did
not ensure that any of the related goods or services were received by reviewing
supporting documentation (such as a receiving report). Consequently, improper
vendor payments could be made and not timely detected.
According to State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2007, the Region used
FMIS to process disbursements totaling approximately $7.5 million.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the disbursement approval process include a review of
supporting documentation, at least on a test basis.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 4
The Region lacked adequate procedures for the issuance of corporate
purchasing cards.
Analysis
The Region lacked adequate procedures for the issuance of its corporate
purchasing cards. Specifically, the employee who requested purchasing cards
from the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services also received the
cards from the Department and distributed the cards to the applicable employees.
Consequently, purchasing cards could be inappropriately issued and used to make
unauthorized purchases.
According to its records, as of April 2008, the Region had 13 active corporate
purchasing cards and, during fiscal year 2007, made related purchases totaling
approximately $1 million.
The Comptroller of the Treasury’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy
and Procedures Manual requires that the employee who requests the purchasing
cards should not also receive and distribute the cards. To provide effective
control at the Region, the employee who requests the cards from the Department
should not also receive the cards for distribution.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Region employee who requests purchasing cards
from the Department not also receive and distribute the cards. We advised
the Region on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services –
Western Maryland Region for the period beginning September 6, 2005 and ending
April 13, 2008. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also
determined the status of the finding included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Region’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
8

--- Page 11 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Region’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Region that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services, on
behalf of the Region, to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Region regarding the
results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Peter J. Klemans, CPA
Audit Manager
Terry S. Gibson
Senior Auditor
David O. Mauriello
Staff Auditor