Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Division of Labor and Industry
Date: 02/01/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d72456067449f
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:10:50.629762
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
March 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously through the Office’s website, by a toll-free call to 1-877-
FRAUD-11, or by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department's
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Safety Inspections Backlog 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Cash Receipts
Finding 1 – Proper Controls Had Not Been Established Over 5
Collections Received at Several Locations
Prevailing Wage
Finding 2 – DLI Had Not Established Comprehensive Procedures for 7
the Review of Certified Payroll Reports Received From Contractors
Regulatory Management System
Finding 3 – DLI Lacked Assurance That the Outsourced System 9
Was Protected Against Operational and Security Risks
Finding 4 – Periodic Reviews of User Access Were Not Performed 11
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) is a separate unit within the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation. The mission of DLI is to protect
and promote the health, safety, and employment rights of Maryland citizens.
Specifically, DLI administers State laws that deal with employment issues, work-
related safety and health issues, and prevailing wages, as well as safety
inspections of amusement rides, boilers and pressure vessels, elevators, and
railroads. According to the State’s records, DLI’s expenditures for fiscal year
2014 totaled approximately $17.2 million.
Status of Safety Inspections Backlog
DLI is responsible for ensuring the periodic safety inspections of boilers, pressure
vessels, and elevators in accordance with State law. This equipment is generally
required to be inspected annually. DLI and authorized third-party entities are
responsible for conducting these inspections. In each of our audit reports since
1977, we have commented that DLI had not ensured that boilers and pressure
vessels were inspected within the time periods specified by law. A similar
condition regarding overdue elevator inspections has appeared in our audit reports
since 1997.
During the current audit, we noted that DLI has continued efforts, first noted in
our preceding audit report, to reduce its longstanding backlog of safety
inspections. As of July 15, 2014, inspections for fewer than two percent of the
boilers and pressure vessels (751 of 52,872) were overdue. In addition, the
inspections for fewer than three percent of the elevators (637 of 22,583) were
overdue. The majority of these inspections were performed by third-party
entities.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 1, 2012. We determined that DLI
satisfactorily addressed these three findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Proper controls had not been established over collections received at several
locations.
Analysis
The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) had not established adequate
accountability and control over cash receipts at certain locations. We reviewed
procedures at three units within the headquarters location that received cash
receipts which were processed and then forwarded to the central administration
office for deposit. We also reviewed procedures at one Maryland Occupational
Safety and Health (MOSH) program location, which received and deposited its
own receipts. These four units collected approximately $2.1 million during fiscal
year 2014.
 Collections for the three units located at DLI headquarters, totaling
approximately $1.1 million during fiscal year 2014, were not recorded in a
check log immediately upon receipt. Specifically, at each location, the checks
were restrictively endorsed but were not recorded until disposition had been
determined which could take several days. The checks were placed in a safe
during this time. Our review of checks on hand on June 11, 2014 noted none
of the eight checks, totaling $5,420, had been recorded.
In addition, our test of receipts collected on 15 different days during fiscal
years 2013 and 2014, totaling approximately $155,706, disclosed that
collections from 7 days, totaling $99,725, were not deposited for periods
ranging from 2 to 13 business days after the dates of receipt.
 During the audit period, independent deposit verifications were not performed
for collections received by the MOSH location. Although the MOSH location
performed two separate verification procedures, these procedures were not
effective. Specifically, one deposit verification procedure was performed by
an employee who also processed the related collections. Although the
employee who performed the other deposit verification procedure was
independent, the employee compared the initial record of checks received to
internal deposit documentation, rather than to bank records. We were advised
that DLI began performing a proper independent deposit verification after
May 2014. Collections at the MOSH location totaled $920,867 during fiscal
year 2014 (through May).
5

--- Page 8 ---
 There was an inadequate separation of duties in the safety inspection unit at
the headquarters location, which collected approximately $320,000 in
inspection fees during fiscal year 2014. Specifically, one employee who
processed cash receipts could modify the related billings and was responsible
for recording receipts in DLI’s regulatory management system for boiler and
elevator inspections. In addition, three other employees with access to cash
receipts could delete payments in the system and modify the related billings.
As a result, these individuals could alter the original documents and
misappropriate the funds without detection.
 Collections processed at DLI’s headquarters location using remote deposit,
which scans the images of checks and money orders and electronically
transmits the images to the State’s bank for deposit, were not sufficiently
controlled. Specifically, as of June 30, 2014, DLI had not destroyed more
than 2,600 checks totaling approximately $1.7 million processed through
remote deposit at the headquarters location during fiscal years 2012 and 2014.
(Checks processed during fiscal year 2013 had been destroyed.) Furthermore,
DLI’s headquarters location and the MOSH location did not have a procedure
in place to independently reconcile checks destroyed with the scanned images
of deposited checks and the incoming check receipt log to ensure all checks
had been destroyed. Finally, the checks on hand from fiscal year 2012 that
were remotely deposited at the headquarters location were not stored in a
secure location and were accessible to many DLI employees.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including adequate
separation of cash receipt processing duties, independent verification of
collections to deposit, and initial accountability over collections received. The
Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services by
Maryland State Agencies recommends scanned and transmitted checks be stored
in a secure location no longer than 30 days before they are destroyed. The Policy
also recommends that destroyed checks be reconciled to the scanned check
images and the check receipt log.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLI
a. immediately record cash receipts upon receipt,
b. deposit all cash receipts in a timely manner,
c. perform independent deposit verifications from initial recordation to
bank records,
d. ensure employees involved with cash receipts functions are independent
from the billing functions, and
6

--- Page 9 ---
e. ensure remotely deposited checks are appropriately secured and
destroyed in compliance with the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of
Remote Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies.
We advised DLI on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Prevailing Wage
Background
State law regulates the hours of labor, rates of pay, conditions of employment, and
obligations of employers under contracts and subcontracts for public works
construction projects in Maryland. Contractors and subcontractors on State-
funded construction projects of $500,000 or more are required to pay employees
no less than the prevailing wage rates, as determined by DLI for each locality in
the State. So that DLI can monitor compliance, contractors and subcontractors
submit self-certified payroll reports, indicating the worker classifications and
wages paid for both straight time and overtime work for every pay period under
the contracts. Under State law, employers found to be paying below the
prevailing wage rate, as determined by DLI, are required to make restitution to the
employee and can be fined $20 per day for each employee paid less than the
established rate. According to DLI records, fines totaling $139,000 were
collected in fiscal year 2014.
In December 2012, DLI implemented its automated prevailing wage system.
During the procurement process for public works construction contracts subject to
the State’s prevailing wage laws, the agency procurement officer may request DLI
to provide a project-specific wage determination which lists the prevailing wage
rates for the project. DLI uses its automated prevailing wage system to generate
these wage determinations. This system also allows contractors to electronically
submit their required self-certified payroll reports for employees working on the
projects for compliance monitoring by DLI.
Finding 2
DLI had not established comprehensive procedures for the review of certified
payroll reports received from contractors.
Analysis
Formal comprehensive policies had not been established regarding DLI’s review
of contractor-submitted certified payroll reports which is the primary means to
monitor contractor compliance with prevailing wage laws. The information in the
7

--- Page 10 ---
certified payroll reports is automatically compared by DLI’s prevailing wage
system to the respective project’s wage determination to determine whether the
applicable prevailing wage rates have been paid. Any discrepancies are
automatically flagged for additional review. According to DLI’s prevailing wage
system, 81,066 certified payroll reports with active payroll information were
submitted for the period from July 2012 through June 2014. The prevailing wage
system flagged 25,780 of these reports for additional review.
However, the reviews performed by the five prevailing wage investigators were
not guided by a policy to ensure that appropriate priority was given to address
potential violations of flagged reports but, rather, reports were selected at the
investigators’ discretion. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that
investigators made appropriate decisions when selecting reports for review. As of
July 2014, prevailing wage investigators had only reviewed 3,494 of the 25,780
reports that had been flagged by the system. Another 7,871 of the flagged reports
were marked as “hold” indicating the investigators intended to review them at a
later date. On the other hand, the prevailing wage investigators had reviewed
35,016 certified payroll reports that were not flagged by the prevailing wage
system. We were advised by DLI that reviews of non-flagged payroll reports
were often included as part of onsite inspections conducted at the completion of a
project, in part, to validate reported payroll information. In addition, the
investigators did not document the specific work performed during their reviews
and the results were not subject to supervisory review.
Comprehensive review policies should establish the frequency and timeliness of
the reviews and the methodology for selecting the payroll reports to be reviewed
based on risk and significance. For example, the procedures should clarify the
extent to which the reviews should focus on payrolls that have been flagged by
the system and the payrolls of contractors that were not flagged but, nevertheless,
should be validated (for example, via on-site inspection of the underlying payroll
records).
Finally, our review of the detail records maintained on DLI’s system disclosed
that, in certain instances, projects were duplicated due to separate wage
determinations being issued for each jurisdiction included under a single project.
Consequently, DLI could not readily provide an accurate number of projects and
estimated costs subject to the State’s prevailing wage laws. According to DLI’s
automated prevailing wage system as of June 30, 2014, there were 991 current
projects subject to the State’s prevailing wage laws, with estimated costs totaling
approximately $7.9 billion.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DLI
a. establish and implement comprehensive policies that define the priorities
for the selection and review of certified payroll reports, which consider
timeliness, significance and risk, and that identify the documentation and
supervisory review requirements;
b. adequately document the work performed by investigators, and the
approval of supervisory personnel of the review results, including the
final disposition of the flagged payroll reports; and
c. take the necessary action to ensure the data recorded in the prevailing
wage system accurately reflects the number and value of projects being
monitored for compliance with the State’s prevailing wage laws.
Regulatory Management System
Background
Since November 2002, DLI has contracted with a vendor to host, maintain, and
support a web-based regulatory management system. This outsourced system
manages the registration and tracking of boilers, pressure vessels, elevators, and
amusement rides; the scheduling and documentation of required inspections; the
issuance of inspection certificates; and enforcement actions for violations or other
non-compliance with regulatory requirements.
The current contract valued at $951,550 is for a term beginning January 1, 2013
and ending December 31, 2018. The system is used collaboratively by DLI and
other state and local regulatory agencies, as well as by large insurance companies
who perform boiler inspections for DLI. These insurance companies also provide
funding for this system. According to State records, through April 2014, DLI has
paid the vendor $149,044 under the current contract.
Finding 3
DLI lacked assurance that the outsourced management system was protected
against operational and security risks.
Analysis
DLI lacked assurance that the outsourced management system for boilers,
pressure vessels, elevators, and amusement rides was protected. The contract did
not require the vendor, a service organization, to periodically obtain an
independent review of controls and provide DLI with the resultant report. In lieu
9

--- Page 12 ---
of these reports, DLI had not performed security reviews of the service providers’
operations. Consequently, there was no assurance that the service provider had
established adequate security controls over system data.
In May 2011, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants issued
guidance concerning examinations of service organization controls. Based on this
guidance, customers, such as DLI, may obtain from service organizations an
independent auditor’s report referred to as a Service Organization Controls (SOC)
2 type 2 report. A SOC 2 type 2 report includes the results of the auditor’s review
of controls placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness for the period
reviewed and could include an evaluation of system security, availability,
processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy over the hosted environment and
system.
At our request, DLI contacted the vendor to determine if an independent review of
system controls had been performed. Although it was not required under the
contract, the vendor completed a self-assessment questionnaire in July 2013 at the
request of the boiler insurance companies that fund the related module of the
system. This self-assessment appeared to provide certain information regarding
system controls; however, it was not independently prepared and there were no
conclusions regarding the adequacy of the design and security of the system, nor
were there any tests of control effectiveness.
Without an independent review and related SOC report, DLI lacked assurance that
operational and security risks related to the outsourced management system were
identified and corrected as necessary. Best practices require that vendors
demonstrate compliance with industry information security requirements, and that
customer entities regularly obtain from the vendors related reports that evidence
such compliance.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLI
a. seek to amend the existing regulatory management system contract and
ensure that future contracts include provisions requiring service
organizations to annually obtain SOC 2 type 2 reviews for outsourced
systems, and
b. obtain and review these SOC 2 type 2 reports and take appropriate action
to ensure that all critical operational and security-related concerns are
properly addressed.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 4
DLI did not perform periodic reviews of user access capabilities for the
regulatory management system and numerous users had inappropriate
access.
Analysis
DLI did not perform periodic reviews of user access capabilities for the regulatory
management system. Consequently, several DLI employees and insurance
inspectors had system access that was not required. Furthermore, the system did
not provide output reports of changes made by DLI employees and insurance
inspectors (such as removing boiler and pressure vessels from the system) that
could be used to ensure any such changes were proper.
We noted that 23 users had administrative access even though their job
responsibilities did not require them to have this access. Such access allowed
these DLI employees to add, modify, and delete user access roles, including their
own. In addition, these users could change and remove objects (that is, boilers,
pressure vessels, elevators, and amusement rides) from the regulatory system and
modify and delete inspection invoices and inspection violations.
In addition, 81 insurance inspectors were assigned access that allowed them to
change demographic information (such as location) and remove boiler and
pressure vessels from the system. The only modification access needed by the
insurance inspectors is to record inspection information in the system for objects
subject to DLI monitoring. Based upon our review, the system was not capable of
appropriately restricting user access capabilities for insurance inspectors.
However, we were advised that DLI was working with the system vendor to
develop a solution.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLI
a. perform a periodic documented review of user access capabilities for the
regulatory management system and ensure users are assigned only those
capabilities needed to perform job duties,
b. work with the system vendor to develop appropriate access restrictions
and provide output reports that can be used to ensure changes made to
the regulatory management system are proper, and
c. remove the inappropriate access granted to the aforementioned DLI
employees and insurance inspectors.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Labor,
Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) – Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) for the
period beginning May 31, 2011 and ending May 18, 2014. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DLI’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts and DLI’s monitoring of compliance
with certain laws pertaining to prevailing wages and safety inspections for boilers,
pressure vessels, and elevators. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
DLI’s operations and tests of transactions. We also extracted data from DLI’s
automated systems used for monitoring safety inspections and certified payrolls
for prevailing wages for the purpose of testing compliance with State laws and
regulations. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DLI by the DLLR –
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll processing,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary.
12

--- Page 15 ---
DLI’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DLI’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
DLLR’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of DLI, is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DLLR regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
5/31/2011 – 5/18/2014
Findings, Recommendations, and Response
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Proper controls had not been established over collections received at several
locations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLI
a. immediately record cash receipts upon receipt,
b. deposit all cash receipts in a timely manner,
c. perform independent deposit verifications from initial recordation to
bank records,
d. ensure employees involved with cash receipts functions are independent
from the billing functions, and
e. ensure remotely deposited checks are appropriately secured and
destroyed in compliance with the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of
Remote Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies.
Response: We Concur and have abated all deficiencies.
The Division has implemented all recommendations and is focused upon
developing a sustaining process of management review when duties and
responsibilities of staff are modified. Although not an acceptable reason,
many of the previously established work controls that satisfied the separation
of duties were overlooked when the Division instituted changes in operational
procedures and consolidation of duties to obtain efficiencies.

--- Page 18 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
5/31/2011 – 5/18/2014
Prevailing Wage
Finding 2
DLI had not established comprehensive procedures for the review of certified
payroll reports received from contractors.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DLI
a. establish and implement comprehensive policies that define the priorities
for the selection and review of certified payroll reports, which consider
timeliness, significance and risk, and that identify the documentation and
supervisory review requirements;
b. adequately document the work performed by investigators, and the
approval of supervisory personnel of the review results, including the
final disposition of the flagged payroll reports; and
c. take the necessary action to ensure the data recorded in the prevailing
wage system accurately reflects the number and value of projects being
monitored for compliance with the State’s prevailing wage laws.
Response: We Concur.
The Division had implemented a basic procedure for review of certified
payroll reports, but it lacked written documentation and full communication
to affected staff. When contractors request a close-out report from the
Division, a comprehensive review of all payroll submittals is undertaken for
that project. The Division has been reviewing the process and is now
preparing a comprehensive written procedure to be used by investigators
and the supervisor when reviewing these close-out requests. This process will
include documentation and supervisory review. The procedure and reporting
system will be fully applied and fully implemented on or before April 30,
2015. Additionally, the Division has requested an assessment of the IT system
that will be focused on accuracy of the number and value of the projects
being monitored.

--- Page 19 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
5/31/2011 – 5/18/2014
Regulatory Management System
Background
Finding 3
DLI lacked assurance that the outsourced management system was protected
against operational and security risks.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLI
a. seek to amend the existing regulatory management system contract and
ensure that future contracts include provisions requiring service
organizations to annually obtain SOC 2 type 2 reviews for outsourced
systems, and
b. obtain and review these SOC 2 type 2 reports and take appropriate action
to ensure that all critical operational and security-related concerns are
properly addressed.
Response: We Concur.
The Division sought the advice and counsel of the Office of Attorney’s
General regarding the existing contract with the outsourced management
systems contractor, concerning these recommendations. We have requested a
face to face meeting with the contractor principals to discuss a contract
modification. The meeting is being scheduled to coincide with the National
Board General Meeting (April 26, 2015) and following the meeting will
determine the appropriate plan to achieve the desired outcome. The Office of
the Attorney’s General advises that all future contracts will include full
compliance with the May 2011, American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants guidance concerning examinations of service organization
controls. The Division will obtain from service organizations an independent
auditor’s report referred to as a Service Organization Controls (SOC) 2 type
2 report for all future SOC contracts.

--- Page 20 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
5/31/2011 – 5/18/2014
Finding 4
DLI did not perform periodic reviews of user access capabilities for the
regulatory management system and numerous users had inappropriate
access.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLI
a. perform a periodic documented review of user access capabilities for the
regulatory management system and ensure users are assigned only those
capabilities needed to perform job duties,
b. work with the system vendor to develop appropriate access restrictions
and provide output reports that can be used to ensure changes made to
the regulatory management system are proper, and
c. remove the inappropriate access granted to the aforementioned DLI
employees and insurance inspectors.
Response: We Concur.
The Division on November 20, 2014, implemented the basic
recommendations relating to restricting access to only appropriate persons
and has developed a sustaining process that includes annual management
review of duties and responsibilities of individual access. The Division
intends to conduct a meeting with the Service Organization to discuss the
application and mechanism to reduce access controls to insurance inspectors.
This is an industry specific challenge, because their access and ability to
modify data is part of the business model for this enterprise. The meeting is
being scheduled to coincide with the National Board General Meeting (April
26, 2015) and following the meeting will determine the appropriate plan to
achieve the desired outcome.

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditor