Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents - Southern Maryland

NOTE: OLA no longer conducts audits of Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents - Southern Maryland because the Institute was closed.
Date: 12/16/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744ed
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:21:23.445108
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
Southern Maryland
December 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 16, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Southern
Maryland (RICA-SM), a unit of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene,
for the period beginning December 1, 2005 and ending June 30, 2008, the date
that RICA-SM was closed. RICA-SM provided mental health and educational
services to emotionally disturbed children and adolescents primarily from Calvert,
Charles, Prince George’s, and St. Mary’s Counties.
Our audit disclosed numerous equipment and supplies record keeping and
inventory control deficiencies. Our audit also disclosed that RICA-SM failed to
pursue certain payments noted in our preceding audit report as questionable or
non-compliant with contract terms.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response to this audit, on behalf
of RICA-SM, is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge
the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by RICA-SM.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Southern Maryland (RICA-
SM) is located in Prince George’s County and is part of the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene’s Mental Hygiene Administration. Until its closure in June
2008, the facility provided mental health and educational services to emotionally
disturbed children and adolescents primarily from Calvert, Charles, Prince
George’s, and St. Mary’s Counties.
During fiscal year 2008, a decision was made to consolidate the Department’s
mental hygiene facilities due to a reduction in the number of residents requiring
services and to eliminate the costs to maintain these facilities. As a result, the
Administration initiated procedures to close RICA-SM and, as of June 30, 2008,
all residents had been transferred from RICA-SM to alternative living facilities
(such as to other State facilities) commensurate with their needs.
As of September 26, 2008, we were advised that the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene (DHMH) was pursuing several potential leases of the RICA-SM
facility, but that there was no specific date for the lease(s) to be finalized.
Asset Liquidation
The liquidation of certain RICA-SM equipment had not been finalized.
Specifically, according to its detail records, RICA-SM had 417 capital equipment
items totaling $423,000 as of July 1, 2008. However, according to its detail
records, approximately 142 items, with an inventory book value totaling
$164,000, remained at RICA-SM as of September 26, 2008. We were advised by
RICA-SM management that the remaining equipment will be disposed of over the
next several months.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 12, 2006. We determined that the RICA-
SM satisfactorily addressed one of these findings; the remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
Numerous recordkeeping and inventory deficiencies hindered adequate
control over the asset liquidation process.
Analysis
RICA-SM did not have adequate controls over its equipment and supplies,
hindering the liquidation process. Specifically, our review disclosed the
following deficiencies:
• RICA-SM did not maintain an equipment control account during fiscal year
2008 to ensure the accuracy of the related detail capital equipment records. In
addition, although we were advised that the physical inventory of capital
equipment conducted in fiscal year 2008 was performed by independent
employees, certain inventory count sheets were not signed by the employees
who counted the items. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all
equipment purchased in fiscal year 2008 was properly accounted for. As of
July 1, 2008, RICA-SM’s detail equipment records were valued at $423,000.
• Inventories conducted of non-capital equipment (that is, equipment that was
less than the prescribed capitalization thresholds and, therefore, was not
recorded in the aforementioned detail records) and supplies were not used in
the liquidation process and were not always properly documented.
Specifically, to facilitate the liquidation process, RICA-SM employees
inventoried non-capital equipment and supplies in fiscal year 2008. However,
certain inventory count sheets documenting the physical inventories were not
signed by the employees who counted the items. As a result, there was a lack
of assurance that physical inventories were conducted by independent
employees. As of June 30, 2008, RICA-SM reported that its supplies were
valued at $40,820.
Furthermore, RICA-SM management did not use the inventories to monitor
the proper disposition of these assets during the liquidation process (such as,
by tracking the disposition of the assets identified during the inventories).
This is significant because RICA-SM lacked any other record of non-capital
equipment and supplies. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all
items had been properly disposed of.
4

--- Page 7 ---
The Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual requires that a
control account and detail records be maintained to properly reflect all
transactions and that the detail records be reconciled to the related control account
balance.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHMH ensure that its facilities maintain the required
equipment records and perform physical inventories, as required. In
addition, we recommend that for future agency closings, DHMH ensure that
there is adequate accountability for all equipment and supplies to facilitate
the liquidation process.
Disbursements
Finding 2
DHMH had not completed a review of certain payments noted in our
preceding audit report as questionable or non-compliant with contract terms.
Analysis
DHMH had not completed a review of two heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC) vendors that were paid approximately $184,000 during
fiscal years 2003 through 2005. In our preceding audit, we noted that certain
payments to these vendors did not comply with contract terms or were
questionable. For example, although the contracts provided that the vendors were
to provide emergency services at a fixed hourly rate and that the first two hours of
service were to be provided at no charge, we noted numerous invoices for which
there was no indication that the required two-hour credit had been received.
Accordingly, in our preceding audit report, we recommended that RICA-SM, in
conjunction with the Department of General Services (DGS) and DHMH, conduct
a thorough review of the matter. We also recommended that RICA-SM recover
any amounts due and determine if any of this activity should be forwarded to the
Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division (OAG-CD).
During our current audit, RICA-SM provided us with a listing of $180,000 of the
aforementioned $184,000 in invoices paid to these two vendors that identified
potential overpayments totaling $35,000. However, as of August 13, 2008,
DHMH had been unable to determine who within DHMH prepared this listing, if
the vendors were billed for the overpayments, and if any amounts had been
recovered.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 2
We again recommend that DHMH conduct a complete review of the
payments to the aforementioned vendors. Specifically, we recommend that
DHMH determine the status of the aforementioned review of HVAC vendor
invoices (such as whether the invoices were reviewed by an individual
knowledgeable about such services, and whether the overpayments were
billed and recovered from the vendor). We also again recommend that
DHMH determine if any of this activity was or should be, forwarded to the
OAG-CD.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Southern
Maryland (RICA-SM), a unit of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s
Mental Hygiene Administration, for the period beginning December 1, 2005 and
ending June 30, 2008. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine RICA-SM’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of RICA-SM’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Since RICA-SM closed on June 30, 2008,
our audit also included a review of the procedures used by RICA-SM and the
Mental Hygiene Administration with respect to the closing. Data provided in this
report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but
were not independently verified.
RICA-SM’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect RICA-SM’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to RICA-SM that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, on behalf of
RICA-SM, to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results
of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
Numerous recordkeeping and inventory deficiencies hindered adequate
control over the asset liquidation process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHMH ensure that its facilities maintain the required
equipment records and perform physical inventories, as required. In
addition, we recommend that for future agency closings, DHMH ensure that
there is adequate accountability for all equipment and supplies to facilitate
the liquidation process.
DHMH Response:
While the Department concurs with this finding, the closure of RICA-SM had to
be completed in less than three months, by June 30, 2008. This involved
notifying 48 employees of the loss of their jobs, finding placements for 60
children in the day program and 14 children in the residential program, and
initiating a closure process for the physical plant. RICA-SM performed a
physical inventory of fixed assets, non-capital equipment and supplies; however,
it was done without the guidance of knowledgeable personnel. The Fiscal Officer
and Chief Financial Officer left in April before the inventory began. RICA-SM
personnel performed the physical inventories in teams of two, with one person
performing the count and the other person recording the count. The inventory
sheets were initialed and dated by the employees and given to their supervisor
who was accountable for the delegation of duties. When the inventory was
transferred to another DHMH facility, a detailed list of the inventory was given to
and signed by the receiving agency and a copy is maintained by RICA-SM which
the Department feels was commendable under the circumstances. Going forward,
the DHMH will reemphasize to its units the requirements to maintain equipment
records and the necessity of performing physical inventories in accordance with
the DGS Inventory Control Manual. In addition, DHMH will remind any units
undergoing closure, of the requirements to maintain adequate accountability for
all equipment and supplies to facilitate the liquidation process.

--- Page 13 ---
Disbursements
Finding 2
DHMH had not completed a review of certain payments noted in our
preceding audit report as questionable or non-compliant with contract terms.
Recommendation 2
We again recommend that DHMH conduct a complete review of the
payments to the aforementioned vendors. Specifically, we recommend that
DHMH determine the status of the aforementioned review of HVAC vendor
invoices (such as whether the invoices were reviewed by an individual
knowledgeable about such services and whether the overpayments were
billed and recovered from the vendor). We also again recommend that
DHMH determine if any of this activity was or should be, forwarded to the
OAG-CD.
DHMH Response:
The Department concurs with the findings but does not agree that pursuit of the
recommendation is a viable option given the current circumstances. At this point
in time, which is over eight years since payments had been made to the contractor
and the fact that the facility is closed, makes it highly improbable that legally the
Department could collect from the contractor even if it could resurrect the
contract documents/invoices and determine with certainty that the Center was
over billed. In addition, documentation demonstrates that there was an
independent review on 10/30/2006 by a maintenance chief at another facility to
determine the appropriateness of charges under the service agreements between
the two contracts. The reviewer states “…I don’t see any parts or material cost
that seem to be outrageous. The majority of the invoices were submitted by one
contractor. Based on this, and using the contract specifications for them, the
Facility is responsible for all material costs.” He goes on to state, “…The audit
states that the hourly rate on one contract was for $90.00 total, but the vendor was
charging $90.00 per person. Neither contract is very clear on this point. I can see
how an argument can be made either way. I don’t see any way a Contractor
would concede this without a fight. It does appear that there were invoices where

--- Page 14 ---
the first two hours of labor should have been deducted and they were not. If the
vendor is still in business you may be able to go after him, but again I am sure he
would fight it.” The Department has also been advised by its AG’s Office that
because of the cited issues, it would be difficult to win a legal case against the
vendors.1
1 Auditor’s Comment: The Department’s response indicates that pursuit of the overpayments is
not a viable option for various reasons, including advice received by the Department’s AG who
indicated that it would be difficult to win a legal case against the vendors.
While collection efforts and legal action may not be successful, it should not preclude reasonable
efforts to recover overpayments from the vendors. Furthermore, the Department failed to
acknowledge that there were potentially $35,000 in overpayments based on a detailed analysis
previously prepared by DHMH. We continue to believe that the Department should conduct a
complete review of the payments to the aforementioned vendors and attempt to collect any
identified overpayments.

--- Page 15 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Carlton A. Sexton
Senior Auditor