Title: State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
Date: 04/14/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744c3
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:15:28.322125
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
April 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud,
waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government resources.
Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
through the Office’s website, by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, or by
mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Name Change 4
Casino Gaming Program 4
Financial Information 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 1 – The SLGCA Network Was Not Adequately Secured 7
Finding 2 – Network Workstations and Servers Were Not 8
Sufficiently Protected Against Malware
* Finding 3 – Mainframe Access Controls, Account and Password 10
Controls, and Security Reporting Were Not Sufficient
Unclaimed Video Lottery Terminal Funds
Finding 4 – Distributions of Unclaimed Funds Were Not Consistent 11
with State Regulations
Procurement
Finding 5 – Certain Contract Awards Were Not Published in 12
eMaryland Marketplace
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Name Change
Chapter 1, Laws of Maryland 2013, effective October 1, 2012, changed the name
of the State Lottery Agency to the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency
(SLGCA). This law also changed the name of the State Lottery Commission to
the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission. SLGCA operations generate
revenue for the State’s General Fund, the Education Trust Fund, the Maryland
Stadium Authority, and certain other governmental funds and agencies as further
detailed on page 5 of this report.
SLGCA administers and operates various lottery games. During fiscal year 2014,
there were 4,721 lottery retail agents who sold instant tickets, as well as tickets for
draw games and monitor games. Draw games include traditional games, such as
Pick 3/Pick 4, and multi-state games, such as Mega Millions and Power Ball.
Monitor games include Keno and Racetrax. SLGCA’s responsibilities for the
operation of these games require continuous oversight and marketing of lottery
gaming operations and the development of new games. SLGCA has entered into
an agreement with a gaming contractor to help fulfill these responsibilities, as
well as to perform the daily operation and maintenance of the lottery gaming
system.
SLGCA also administers the video lottery terminal (VLT) program, including
accounting for and distributing VLT revenues, managing the program’s central
system, and regulation and licensing operators. In 2012, SLGCA’s
responsibilities were further expanded to include the regulation of table games at
previously authorized VLT facilities (casinos).
The Gaming Control Commission consists of seven members appointed by the
Governor with the advice and consent of the State Senate. The Commission has
oversight responsibilities for SLGCA’s operations and, in conjunction with
SLGCA, is responsible for regulating the operations of the State’s VLTs and table
games.
Casino Gaming Program
Chapter 1, Laws of Maryland 2013, expanded the State’s casino gaming program.
Specifically, the Maryland 2013 law authorized VLT operation licensees (casino
operators) to operate table games, increased the number of authorized VLTs, and
allowed for the future operation of a VLT and table game facility in Prince
4

--- Page 7 ---
George’s County. Certain provisions of the law were subject to voter referendum
and were upheld by Maryland voters on November 6, 2012.
Licenses required to operate six casinos in Maryland have been awarded. The
licensees are responsible for the daily operation of the casino with onsite
monitoring being performed by SLGCA. SLGCA has also entered into an
agreement with a contractor to operate a central computer system that performs
VLT accounting and provides monitoring, command, and control functions for the
VLTs and table games. Casinos in Cecil, Worcester, Anne Arundel, and Allegany
Counties, and in Baltimore City opened in September 2010, January 2011, June
2012, May 2013, and August 2014, respectively. A facility in Prince George’s
County is expected to open to the public during calendar year 2016.
Financial Information
According to SLGCA’s audited financial statements for the fiscal year ended June
30, 2014, gross revenue totaled approximately $2.6 billion, of which
approximately $942 million was credited to various State funds or agencies as
prescribed by law:
• $1.0 billion was disbursed for prize claims;
• $528 million was disbursed for agent and casino commissions and claims
fees;
• $148 million was used to pay SLGCA’s operating expenses;
• $501 million was credited to the State’s General Fund;
• $328 million was credited to the Education Trust Fund:
• $20 million was transferred to the Maryland Stadium Authority; and
• $93 million was credited to other governmental funds and agencies.
SLGCA engages an independent accounting firm to perform an annual audit of its
financial statements and monthly audits of special-purpose financial statements,
and to provide assistance in technical matters. In the related audit reports for the
fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2013, and 2014, the firm stated that SLGCA’s
financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, its financial position,
and the respective changes in its financial position and cash flows, for the years
then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives,
our audit included a review to determine the status of five of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated May 21, 2012. We determined that
SLGCA satisfactorily addressed three of these five findings and the remaining
two findings are repeated in this report. We did not follow up on the remaining
finding which pertained to the licensing functions for VLT operations.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency’s (SLGCA) Information
Technology Unit manages the development, maintenance, and support of
SLGCA’s information technology infrastructure, including all related networking,
telecommunications, and business information systems. The Unit’s staff operates
a mainframe computer which hosts numerous systems used for multiple purposes
including SLGCA agent administration, tracking of SLGCA annuity winners,
claims administration, financial systems operations and monitoring, and review of
sales. In addition, the Unit operates an internal network which includes email,
application, and database servers. Furthermore, the internal network connects to
networkMaryland, the Internet, video lottery terminal operations, and the
contractor networks used for support of SLGCA games.
The SLGCA wide area network (WAN) supports SLGCA staff, located at the
State’s casinos, who provide oversight and monitoring of casino operations at the
following sites:
• Hollywood Casino, Perryville MD
• Ocean Downs Casino, Berlin MD
• Maryland Live Casino, Hanover MD
• Rocky Gap Casino, Cumberland MD
• Horseshoe Casino, Baltimore, MD
Finding 1
The SLGCA network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic.
Analysis
The SLGCA network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic.
• The firewalls installed to protect the SLGCA network allowed unnecessary
and insecure connections to network devices on the internal network. The
firewalls’ rules were not configured to adequately secure connections into the
network from the Internet, networkMaryland, and other untrusted sources. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
addition, many outdated rules existed on these firewalls. Therefore, critical
network devices were susceptible to attack which could result in a loss of data
integrity or the interruption of critical network services.
7

--- Page 10 ---
• Network traffic from a contractor to SLGCA’s secondary claims center and
backup data center was not filtered by an SLGCA device. As a result, critical
network devices at the centers were susceptible to attack. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• An insecure connection protocol that transmitted unencrypted traffic,
including userids and passwords was used for remote administration of the
SLGCA Internet firewall. In addition, remote administrative connections to
this firewall were not restricted to originating from only authorized source
addresses and this firewall was not configured to uniquely identify individuals
performing administrative actions on the firewall thereby precluding
accountability for these actions.
• The SLGCA Internet firewall logs were only stored in its internal memory.
As such, these logs were constantly overwritten and if the firewall was
compromised the logs could be deleted thereby removing evidence of the
compromise. In addition, the firewall logs were not regularly reviewed for
unusual or suspicious entries.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SLGCA
a. configure its firewalls to achieve a “least privilege” security strategy
giving individuals, entities, and devices only those network access
privileges needed to perform assigned tasks (repeat);
b. use only secure protocols to connect to all firewalls, limit remote access to
all firewalls to only authorized source addresses, and configure all
firewalls to uniquely identify all individuals performing administrative
actions on these firewalls; and
c. store firewall logs in a secure location, retain the most recent three
months of logs, regularly review these logs, investigate unusual or
suspicious log entries, document these reviews and investigations, and
retain such documentation for future reference.
Finding 2
Network workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
Analysis
Network workstations and servers (approximately 220 devices) were not
sufficiently protected against malware.
8

--- Page 11 ---
• Three of ten workstations tested were improperly configured with users
having administrator rights. Administrator rights are the highest permission
level that can be granted to users and it allows users to install software and
change configuration settings. As a result, if these workstations were infected
with malware, the malware would run with administrator rights and expose
these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’
user accounts operated with only user rights. In addition, as a result of the
administrator rights assigned, these three users had the ability to disable the
malware protection software on their workstations.
• Workstations and servers tested had not been updated with the latest releases
for software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, SLGCA had not
updated its workstations and servers for these patches. For example, our test
of 13 workstations and servers for one of these software products disclosed
that 11 of these devices were running older versions of this software that had
not been updated for periods ranging from 4 months to over 3 years.
• Although SLGCA used an enterprise-wide management tool to provide anti-
malware software on its workstations and servers, SLGCA did not use the
management capabilities of this tool to verify that the malware protection
software and related definition files were up to date on its devices. In this
regard, SLGCA personnel advised that regular reviews of the management
tool’s dashboard and reports were not performed. Our test of 10 workstations
disclosed that 8 of these workstations were running an outdated version of the
anti-malware software and 1 workstation did not have any anti-malware
software installed.
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) Information Security Policy
states that agencies should configure security settings of information technology
products to the most restrictive mode consistent with operational requirements
and protect against malicious code by implementing protections that, to the extent
possible, include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SLGCA
a. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to
network administrators;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates; and
9

--- Page 12 ---
c. monitor all workstations and servers to ensure the devices have malware
protection software that is operational and up to date, and that the
related definition files are also kept up to date.
Finding 3
Mainframe access controls, account and password controls, and security
reporting were not sufficient.
Analysis
Mainframe access controls, account and password controls, and security reporting
were not sufficient.
• As of January 2015, SLGCA had not generated mainframe security and audit
event reports since September 2013. As a result, unauthorized or
inappropriate activities affecting the integrity of the mainframe data could
occur and go undetected by management. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• Ninety active accounts (assigned to 76 users) had unnecessary access to a
mainframe command that permitted these users to bypass menu security
controls and directly access specific system screens. This condition may
result in unauthorized access to critical mainframe functions, disclosure of
sensitive information, or modification of critical production data.
• Six users were improperly granted the ability to make changes to the
mainframe’s security and auditing settings. As a result of this condition, these
six users could initiate unauthorized and inappropriate activities that could
affect the integrity of production data on the mainframe computer.
• Mainframe account and password settings did not comply with DoIT
Information Security Policy account and password requirements. For example
account lockout and password aging were not properly enforced.
The DoIT Information Security Policy requires that information systems must
generate audit records for all security-relevant events and procedures must be
developed to routinely review audit records for indications of unusual activities,
suspicious activities, or suspected violations, and to report findings to appropriate
officials for prompt resolution. The Policy also requires that system access be
limited to only authorized individuals and that such access supports the concepts
of “least possible privilege” and “need-to-know.”
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SLGCA
a. generate reports of all critical mainframe security and audit events,
review these reports and investigate unusual events, document these
reviews and investigations and retain the documentation for future
reference (repeat);
b. restrict access to critical mainframe commands and security and audit
settings to only those individuals requiring such access; and
c. ensure that its mainframe account and password settings are in
accordance with the DoIT Information Security Policy requirements.
Unclaimed Video Lottery Terminal Funds
Finding 4
SLGCA did not distribute unclaimed video lottery terminal (VLT) funds in a
manner consistent with State regulations.
Analysis
SLGCA did not distribute unclaimed VLT funds in a manner consistent with State
regulations. Although State law does not address how unclaimed VLT funds are
to be distributed, State regulations provide that, after 182 days, unclaimed VLT
funds shall become the property of the State. Rather than distributing all
unclaimed VLT funds to the State, SLGCA distributed these funds in the same
manner as specified in the law for VLT gambling proceeds, which are distributed
to the State, the casinos, and for other purposes specified in the law. While
SLGCA agreed that the regulations, as currently written, specify that unclaimed
VLT funds should be distributed to the State, SLGCA also stated that it has
always been its intent to distribute these funds in the same manner as VLT
proceeds and would seek to revise the regulations accordingly.
VLT play, including wagers and winnings, is automatically recorded by VLTs.
At the conclusion of play, each player’s balance is recorded and printed on a
voucher that the player may redeem at the casino for cash. According to SLGCA
records, during calendar year 2013, vouchers totaling $704,000 went unclaimed
for more than 182 days and were distributed in the aforementioned manner to the
State and other entities. Of this total, $347,000 was distributed to non-state
entities rather than to the State as provided for by State regulations.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that unclaimed VLT funds be distributed to the State unless
SLGCA receives approval to amend the regulations to conform with its
current practices.
Procurement
Finding 5
SLGCA had not published the award of three contracts, collectively valued
at approximately $106 million, on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Analysis
SLGCA had not published the award of three significant contracts on eMaryland
Marketplace as required by State law. SLGCA awarded these three contracts,
which collectively totaled $106 million, during the period from June 2013 through
February 2014; however, as of April 2014 the contract awards had not been
published. These contracts were procured for advertising services, design and
development of instant ticket games, and the purchase of certain instant lottery
ticket machines and related services.
State regulations require that contract awards greater than $25,000 be published
on eMaryland Marketplace not more than 30 days after the execution and
approval of the contract. After our inquiry, SLGCA published these three awards
during May and June 2014.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SLGCA ensure that all applicable contract awards are
published on eMaryland Marketplace not more than 30 days after the
execution and approval of the contract as required.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Lottery and Gaming
Control Agency (SLGCA) for the period beginning March 7, 2011 and ending
March 19, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SLGCA’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the operation of lottery games, video lottery
terminals, and table games, including the accountability over proceeds and
payouts. In addition, the audit addressed purchases, disbursements, and
information technology systems. We also determined the status of five of the six
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SLGCA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit. In addition, we obtained
data extracted from SLGCA’s automated records for the purpose of testing casino
and lottery financial activity. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SLGCA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
13

--- Page 16 ---
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SLGCA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SLGCA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
SLGCA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SLGCA regarding the
results of our review of its response.
14

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 1
The SLGCA network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SLGCA
a. configure its firewalls to achieve a “least privilege” security strategy giving
individuals, entities, and devices only those network access privileges needed to
perform assigned tasks (repeat);
b. use only secure protocols to connect to all firewalls, limit remote access to all
firewalls to only authorized source addresses, and configure all firewalls to
uniquely identify all individuals performing administrative actions on these
firewalls; and
c. store firewall logs in a secure location, retain the most recent three months of
logs, regularly review these logs, investigate unusual or suspicious log entries,
document these reviews and investigations, and retain such documentation for
future reference.
SLGCA Response:
SLGCA agrees with the recommendations, and the following changes have or will be
impale. mPernotbeldem. atic configurations identified in the firewall during the audit are ninety percent
resolved to meet the principal of least privileged. The remainder of the required changes
involves a process of “fine tuning” and will be completed by July of 2015.
b. Connections to the firewalls have been changed to utilize a secure protocol, remote
access to Agency firewalls is restricted to IP addresses of authorized users, and all users
are uniquely identified. These changes were implemented in January of 2015.
c. Firewall logs are retained for 90 days, and documented regular review of the logs is being
performed. The retention change and review process was fully implemented in February
of 2015.
Finding 2
Network workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SLGCA
a. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to network
administrators;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates; and
c. monitor all workstations and servers to ensure the devices have malware
protection software that is operational and up to date, and that the related
definition files are also kept up to date.

--- Page 19 ---
SLGCA Response:
SLGCA agrees with the recommendations, and will ensure that the following items are
impale. mAednmteidn.i s trator rights on workstations are restricted to network administrators. Users with
local administrative rights that were identified during the audit have been removed.
b. Critical security updates will be promptly installed. Operating system patches are being
installed regularly, and Adobe, Java, and Flash updates will be installed when new
versions become available.
c. Workstations will be actively monitored to ensure malware protection software is
operational, up to date, and that related definition files are kept current.
Finding 3
Mainframe access controls, account and password controls, and security reporting
were not sufficient.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SLGCA
a. generate reports of all critical mainframe security and audit events, review these
reports and investigate unusual events, document these reviews and
investigations and retain the documentation for future reference (repeat);
b. restrict access to critical mainframe commands and security and audit settings to
only those individuals requiring such access; and
c. ensure that its mainframe account and password settings are in accordance with
the DoIT Information Security Policy requirements.
SLGCA Response:
SLGCA agrees with the recommendations, and the following changes have been
imple mented.
a. A security report is being generated daily and is regularly reviewed for unusual
events. The reviews are being documented and retained.
b. Accounts have been reviewed and the appropriate changes were made to ensure
accounts adhere to the principle of least privilege.
c. Mainframe accounts and passwords meet the DoIT Information Security Policy to
the extent that the system is capable of meeting the requirement.

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 4
SLGCA did not distribute unclaimed video lottery terminal (VLT) funds in a manner
consistent with State regulations.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that unclaimed VLT funds be distributed to the State unless SLGCA
receives approval to amend the regulations to conform with its current practices.
SLGCA Response:
The SLGCA has moved forward to change the regulation to reflect its practice. A revised
regulation was submitted and approved by the MLGCA Commission on December 16, 2014
and was subsequently published in the Maryland Register on March 20, 2015. The
r e gulation is open for public comment until April 20, 2015.
Finding 5
SLGCA had not published the award of three contracts valued at approximately $106
million, on eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SLGCA ensure that all applicable contract awards are published
on eMaryland Marketplace not more than 30 days after the execution and approval of
the contract as required.
SLGCA Response:
eMaryland
Marketplace
The SLGCA agrees to ensure that all contract awards are published on
.
eMaryland Marketplace
The Request for Proposals (RFPs) for the three contracts in question were all posted on
eMaarty ltahned tMimarek eopf laiscseuance. For each RFP, Pre-Proposal Conference
summary, Question and Answer documents, amendments and other related documents
were also posted on .
eMaryland Marketplace
For large contracts including those in question, the SLGCA requires offerors to submit their
proposals by hard copy. The SLGCA does not utilize the functions
for electronic offer submission, electronic offer review, or electronic offer seleecMtiaorny laanndd
pMoasrtkinetgp olaf caewards. Therefore, at the conclusion of a procurement process and after Board
of Public Works approval of the award, the SLGCA must go back into the
RFP files and post the award information manually.
e Maryland Marketplace
These were the first large competitive procurements done by the SLGCA since the new
system went into effect. The SLGCA believed that it had posted the

--- Page 21 ---
eMaryland Marketplace.
awards in However, when verification of the posting of the awards
was requested by the auditors, we were unable to locate such verification on the system so
in May/June, we went back into the RFP files and posted the 3 awards.
eMaryland Marketplace
On September 30, 2014 the SLGCA Director of Procurement attended training provided by
DGS on the use of the new system including the procedures for
input and posting of various procurement functions on the system.

--- Page 22 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Steven P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Christopher D. Jackson, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Jessica A. Foux
Annette L. Manning
Staff Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Staff Auditor