Title: Office of Administrative Hearings
Date: 02/05/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d09cc9d724560674252
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:35:52.360173
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of Administrative Hearings
December 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) was established to provide an
unbiased and objective forum for contested cases involving State agencies that
regulate certain actions of businesses and citizens. According to OAH’s records,
during fiscal year 2014, OAH disposed of 48,599 cases. The majority of cases
heard by OAH relate to the Motor Vehicle Administration and the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene. OAH’s fiscal year 2014 appropriation provided for
129 employee positions, including 56 administrative law judges. According to
the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014, OAH’s expenditures totaled
approximately $14.5 million.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated December 2, 2011. We determined that OAH
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement
Finding 1
The Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) did not comply with State
procurement regulations when purchasing temporary staffing services.
Analysis
The OAH did not comply with State procurement regulations when purchasing
temporary staffing services. Based on our review of disbursement transactions
made during the period from March 2012 to December 2013, we noted that OAH
made repeated purchases from one vendor totaling $93,000 for temporary staffing
services without obtaining competitive bids and did not enter into written
contracts. Consequently, there is no assurance that OAH obtained these services
at the lowest cost.
State procurement regulations generally specify that contracts in excess of
$25,000 shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, and that procurements
exceeding $5,000 must have also have written contracts.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OAH comply with State procurement regulations by
using a formal written procurement process (such as competitive sealed
bidding) for purchases that are reasonably expected to exceed $25,000 and
ensure that procurements exceeding $5,000 have formal written contracts.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of Administrative
Hearings (OAH) for the period beginning June 15, 2011 and ending August 3,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OAH’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, cash receipts, case
management, and payroll. We also determined the status of the finding contained
in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OAH’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll
Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering the State’s
Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
4

--- Page 7 ---
OAH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
Our audit did not disclose any conditions that we consider to be significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect OAH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and
efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This audit
does include a finding regarding a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
OAH’s response to our finding and recommendation is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise OAH regarding the results of our
review of its response.
5

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker
Staff Auditor