Title: Subsequent Injury Fund
Date: 04/09/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746d4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:47:33.731083
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Subsequent Injury Fund
September 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity 4
Outstanding Claim Against the Subsequent Injury Fund 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Claim Payments
Finding 1 – SIF did not ensure claim payments agreed with amounts 6
awarded by the Workers’ Compensation Commission, resulting in
potential overpayments going undetected.
* Finding 2 – SIF did not always pursue recovery of claim payments 7
improperly disbursed to deceased individuals.
Assessment Billings and Collections
* Finding 3 – SIF did not ensure that all assessments were recorded in its 8
accounts receivable system and did not conduct independent reviews
of adjustments to these accounts. Additionally, SIF did not properly
separate certain accounts receivable and cash receipts functions.
* Finding 4 – SIF did not document its efforts to collect delinquent 9
assessment accounts and did not refer all delinquent accounts to the
State’s Central Collection Unit.
Finding 5 – SIF did not have adequate procedures and controls over 10
collections processed by remote deposit.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The purpose of the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF) is to encourage the employment
of individuals with pre-existing health conditions by limiting an employer’s
liability should a subsequent occupational injury render an individual permanently
disabled or result in the individual’s death. Specifically, the employer’s liability
under these circumstances is limited to compensation for damages from the
current injury. SIF incurs the liability associated with the combined effects of all
injuries. The administration of the SIF is supervised by the Subsequent Injury
Fund Board, which consists of three members appointed by the Governor.
The principal source of funding for claim payments and SIF’s operating expenses
is assessments collected for each award against an employer or its insurer for
permanent disability or death and each amount payable by an employer or insurer
under a settlement agreement approved by the Workers' Compensation
Commission (WCC). SIF calculates these assessments, which are currently 6.5
percent of the aforementioned award amounts.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2016, assessment collections totaled
approximately $27.1 million, claim payments totaled approximately $21.7
million, and SIF operating expenses totaled approximately $2.3 million. SIF’s
fund balance as of October 31, 2016 totaled approximately $87.5 million.
Claim obligations are funded on a pay-as-you-go basis so, as obligations become
due in future periods, the obligations must be paid from future assessments
collected from employers and insurance companies. In this regard, SIF’s most
recent actuarial study performed in March 2016 indicated that, at that time, SIF
had an unfunded liability for permanent injury and death claims of approximately
$181.2 million (discounted at three percent). This unfunded liability represents a
29 percent decrease from the preceding actuarial study performed in June 2011.
A September 8, 1992 advice of the Attorney General concluded that, should fund
awards ever exceed the amount of monies in the SIF, the State would not be liable
to appropriate its own funds to pay claims.
Outstanding Claim Against the Subsequent Injury Fund
On April 10, 2012, the Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) requested that SIF
return $544,000 in assessments that UEF believed it had erroneously paid in
connection with a 2006 memorandum of understanding (MOU). The MOU
addressed the processing of workers’ compensation claims associated with
4

--- Page 7 ---
employees of the former Bethlehem Steel Corporation (BSC), which had filed for
federal bankruptcy protection in 2001. As of June 2017, UEF’s claim was still
outstanding.
Under the terms of the 2006 MOU, the Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Fund
(CEIC), formerly the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund, on behalf of the State of
Maryland, was to process workers’ compensation claims of former BSC
employees, and UEF was to reimburse CEIC for the claims paid. In accordance
with the MOU, UEF reimbursed CEIC for the claim payments but subsequently
discovered that some of these payments improperly included SIF assessments
relating to BSC claims. UEF requested SIF to return the assessment payments
related to these BSC claims, which it valued at $544,000.
On April 9, 2014, UEF requested an advice from the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) as to whether SIF should reimburse UEF for these assessments.
While a written advice was not received, UEF management advised us that the
OAG verbally recommended that the issue be directed to the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM). UEF did not pursue the issue with DBM, as
recommended, and made no additional attempts to recover the funds from SIF
until December 2016. At that time, UEF provided SIF with details of the specific
BSC assessments it was attempting to recover. SIF has preliminarily agreed to
reimburse UEF for certain of these assessments totaling approximately $441,468
(which includes lost interest). UEF and SIF believe the proposed resolution
should be referred to the Governor’s Office for review prior to finalization. As of
June 2017, the issue had not been referred to the Governor’s Office.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 8, 2014. We determined that SIF
satisfactorily addressed two of these findings. The remaining three findings are
repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Claim Payments
Background
Based on workers’ compensation awards as determined by the Workers’
Compensation Commission (WCC), the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF) pays
claims for subsequent occupational injuries that render an individual permanently
disabled or that result in the individual’s death. Claim payments are made for
injured persons either as a lump sum or as recurring payments. Recurring
biweekly payments are made for a set period or indefinitely for the life of the
injured person.
According to its records, claim payments processed by SIF during fiscal year
2016 totaled approximately $21.7 million ($16.6 million for recurring biweekly
payments and $5.1 million for lump sum settlement payments). We were advised
that as of June 30, 2017, 883 claimants were receiving biweekly payments.
Finding 1
SIF did not ensure claim payments agreed with amounts awarded by WCC,
resulting in overpayments going undetected.
Analysis
SIF had not established a procedure to ensure its claim payments agreed with the
amounts awarded by WCC, including changes to these award amounts, allowing
certain overpayments to go undetected. SIF employees recorded new claim
payment awards in SIF’s accounts payable system based on information
transmitted from WCC on a daily basis. Recurring payments were established for
a fixed payment period (such as 100 weeks) and were manually adjusted at the
expiration of that period.
The supervisory reviews of new claim payments (both lump sum and recurring)
only ensured that the recipients were authorized to receive the funds and did not
include any verification that the payments were consistent with the amounts
awarded by WCC. In addition, there was no supervisory review performed of
adjustments to award amounts for recurring biweekly payments (such as for cost-
of-living increases or expiration of the payment period). As a result, unauthorized
or erroneous payments could be issued and not readily detected.
Our test of recurring biweekly payments to 10 claimants totaling $12,715
disclosed that the biweekly payments to 2 claimants totaling $2,571 were
overstated by $215. As a result, these two claimants received overpayments of
6

--- Page 9 ---
approximately $9,800 during the period from September 2008 through December
2016. For example, an erroneous entry in SIF’s accounts payable system for one
of these claimants, dating back to September 2008, resulted in this individual
receiving $8,897 in excess of the amount awarded by WCC. After bringing these
errors to SIF’s attention, future recurring payments were corrected, and SIF
management advised us that overpayments would be considered for recovery on a
case-by-case basis, in consultation with its Board. Our test of 15 lump sum
payments disclosed that the payments agreed with WCC awards.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SIF
a. establish a supervisory review procedure that ensures that new claim
payments and adjustments to claim payments were in accordance with
the amounts awarded by WCC; and
b. initiate a review of all current recurring claim payments to determine if
the biweekly payment amount is accurate, correct any inaccuracies and,
in conjunction with the SIF Board, consider recovering any
overpayments identified, including the overpayments noted above.
Finding 2
SIF did not always pursue recovery of claim payments improperly disbursed
to deceased individuals.
Analysis
SIF did not always pursue recovery of claim payments improperly disbursed to
deceased individuals. SIF submitted a monthly social security number query to
the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) to match its records of injured
persons receiving (or scheduled to receive) claim payments with SSA’s death
records. SIF terminated future payments, and issued stop payment orders or
attempted to recover claim payments made to deceased individuals. During the
period from January 2014 to October 2016, these matches identified 43 deceased
individuals who were receiving payments from SIF.
Our test of 10 of these deceased individuals disclosed that payments totaling
$18,937 had been made after the individuals’ reported dates of death and, as of
December 2016, SIF could not document any attempts to recover payments
totaling $12,709 made to 6 of these deceased individuals. According to SIF
management, it was aware of these improper payments; however, follow-up
actions were not initiated in these 6 cases because of their low dollar amounts.
The improper payments made to the other 4 individuals had been recovered. In
7

--- Page 10 ---
all 10 cases, SIF ceased making the recurring payments to these individuals upon
receipt of the SSA match results.
In accordance with the Labor and Employment Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, SIF is not obligated to pay any claims after the death of the
beneficiary. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SIF investigate the results of the monthly death matches
and actively pursue recovery of funds in a timely manner (repeat).
Assessment Billings and Collections
Finding 3
SIF did not ensure that all assessments were recorded in its accounts
receivable system and did not conduct independent reviews of adjustments to
these accounts. Additionally, SIF did not properly separate certain accounts
receivable and cash receipts functions.
Analysis
SIF did not ensure that all assessments were recorded in its accounts receivable
system, did not perform independent reviews of adjustments to assessment
accounts, and did not properly separate the responsibilities for processing
assessment adjustments and handling the related collections. According to SIF’s
records, during fiscal year 2016, accounts receivable recorded for WCC award
assessments totaled $28.1 million and net adjustments reduced accounts
receivable by $533,000.
 SIF did not have a process to ensure that assessments were entered into its
accounts receivable system for all awards issued by the WCC. SIF personnel
recorded the WCC awards (including settlement agreements) in its accounts
receivable system; the system automatically calculated and recorded the
assessment amounts, which were based on 6.5 percent of the award amounts.
SIF generated billings to employers and insurance companies based on these
assessments. However, SIF did not compare the number of assessment
accounts created in the accounts receivable system with the number of awards
received from WCC to ensure that all assessments were recorded.
 Adjustments to the assessment accounts were not independently reviewed for
propriety and approved prior to their recordation in the accounts receivable
8

--- Page 11 ---
records, nor were the recorded adjustments subject to independent review.
Furthermore, two employees who processed these adjustments had access to
the related cash receipts prior to deposit. As a result, funds could be
misappropriated without being readily detected. The Comptroller of
Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires independent review and
approval of adjustments to accounts receivable records and separation of the
accounts receivable functions from the cash receipts functions. A similar
condition was commented upon in our four preceding reports dating back to
October 5, 2005.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SIF
a. establish an independent procedure to ensure assessments are recorded in
the accounts receivable records for all WCC awards received;
b. establish independent review and approval to ensure the propriety of
adjustments to be recorded and, on a test basis, ensure only approved
adjustments have been recorded in the accounts receivable records
(repeat); and
c. ensure that the assessment collection and accounts receivable functions
are properly separated (repeat).
We advised SIF on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 4
SIF did not document its efforts to collect delinquent assessment accounts
and did not refer all delinquent accounts to the State’s Central Collection
Unit.
Analysis
SIF did not document its efforts to collect delinquent assessment accounts and did
not refer all delinquent assessment accounts to the Department of Budget and
Management’s Central Collection Unit (CCU). As of January 13, 2017, there
were 3,786 outstanding assessment accounts totaling $6.5 million, of which 1,976
accounts, totaling $3.4 million, were older than 90 days. Similar conditions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report, and outstanding accounts have
significantly increased since that time. Specifically, as of December 31, 2013,
there were 1,891 assessment accounts totaling $3.1 million, of which 720
accounts totaling $1.3 million were older than 90 days.
9

--- Page 12 ---
 Although SIF advised us that it sent dunning notices for delinquent accounts
in accordance with CCU regulations, SIF did not maintain any documentation
of these notices, and SIF’s automated accounts receivable system did not
identify whether notices had been generated.
 According to SIF records, as of January 2017, SIF had not referred any
delinquent assessment accounts to CCU since October 2015, and only 126
delinquent accounts were referred to CCU from October 2013 through
October 2015. Our test of ten delinquent accounts, totaling $594,000, which
had been delinquent for periods between 174 and 1,170 days, disclosed that
none had been referred to CCU for collection assistance.
State regulations generally require that three written demands for payment be
made on accounts at 30-day intervals and, if no payments are received, the
accounts should be considered delinquent and immediately referred to CCU for
collection assistance. The failure to pursue outstanding debts may decrease the
likelihood of collecting the funds.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SIF
a. document its efforts to send written demands for payment at 30-day
intervals (repeat); and
b. refer all delinquent accounts to CCU for collection assistance, as required
(repeat).
Finding 5
SIF did not have adequate procedures and controls over collections
processed by remote deposit.
Analysis
SIF did not have adequate procedures and controls over its collections, which
were processed by remote deposit. Remote deposit is a process in which the
images of checks are scanned and electronically transmitted to the State’s bank
for deposit. According to State accounting records, SIF deposited approximately
$25.6 million during fiscal year 2016.
SIF did not ensure that its collections were adequately safeguarded and deposited.
Specifically, SIF did not restrictively endorse checks until after they had been
scanned into the remote deposit system. In addition, SIF did not ensure that all
checks had been deposited and subsequently destroyed. In this regard, the initial
record of collections received was not reconciled to the corresponding bank
10

--- Page 13 ---
records and to the record of checks destroyed after deposit. Such verifications
should be performed by employees independent of the cash receipts processing
functions. Finally, SIF retained deposited checks for approximately three months
before they were destroyed.
The Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services
by Maryland State Agencies requires that agencies ensure checks are restrictively
endorsed prior to scanning. The Policy further requires agencies to independently
reconcile both the checks deposited at the bank and the checks destroyed to the
incoming check receipt log, and to destroy scanned checks within 30 days of
deposit unless there is an exigent circumstance or the bank provides other
guidance.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SIF comply with the Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit
Services by Maryland State Agencies. Specifically, we recommend that SIF
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt,
b. independently reconcile checks deposited and checks subsequently
destroyed with the initial receipt log, and
c. destroy checks within 30 days of bank deposit.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF)
for the period beginning October 29, 2013 and ending November 13, 2016. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SIF’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included assessment collections and billings, claim
payments, and information systems security and control. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
SIF’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from the system
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from SIF’s automated accounts receivable and accounts
payable system for the purpose of testing assessment accounts receivable and
claim payment monitoring. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
12

--- Page 15 ---
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SIF’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SIF’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SIF that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
SIF’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SIF regarding the results of our
review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
Claim Payments
Finding 1
SIF did not ensure claim payments agreed with amounts awarded by WCC,
resulting in overpayments going undetected.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SIF
a. establish a supervisory review procedure that ensures that new claim
payments and adjustments to claim payments were in accordance with the
amounts awarded by WCC; and
b. initiate a review of all current recurring claim payments to determine if the
biweekly payment amount is accurate, correct any inaccuracies and, in
conjunction with the SIF Board, consider recovering any overpayments
identified, including the overpayments noted above.
SIF Response 1
a. SIF concurs. Beginning 6/5/2017, SIF Claims Department personnel
began reviewing a new report detailing all claimant disbursement
transactions for the previous week, except biweekly claimant
payments. A second report is reviewed that identifies changes in the
current Bi-Weekly payments compared to the last. This new process
confirms compliance with payment changes ordered by the WCC and
identifies any erroneous or unauthorized transactions.
b. SIF concurs and has initiated a review of all recurring payments and
is recording the results. Any identified discrepancies will be
forwarded to the Legal Department to confer with the SIF Board for
recovery procedures.
Finding 2
SIF did not always pursue recovery of claim payments improperly disbursed
to deceased individuals.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SIF investigate the results of the monthly death matches and
actively pursue recovery of funds in a timely manner (repeat).

--- Page 18 ---
SIF Response 2
SIF agrees with OLA’s recommendations. SIF has developed a procedure
(checklist) to immediately cease further claimant payments, recover any
outstanding payments that have not been presented for payment and
document all collection activity. SIF will actively pursue recovery of funds
disbursed to deceased beneficiaries in a timely manner including legal action
and referral of the account to CCU, if necessary.
Assessment Billings and Collections
Finding 3
SIF did not ensure that all assessments were recorded in its accounts
receivable system and did not conduct independent reviews of adjustments to
these accounts. Additionally, SIF did not properly separate certain accounts
receivable and cash receipts functions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SIF
a. establish an independent procedure to ensure assessments are recorded in the
accounts receivable records for all WCC awards received;
b. establish independent review and approval to ensure the propriety of
adjustments to be recorded and, on a test basis, ensure only approved
adjustments have been recorded in the accounts receivable records (repeat);
and
c. ensure that the assessment collection and accounts receivable functions are
properly separated (repeat).
We advised SIF on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
SIF Response 3
a. SIF concurs. SIF will establish a procedure to review the assessment
awards on a daily basis. We will determine that the total number of
assessment awards on the WCC web-site equal the total number of
assessment awards in the SIF Accounts Receivable system. Any
discrepancies will be investigated and resolved on a weekly basis.
b. SIF concurs. SIF will be following the provided recommendation by
modifying our applications (SIF2QB) to automate the adjustment
process with the proper separation of duties.

--- Page 19 ---
c. SIF concurs. SIF will correct the permission oversight.
Finding 4
SIF did not document its efforts to collect delinquent assessment accounts
and did not refer all delinquent accounts to the State’s Central Collection
Unit.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SIF
a. document its efforts to send written demands for payment at 30-day intervals
(repeat); and
b. refer all delinquent accounts to CCU for collection assistance, as required
(repeat).
SIF Response 4
a. SIF agrees. SIF plans to modify their Accounts Receivable
application to record invoice reprint counts to enable us to know
when to refer the invoices to CCU.
b. SIF agrees. SIF has a formal Delinquent Accounts Receivable
Collection plan in place. SIF will comply with OLA’s
Recommendation to pursue accounts for collection in accordance with
State regulations.
Finding 5
SIF did not have adequate procedures and controls over collections
processed by remote deposit.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SIF comply with the Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit
Services by Maryland State Agencies. Specifically, we recommend that SIF
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt,
b. independently reconcile checks deposited and checks subsequently destroyed
with the initial receipt log, and
c. destroy checks within 30 days of bank deposit.
SIF Response 5
SIF concurs. We have initiated a transfer of assessment collections to a bank
at a downtown Baltimore Post Office Lockbox which will be accomplished
soon.

--- Page 20 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Susan C. Skinner
Staff Auditor