Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Central Payroll Bureau
Date: 02/07/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742c2
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:44:12.111820
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Central Payroll Bureau
September 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Central Payroll Bureau (CPB), a unit of the Comptroller of Maryland, is
primarily responsible for processing and issuing payroll checks and direct deposit
advices on a bi-weekly basis for the regular and contractual State payrolls, and the
payrolls of the Maryland Department of Transportation and the University System
of Maryland. According to CPB’s records, the payrolls collectively totaled
approximately $8 billion during fiscal year 2015. In addition, CPB is responsible
for processing payroll deductions, employee withholding statements for certain
employees, and other payroll reports for State government. According to the
State’s accounting records, CPB’s operating expenditures totaled approximately
$2.6 million during fiscal year 2015.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of CPB’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Certain
less significant findings were communicated to CPB that did not warrant mention
in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to CPB. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland –
Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) for the period beginning October 18, 2011 and
ending March 17, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CPB’s financial
3

--- Page 6 ---
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included CPB’s management of the State payroll system,
non-budgeted funds maintained for payroll deductions, and critical information
technology systems.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to CPB by the
Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These support services
(such as processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller. Our audit also did not include certain support services provided to
CPB by the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology Division related
to the procurement and monitoring of information technology equipment and
services. These support services are included in the scope of our audits of the
Information Technology Division.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
CPB’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
CPB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
4

--- Page 7 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Charnelle S. Brown
Staff Auditor