Title: Office of the State Treasurer
Date: 07/15/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d724560674706
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:53:20.024714
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the State Treasurer
September 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund (IWIF)
* Finding 1 – STO has still not resolved longstanding contract issues 7
involving oversight of claims processing services for workers’
compensation claims provided by IWIF. For example, STO had not
implemented certain recommendations made by the Maryland
Insurance Administration that were intended to safeguard the State’s
financial interests.
Unpresented Check Fund
Finding 2 – STO did not transfer excess funds totaling $3.9 million from 9
the State’s Unpresented Check Fund to the General Fund at the end of
fiscal year 2015, as required by State law.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Sensitive personally identifiable information was not 10
properly protected by STO.
Finding 4 – STO did not have a comprehensive information technology 11
disaster recovery plan for recovering its computer operations from
disaster scenarios.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the State Treasurer (STO) is responsible for the receipt,
disbursement, safekeeping, and investment of the funds of the State Treasury. It
is also responsible for reconciling the related bank accounts, procuring banking
and financial services for State agencies, and maintaining an insurance program
for State property and personnel. STO also coordinates the State’s general
obligation debt functions for the Board of Public Works. According to the State’s
records, STO’s operating expenditures for fiscal year 2015 totaled approximately
$38.9 million.
According to State law, State Treasury investments are limited to secured bank
accounts, full faith and credit obligations of the federal government, obligations
of certain federal agencies or instrumentalities, repurchase agreements
collateralized by those securities, certain money market mutual funds, and limited
amounts of commercial paper. As of June 30, 2015, the State Treasury
investment portfolio, based on market value, totaled approximately $6.3 billion.
4

--- Page 7 ---
State Treasury Investment Portfolio
as of June 30, 2015 (in thousands)
Other Federal
Agencies
Repurchase Fannie Mae
$352,608
Agreements $2,119,177
5%
$907,369 34%
Federal Farm 14%
Credit Bank
$230,366
4%
Federal Home
Loan Bank
$816,365
13%
Freddie Mac
$1,906,358
30%
Source: STO’s records (unaudited)
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 15, 2014. We determined that STO
satisfactorily addressed two of these findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report and appear as one finding.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund
Background
Under the terms of a 1990 contract between the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund
(IWIF) and the Board of Public Works (BPW), IWIF provides claims processing
services for workers’ compensation claims filed by State employees. Specifically,
IWIF is responsible for investigating, defending, and paying claims to State
employees for damages sustained in the course of employment, including injury
or death. The State is self-insured for such claims. The contract provides that the
Office of the State Treasurer (STO) is responsible for administering the contract,
on behalf of BPW. In addition, the contract includes provisions that the State
shall receive interest earned on amounts paid to IWIF and that the State may fund
future costs of incurred losses to mitigate the State’s unfunded liability.
As required by the contract, at the start of each fiscal year, STO sends a payment
to IWIF for State workers’ compensation claims costs for the upcoming year. The
payment includes funds for anticipated workers’ compensation claims and for
IWIF’s administrative costs for providing claims processing services to the State.
STO calculates the anticipated claims using the actual claims paid in a prior fiscal
year, adjusted for anticipated costs (such as settlements and inflation in certain
medical costs), as reported by IWIF. The administrative costs were calculated
using IWIF’s administrative costs for serving the State, which were also reported
by IWIF. Both the anticipated claims and administrative costs are reviewed and
approved by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) prior to STO
paying IWIF.
Chapter 570, Laws of Maryland, 2012, allowed IWIF to convert from an
independent State entity to a fully competitive, private, non-stock, nonprofit
insurer. In accordance with the provisions of the law, on October 1, 2013, IWIF
became Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company (CEIC). However, the law
allowed IWIF to continue to exist as an instrumentality of the State, its business
limited to serving as the third-party administrator for the State’s self-insured
workers’ compensation program. The law allowed IWIF employees, at the time
of conversion, to remain State employees under IWIF or become employees of
CEIC. IWIF is prohibited from hiring new employees and the law provides that
IWIF shall remain in existence until it no longer has any employees. As of April
21, 2016, IWIF continued to exist.
According to STO’s records, during the period from June 2013 through July 2015,
payments to IWIF totaled $261.8 million, including $189.1 million for State
6

--- Page 9 ---
workers’ compensation claim costs, $40.6 million for administrative costs, and
$32.1 million for adjustments and settlements. These costs are recovered through
State agency assessments prepared by STO.
Finding 1
STO has still not resolved longstanding contract issues involving oversight of
claims processing services for workers’ compensation claims provided by
IWIF. For example, STO had not implemented certain recommendations
made by the Maryland Insurance Administration that were intended to
safeguard the State’s financial interests.
Analysis
STO has still not resolved longstanding contract issues involving oversight of
claims processing services for workers’ compensation claims provided by IWIF.
In our three preceding audit reports, we commented that STO did not ensure the
propriety of amounts paid to IWIF and had never competitively bid the contract
for the services provided by IWIF for more than 25 years. While STO engaged
the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) to perform a limited scope
examination of IWIF in an effort to address our prior audit findings, as of March
2016, STO had not implemented certain recommendations made by MIA in
January 2011 that were intended to safeguard the State’s interest related to IWIF
activity. In addition, STO had not further analyzed its existing contract with
IWIF and the benefits to the State in accordance with guidance provided in July
2014 by the Presiding Officers of the Maryland General Assembly.
The limited scope examination performed by MIA focused on the completeness
and accuracy of IWIF’s fiscal year 2010 expenses, including claims and
administrative costs charged to the State, and the verification that the allocated
costs were fair and reasonable and in compliance with the State’s contract with
IWIF. In its report dated, January 19, 2011, MIA made the following
recommendations regarding STO’s relationship with IWIF, which STO has not
taken substantial action to address.
 STO should modify its contract with IWIF to safeguard the State’s financial
interest. This would include identifying the actual services to be provided by
IWIF and the associated terms governing those services, and modifying the
contract periodically for future changes to services and terms. Any
modification should also include the identification of specific information that
STO feels is necessary to monitor IWIF’s administrative activity and to
analyze the cause, frequency, and severity of losses. STO should also
consider establishing procedures to ensure that State agencies actually access
and use this information to minimize workers’ compensation loss experience.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finally, the contract should specify the amount for catastrophic loss protection
so STO can determine if the amount is reasonable.
 STO should consider using IWIF’s independent auditor to perform agreed-
upon procedures reviews to ensure the amounts charged STO for
administrative fees, claims, and claims-related charges are accurate and
supported.
 STO should establish a not-to-exceed amount provision for the IWIF
administrative fees to ensure the fees charged the State remain fair and
reasonable.
Although both STO and IWIF agreed with MIA’s recommendations, STO has not
amended the contract or taken substantial action to implement these
recommendations. Furthermore, no procedures have been implemented to assess
the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF since MIA’s examination of fiscal year
2010 expenses and claims. With regard to the IWIF administrative fees, STO and
DBM negotiated a maximum rate of 23 percent of total claims for fiscal years
2014 through 2016, but no rate was negotiated for any subsequent years.
According to IWIF records provided to STO, this maximum provision reduced
IWIF administrative fees by approximately $1.5 million each of these three years.
Based on STO’s request for guidance on these matters, the Presiding Officers of
the Maryland General Assembly stated in a letter issued in July 2014 their belief
that it was in the State’s best interest for IWIF to continue providing workers’
compensation claim services to the State and for STO to renegotiate the existing
contract while allowing sufficient time to analyze further its coverage terms and
benefits to the State.
Specifically, the Presiding Officers urged STO to fill two new employee positions
to analyze the existing contract, renegotiate the terms in a new IWIF contract, and
oversee and manage the new contract. Accordingly, STO requested and received
approval from the Board of Public Works on November 12, 2014 for two
additional positions to provide fiscal oversight and ongoing workers’
compensation contract management, including executing a new contract with
IWIF as recommended by MIA. The two positions were to be funded with a
fiscal year 2015 deficiency appropriation and additional funding in STO’s fiscal
year 2016 budget. During the 2015 legislative session, however, STO’s fiscal
year 2016 budget appropriation was reduced by $100,000. We were advised by
STO management that, as a result of this reduction, the positions were never filled
and are not planned to be filled until at least fiscal year 2017, subject to the
availability of funds.
8

--- Page 11 ---
The Presiding Officers also urged STO to analyze the possibility that the State
could obtain better coverage terms through a different process. However, no
analysis has been conducted. The contract to administer workers’ compensation
claims filed against the State has never been subject to a competitive bid process
and IWIF has been providing these services for more than 25 years. Competitive
bids are generally not required for contracts between units of State government;
however, considering that the payments to IWIF are significant and the same
services are available from other insurance companies, a competitive bid process
should be used to determine if the State is receiving the best value for services
rendered by IWIF. We were advised by STO management that once a new
contract has been renegotiated, STO would analyze the possibility that the State
could obtain better coverage terms through a different process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that STO
a. implement MIA’s recommendations to safeguard the State’s interest with
respect to the workers’ compensation claims processing services provided
by IWIF, including reviewing payments to IWIF for propriety, at least on
a test basis (repeat);
b. take the necessary actions to ensure that workers’ compensation claims
processing services are obtained in a manner most beneficial to the State
(repeat); and
c. take any other necessary actions in accordance with the guidance
provided by the Presiding Officers of the Maryland General Assembly.
Unpresented Check Fund
Finding 2
STO did not transfer excess funds totaling $3.9 million from the State’s
Unpresented Check Fund to the General Fund at the end of fiscal year 2015,
as required by State law.
Analysis
STO did not transfer excess funds totaling $3.9 million from the State’s
Unpresented Check Fund (UCF) to the General Fund at the end of fiscal year
2015, as required by State law. The UCF was established by State law to account
for State-issued checks that have not been presented for payment within two years
from the issuance date. At the end of each fiscal year, State law requires STO to
estimate the amount needed in the UCF to honor the unpresented checks and to
transfer the remaining UCF balance to the State’s General Fund.
9

--- Page 12 ---
At the end of fiscal year 2015, STO transferred $6 million to the General Fund,
leaving a UCF balance of $4.9 million—an amount which was excessive,
according to its policy. Specifically, STO’s policy was to retain the greater of $1
million or three times the amount by which total disbursements exceeded deposits
into the UCF during the year. During fiscal year 2015, disbursements from the
UCF totaled $580,000 and deposits into the UCF totaled $6.8 million.
Accordingly, STO should have retained a balance of $1 million in the UCF.
STO management acknowledged that the entire $3.9 million could have been
transferred, but funds were being held for possible payouts. For example, STO
retained $2.9 million in anticipation of a single check being presented for
payment. This check, dated January 2008, was transferred to the UCF during the
June 30, 2011 budgetary closeout, and we were advised by management at the
State agency that issued the check that the payee was unlikely to present the check
for payment because of tax and legal issues.
We were subsequently advised that STO transferred the excess balance in the
UCF to the General Fund during the fiscal year 2016 budgetary closeout.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, STO comply with State law and its policy
regarding the transfer of excess funds.
Information Systems Security and Controls
Background
STO maintained an internal computer network with servers that supported file
sharing, email, web based applications, Internet connectivity and were also used
for multiple services including processing deposit transactions and invoices. The
internal network included a firewall, with an integrated intrusion detection
prevention system module.
Finding 3
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was not properly protected
by STO.
Analysis
Sensitive PII was not properly protected by STO. Specifically, we identified two
files residing on a critical server which contained 148,113 and 114,533 unique
social security numbers in clear text, with related full names. In addition, we
10

--- Page 13 ---
determined that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls.
This sensitive PII, which is commonly associated with identity theft, should be
protected by appropriate information system security controls. The State of
Maryland’s Information Security Policy states that agencies should protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that STO properly protect the aforementioned personally
identifiable information by the use of encryption or other substantial
mitigating controls.
Finding 4
STO did not have a comprehensive information technology disaster recovery
plan for recovering its computer operations from disaster scenarios.
Analysis
STO did not have a comprehensive information technology disaster recovery plan
(DRP) for recovering its computer operations from disaster scenarios (for
example, a fire or flood). We noted that the DRP used by STO only addressed an
alternate recovery site. The State of Maryland Information Technology (IT)
Disaster Recovery Guidelines provide information on the minimum required
elements needed for a complete information systems’ DRP. STO’s DRP did not
address most of these minimum requirements. For example, the DRP did not
address restoration of network connectivity or contain listings of hardware and
software components and had not been tested.
Without a comprehensive and tested DRP, a disaster could cause significant
delays (for an undetermined period of time) in restoring STO’s information
systems operations above and beyond the expected delays that would exist in a
planned recovery scenario.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that STO create a comprehensive DRP that covers all of its
information technology operations and is in compliance with the
requirements of the State’s IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the State Treasurer
(STO) for the period beginning August 30, 2012 and ending August 24, 2015.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine STO’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included monitoring State agency bank accounts,
reconciling the State’s bank accounts, monitoring payments to the Injured
Workers’ Insurance Fund, and monitoring the State’s securities and investments.
The audit also included information systems security and controls, the State
Insurance Program, and the Cash Management Improvement Act. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
STO’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from STO’s automated financial record keeping system for
the purpose of testing banking and insurance transactions. We performed various
12

--- Page 15 ---
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
STO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect STO’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to STO that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
STO’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise STO regarding the results of our
review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX
MARYLAND STATE TREASURER
Nancy K. Kopp
September 8, 2016
Mr. Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
Attached is the State Treasurer’s Office (STO) response to the draft audit report for the
period beginning August 30, 2012 and ending August 24, 2015, which I am pleased to forward
for your review.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the members of the Office of Legislative
Audits who spent a great deal of time and effort preparing the audit. They were an impressive,
professional team and we appreciate their attention and concern. Needless to say, I would also
like to thank the outstanding team at the STO who have accomplished so much with great
dedication and determination, despite limited resources.
Sincerely,
Nancy K. Kopp
State Treasurer
Goldstein Treasury Building • 80 Calvert Street • Annapolis, Maryland 21401
410-260-7160 • 800-322-4296 • FAX: 410-260-6056 • TTY: 800-735-2258 • nkopp@treasurer.state.md.us

--- Page 17 ---
State Treasurer’s Office Response to
Findings and Recommendations
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund
Finding 1
STO has still not resolved longstanding contract issues involving oversight of claims
processing services for workers’ compensation claims provided by IWIF. For example,
STO had not implemented certain recommendations made by the Maryland Insurance
Administration that were intended to safeguard the State’s financial interests.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that STO
a. implement MIA’s recommendations to safeguard the State’s interest with respect to the
workers’ compensation claims processing services provided by IWIF, including
reviewing payments to IWIF for propriety, at least on a test basis (repeat);
b. take the necessary actions to ensure that workers’ compensation claims processing
services are obtained in a manner most beneficial to the State (repeat); and
c. take any other necessary actions in accordance with the guidance provided by the
Presiding Officers of the Maryland General Assembly.
Agency Response: Office Concurs
The current agreement between the Board of Public Works and IWIF was renegotiated in 1990.
Under that Agreement, IWIF serves as third-party administrator for claims brought against the
State under Maryland’s Workers’ Compensation Law.
The Agreement describes three primary responsibilities which involve the Office. The first
requires that the Treasurer decide all matters relating to contract administration and performance.
The second requires IWIF to submit an annual invoice to the Treasurer reflecting the amount of
actual losses incurred by the State, as well as an invoice reflecting the balance of the State’s
account. The third requires IWIF to compile whatever reports the Treasurer determines to be
necessary to:
(a) monitor the performance of the claims administration activity;
(b) assess the financial liability of the program to the State;
(c) project loss experience for the purposes of establishing budgets and agency premiums;
and
(d) analyze the causes of losses.
A review of the Board of Public Works files, including the January 31, 1991 agenda item and
transcript, does not reveal any other information defining the requirements of this provision, with
the sole exception of a general comment made by Treasurer Maurer to the effect that the Office’s
Insurance Division was working closely with IWIF. Additionally, there is no record to reflect
2 | Page

--- Page 18 ---
whether these performance reports have ever been deemed “necessary” or have been requested
or produced.
Since the inception of the Agreement in 1990 through the State’s Fiscal Year 2016 budget, the
Office has served as a conduit to remit payments to IWIF. Since 1990, the Office has received
an annual report, via the Department of Budget and Management, that identifies the amount the
Governor, through DBM, has proposed and the General Assembly has appropriated, for
Workers’ Compensation coverage, including any appropriation for the unfunded liability. The
Office prepares a disbursement transmittal, wires this amount to IWIF, and subsequently collects
from each agency its share of the appropriated amounts. Historically, any changes to the amount
to be remitted to IWIF has been determined by DBM and forwarded to the Treasurer’s Office for
adjustment.
While the Office has not routinely requested performance reports from IWIF, a report on the
State Assessment for Workers’ Compensation had been prepared by the Department of Budget
and Management, and submitted to the Office. The report reviewed, analyzed, and commented
on the amounts the State paid and the administrative costs charged by IWIF. In addition, as a
State agency, IWIF was subject to periodic Legislative Audits until 2002, and the Office had
access to those reports. IWIF is now subject to audit by the Maryland Insurance Administration.
The Office monitors these MIA audits and notes that, to date, there have been no findings
questioning the propriety of IWIF premiums or administrative charges.
The question of whether IWIF should continue to provide Worker’s Compensation Coverage for
the State is a significant public policy decision, and must be made in a way that provides a clear
understanding and safeguards the State’s interest. Chapter 570 of 2012 allowed IWIF to convert
to Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company, a private, nonprofit and non-stock insurance
company. However, the law further provided that IWIF may (not shall) continue to serve as the
State’s third party administrator. Clarification seemed appropriate.
The Office received guidance from the General Assembly in July 2014. The General Assembly
advised they thought it in the State’s best interest to remain with the current vendor and
emphasized renegotiating the contract in order to review coverage and benefits to the State. It
was recognized, also, that the Office would need to identify and hire individuals in order to
examine and renegotiate the contract with IWIF as well as to analyze the possibility that the State
could obtain better coverage through a different process.
As noted by the Auditor, the Office did receive approval during the 2015 Session for two
positions to handle the IWIF functions as well as funding for part of Fiscal Year 2015 and Fiscal
Year 2016. However, as the Auditor further notes during the 2015 legislative session, the
Office’s budget appropriation was reduced by $100,000 for Fiscal Year 2016. This reduction
limited funds for the new positions beyond Fiscal Year 2015; therefore, the Office could not fill
the positions before Fiscal Year 2017.
The two new positions include a Program Manager who will have an expertise in Workers’
Compensation and contractual negotiation, and an Accountant with a background in Workers’
Compensation billing and claims payment reviews. The new contract will incorporate; 1) a new
3 | Page

--- Page 19 ---
payment structure, including not-to exceed administrative fees; 2) recommendations made by
MIA, including but not limited to independent audits of IWIF, review of claims and claims-
related charges; and 3) other contractual requirements the Treasurer deems necessary to
safeguard the State’s interest in its relationship with IWIF.
Finally, once an updated contract has been executed with IWIF, the Office will begin researching
and analyzing alternative methods of obtaining the State’s Workers’ Compensation Coverage in
a manner the Treasurer deems is most beneficial to the State.
Unpresented Check Fund
Finding 2
STO did not transfer excess funds totaling $3.9 million from the State’s Unpresented Check
Fund to the General Fund at the end of fiscal year 2015, as required by State law.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, STO comply with State law and its policy regarding the
transfer of excess funds.
Agency Response: Office concurs
The Office concurs with the Auditor’s recommendation, but would like to present a more
detailed account of our decision to maintain additional funds in the Unpresented Check Fund.
Annually in June, the Office prepares for year-end closing and begins the process of determining
a minimum balance to retain in the Unpresented Check Fund. During this process, the Office
consults with the Comptroller’s Office about outstanding checks, especially large-dollar
outstanding checks issued from the Income Tax Refund Account. The Office spoke with the
Manager of Taxpayer Accounting Services in June 2015 and was advised that they had been in
contact with the payee of a quite large check and expected the outstanding check to be reissued
after a specific date that related to a Statute of Limitations issue. As a result of these
conversations the Office decided to maintain an additional $2.9 million in the fund to cover this
expected reissue.
Subsequently, the Revenue Administration Division informed the Auditor that the check was, in
fact, unlikely to be requested to be reissued by the payee. The Office considered this new
information, then confirmed by the Revenue Administration Division, when determining the
amount of excess funds to be transferred back to the General Fund in accordance with office
policy and State law. The Office reverted to the State’s General Fund from the Unpresented
Check Fund approximately $12 million on July 21, 2016, including the $2.9 million check
identified by the Auditors, while retaining a balance of $1 million.
4 | Page

--- Page 20 ---
Information Systems Security and Controls
Finding 3
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was not properly protected by STO.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that STO properly protect the aforementioned personally identifiable
information by the use of encryption or other substantial mitigating controls.
Agency Response: Office concurs
The Office concurs with the Auditor’s recommendation, but would like to offer details on
processes in place to protect PII in transit and processes in place to assist in protecting PII at rest
on the Office’s systems.
1. The Office employs encryption on all files being transmitted between the Office’s
computer system and State Agencies over the SWGI network. When connecting to
external partners (Banks), the Office implements the use of secure VPN tunnels that are
established only when the transmission needs to happen and the file is encrypted during
the transmission over this secure VPN connection. After the transmission is complete the
VPN tunnel is terminated. Thus, information in transmission is encrypted and protected.
2. The Office has begun the process of replacing the systems identified with multiple server
based systems that will employ encryption for data at rest. For example, Check Printing is
already being moved off of the current system to a new system that has already been put
into place and will incorporate encryption for data at rest.
3. The Office maintains strict control over user accesses and reviews system changes and
user access logs daily to ensure that the system has not been breached or users have
gained unauthorized access. The Office also has specific procedures in place to grant
access to users and remove accesses due to change in job roles and/or termination.
4. Connections to the current system can only be established from trusted sources.
5. Access to files is limited to viewing individual records for business purposes only.
System level access to the database files is extremely limited and for admin and file
transmission only.
6. The Office reviews Firewall logs, Intrusion Prevention System (IPS), and Intrusion
Detection System (IDS) for attempts to make connections to the current system from an
external source.
7. The Office will be implementing a Data Loss Prevention (DLP) in accordance with the
Office’s IT Master Plan.
5 | Page

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 4
STO did not have a comprehensive information technology disaster recovery plan for
recovering its computer operations from disaster scenarios.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that STO create a comprehensive DRP that covers all of its information
technology operations and is in compliance with the requirements of the State’s IT Disaster
Recovery Guidelines.
Agency Response: Office concurs
At the time of the OLA Audit, the Office had already procured the necessary hardware and
executed a Memorandum of Agreement with Maryland State Police (MSP) for Disaster
Recovery (DR). The Office is in the process of deploying the already procured Disaster
Recovery software that will allow for near real-time fail-over to the MSP site.
The Office’s IT Director has been actively working with Division representatives to draft the
Continuity of Operations (COOP) DR Plan and associated contingencies for a variety of
situations. Once the DR Plan is approved by Executive Management, the plan will be accessible
in multiple secure locations in electronic and paper formats to the Office’s Executive Staff and
Directors. We anticipate final implementation of the Office’s DR Plan, which will comply with
the requirements of the State’s IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines, prior to the end of Fiscal Year
2017.
6 | Page

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Michell Min
Richard Tran
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors
Robert H. Dean
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditors