Title: Office of the Public Defender
Date: 02/10/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d72456067458a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:22:31.283208
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Public Defender
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OmcE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
VictoriaL. Gruber ThomasJ. BarnickelIII,CPA
LegislativeAuditor
ExecutiveDirector
January 11,2018
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Office ofthe Public Defender
(OPD) for the period beginning July 1, 2013 and ending September 22, 2016.
OPD is primarily responsible for providing legal services to eligible indigent
individuals charged with violating State, county, or municipal laws involving
possible incarceration or a fine greater than $500.
Our audit disclosed that OPD did not ensure that all applications for legal
representation were adequately supported and maintained on file, and that client
eligibility determinations were subject to supervisory review as required.
Consequently, there was a lack ofassurance that certain clients were eligible to
receive services. A law change effective October 1,2017 transferred OPD’s
responsibility for determining eligibility for its services in most cases to the
State’s Judiciary. Nevertheless, OPD is still required to determine eligibility for
some cases, primarily those pertaining tojuveniles (11,000 cases opened in
calendar year 2015). Our audit also disclosed that OPD did not ensure that
administrative fees were assessed to all applicable clients.
We also noted that OPD had no formal process for updating attorney caseload
standards, which have not been revised since 2005. These caseload standards
help OPD evaluate services rendered to clients and assess the caseload allocation
among its attorneys. While average attorney caseloads have decreased in all three
courts Circuit, District, and Juvenile the average attorney caseloads continue
— —
to exceed OPD’s existing standards for both Circuit and District Courts.
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline $77-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
OPD’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis audit by
OPD.
Respectfully submitted,
i
Thomas Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Law Change 4
Financial Operations and Budgets (Performance Audit Follow-up) 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Client Eligibility
* Finding 1 – The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) did not ensure 7
that applications for legal representation were always adequately
supported and maintained on file, and that eligibility determinations
were subject to supervisory review as required.
Client Billings
* Finding 2 – OPD did not ensure that administrative fees were assessed 8
to all applicable clients.
Attorney Caseload Standards (Performance Audit Follow-up)
* Finding 3 – OPD has not implemented a formal process to determine 9
whether existing attorney caseload standards should be revised.
Average attorney caseloads for Circuit and District Courts continue
to exceed current standards.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) is primarily responsible for providing
legal services to eligible indigent individuals charged with violating State, county,
or municipal laws involving possible incarceration or a fine greater than $500.
Legal representation is provided in criminal and juvenile proceedings, post-
conviction proceedings, probation and parole revocations, involuntary
commitments to public or private institutions, and termination of parental rights
proceedings. OPD provides these services through a central headquarters and 48
offices located in 12 districts throughout the State.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2016, OPD had 913
authorized positions and operating expenditures totaled approximately $104.2
million, primarily for salaries, wages, and fringe benefits. According to its annual
reports for fiscal years 2017 and 2016, OPD opened approximately 172,000 and
194,000 new cases during calendar years 2016 and 2015, respectively.
OPD has a 13-member Board of Trustees with 11 members appointed by the
Governor with Senate advice and consent, one selected by the Senate President,
and one selected by the Speaker of the House. The Board reviews the
administration of OPD, advises the Public Defender on its operations, coordinates
the activities of district advisory boards, and consults on certain matters such as
fees.
Law Change
Chapter 606, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective October 1, 2017, transferred
OPD’s responsibility for determining eligibility for its services in most cases to
the State’s Judiciary. Specifically, an individual charged with a crime that carries
a penalty of incarceration will now apply to a district court commissioner for
OPD’s services, rather than directly to OPD. OPD will retain the responsibility
for determining eligibility for juvenile proceedings, post-conviction proceedings,
probation and parole revocations, involuntary commitments to public or private
institutions, and termination of parental rights proceedings. The law leaves in
place long-standing criteria for determining indigency. Applying this law change
to the aforementioned 194,000 new cases opened in calendar year 2015 would
have resulted in the Judiciary making the eligibility determinations for
approximately 183,000 of the 194,000 cases, the difference of 11,000 cases being
juvenile proceedings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Operations and Budgets (Performance Audit Follow-
up)
In a performance audit report dated November 19, 2009, we addressed certain
aspects of OPD’s operations, including OPD’s regular need for deficiency
appropriations. In that report, we noted that OPD routinely required deficiency
appropriations to fund current and prior year operating expenditures. The report
further noted that, in spite of receiving these additional appropriations, OPD
regularly carried unfunded expenses into the following fiscal year. Unrecorded
expenses that must be reported to the Comptroller of Maryland as part of an
agency’s year-end budgetary closing process essentially represent amounts owed
to vendors at the end of the fiscal year for which there is no available funding and
must be paid from the subsequent year’s appropriation.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding fiscal compliance
audit report on OPD, and our current audit disclosed no change in these
conditions. For example, as noted in Table 1 on the following page, OPD
received a deficiency appropriation totaling $6.1 million in fiscal year 2016. Of
this total, approximately $4.9 million was necessary to cover fiscal year 2015
case-related expenses, such as costs for panel attorneys, as well as accrued leave
payouts that exceeded OPD’s appropriation for that year. The remaining amount
was necessary to help fund an expected fiscal year 2016 deficit. Furthermore,
OPD reported to the Comptroller additional unrecorded expenditures totaling
approximately $5.2 million at the end of fiscal year 2016.
The extent of case-related expenses, and in particular the cost of panel attorneys,
which may not be fully known in advance, have contributed significantly to these
conditions. OPD retains private attorneys, referred to as panel attorneys, to
handle cases when a conflict of interest may exist, such as when a codefendant is
being represented by an assistant public defender. According to OPD’s records,
panel attorney expenditures totaled approximately $9 million in fiscal year 2016
while the related appropriation totaled only $7 million. In addition, panel attorney
costs represented approximately $3.4 million of the unrecorded expenditures for
fiscal year 2016.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Table 1
OPD Appropriations and Expenditures
Fiscal Years 2014 – 2016
Unrecorded
Fiscal Deficiency Expenditures Carried
Appropriation
Year Appropriations Over to Subsequent
Year
2014 $95,320,609 $6,211,054 $1,867,341
2015 $97,463,177 $2,467,341 $4,894,813
2016 $98,015,615 $6,055,519 $5,216,698
Source: Department of Budget and Management’s State Budget Books, Fiscal Digests, and the Joint
Ch i ’
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 21, 2014, which included two findings
related to our November 2009 performance audit report. We determined that
OPD satisfactorily addressed one of these five findings, three findings are
repeated in this report, and one audit finding (financial operations and budgets) is
addressed in the preceding informational item.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Client Eligibility
Finding 1
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) did not ensure that applications for
legal representation were always adequately supported and maintained on
file, and that eligibility determinations were subject to supervisory review as
required.
Analysis
OPD did not ensure that all applications for legal representation were adequately
supported and maintained on file, and that eligibility determinations were subject
to supervisory review as required. Consequently, OPD lacked assurance that all
clients were eligible to receive the services provided. We tested 24 cases opened
by two large district offices during the period from January 2015 through July
2016.
 Application decisions were not adequately supported for 9 of the 24 cases
tested. For 6 of the 9 cases (5 from one office and 1 from the other), OPD did
not verify that income claimed on the applications was supported by reports
from the State’s Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) as
required by State regulations and OPD’s Intake Manual. Income information
is necessary to help determine whether the client has the ability to pay for
legal representation. In addition, for 3 of the 9 cases tested (2 from one office
and 1 from the other); OPD could not provide the related applications.
 Based on criteria stipulated in OPD’s Intake Manual, 11 of the 24 cases tested
should have been reviewed by supervisory personnel to ensure the propriety
of client eligibility determinations made by district office staff. However, our
test disclosed that 8 of the 11 cases were not reviewed by supervisory
personnel. The Intake Manual requires supervisory review of case files,
including supporting documentation that meet certain selection criteria,
generally resulting in a review of 20 percent of cases statewide. In addition,
OPD did not consistently use output reports from its automated case
management system as the source for identifying cases requiring supervisory
review. The case management system should be used in the selection process
to help ensure that all such cases are in fact identified for review.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Similar conditions were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Individuals requesting OPD services were required to meet with an intake worker
at an OPD district office and provide certain documentation to support their
financial eligibility, in accordance with State law. According to its annual report
for fiscal year 2017, OPD opened approximately 172,000 new cases during
calendar year 2016.
Effective October 1, 2017, State law transferred OPD’s responsibility for
determining eligibility for services in certain cases to the State’s Judiciary, as
further explained on page 4 of this report. OPD will retain responsibility for
determining client eligibility for juvenile cases, which takes parental income into
account when appropriate, and other cases that do not involve a crime that carries
a penalty of incarceration.
Recommendation 1
We recommend OPD ensure that
a. applicant reported income supporting eligibility determinations is
verified to reports from DLLR in accordance with State regulations, and
that applications are maintained on file (repeat);
b. eligibility determinations are reviewed and approved by supervisory
personnel as required by OPD’s Intake Manual, and that such reviews
are documented (repeat); and
c. the automated case management system is used as the source for
identifying eligibility determinations requiring supervisory review.
Client Billings
Finding 2
OPD did not ensure that administrative fees were assessed to all applicable
clients.
Analysis
OPD did not ensure that administrative fees were properly assessed to all
applicable clients. State regulations require applicants seeking representation,
except for unaccompanied juveniles and clients confined to a mental institution, to
enter into an agreement committing them to pay an administrative fee of $50 for
adults and $25 for juveniles.
We compared the number of new cases recorded in OPD’s case management
system in calendar year 2015, reduced for cases that are categorically exempt
8

--- Page 11 ---
from administrative fees by regulation (150,302), with the related accounts
receivable records of cases charged administrative fees (119,336). This
comparison disclosed 30,966 cases for which administrative fees were not
assessed but may not have been required depending on the circumstances of the
individual cases.
Our test of 15 of these 30,966 cases disclosed 8 cases that were not properly
assessed fees totaling $400. OPD acknowledged that the fees should have been
charged in all 8 of these cases. For the remaining 7 cases tested, administrative
fees were appropriately not assessed for various reasons. For example, the case
may have been a continuation of an existing case. OPD claimed that, on a test
basis, it periodically reviewed cases for which administrative fees were not
assessed to determine if a fee should have been assessed; however, these reviews
were not documented.
According to OPD’s records for fiscal year 2016, administrative fee billings
totaled $5.8 million and collections totaled $2 million; the accounts receivable
balance totaled $22.3 million as of June 30, 2016. A similar condition was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPD
a. assess administrative fees to applicants as required by State regulations
(repeat), and
b. document its periodic review of cases not assessed a fee.
Attorney Caseload Standards (Performance Audit Follow-up)
Finding 3
OPD has not implemented a formal process to determine whether existing
attorney caseload standards should be revised. Average attorney caseloads
for Circuit and District Courts continue to exceed current standards.
Analysis
OPD has not implemented a formal process to determine whether existing
attorney caseload standards need to be modified or new standards created as a
result of changes to its operations and other relevant factors. We were advised by
management that caseload standards have not been reviewed and revised since
2005. This condition was commented upon in the aforementioned performance
audit report on certain aspects of OPD’s operations, as well as in our preceding
fiscal compliance audit report on OPD.
9

--- Page 12 ---
According to caseload data presented in State budget documents, average attorney
caseloads have decreased in all three courts – Circuit, District, and Juvenile –
between calendar years 2012 and 2015. However, average attorney caseloads
continued to exceed OPD’s existing caseload standards for both Circuit and
District Courts. See Table 2.
Notwithstanding the fact that current caseload standards are not being met, OPD
believes an evaluation of current standards would likely result in the conclusion
that caseload standards should be decreased further, meaning attorneys should
handle even fewer cases than current standards call for. In this regard, in
legislative testimony provided as part of the review of OPD’s budget in 2015,
OPD referenced a June 2014 study of attorney workload standards used by the
Missouri Public Defender System, which stated that caseload standards should be
periodically revisited to account for potential changes in technology and
technology usage, indigent defendant demographics, crime patterns, and staffing
and organizational structure. Appropriate caseload standards are critical since
they serve as an important monitoring tool for evaluating services rendered to
OPD’s clients and for allowing OPD to assess the allocation of cases among its
attorneys.
Table 2
Comparison of Caseloads Per Attorney by Type of Court
Calendar Years (CY) 2012 and 2015
Decrease in
CY15
Average CY12 Average Average
Average
Attorney Attorney Attorney
Attorney
Type of Court Caseloads Per Caseloads as a Caseloads as a
Caseloads as
OPD Percentage of Percentage of
Percentage of
Standards Standard Standard from
Standard
2012 to 2015
Circuit Court 171 126% 123% 3%
District Court 663 149% 136% 13%
Juvenile Court 253 95% 67% 28%
Source: State Budget Books
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OPD implement a process to periodically determine if
existing attorney caseload standards need to be modified, or new standards
created, based on changes to OPD’s operations and other relevant factors
(repeat).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Public Defender
(OPD) for the period beginning July 1, 2013 and ending September 22, 2016.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OPD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included client eligibility, procurements and
disbursements, accounts receivable, and payroll. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OPD’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
11

--- Page 14 ---
OPD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OPD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
OPD’s response to our findings and recommendations in included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise OPD regarding the results of our
review of its response.
12

--- Page 15 ---
APPENDIX
STATEOFMARYLAND OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER
PAUL B. DeWOLFE
ADMINISTRATION PUBLICDEFENDER
WILLIAM DONALD SCHAEFER TOWER
BECKY FELDMAN
6 SAINT PAUL STREET, SUITE 1400
DEPUTYPUBLICDEFENDER
BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 21202
Ph. (410) 767-8460
fax(410) 333-8496
LAWRENCEJ.HOGAN,JR. Tollfree: 1 (877) 430-5187
GOVERNOR
BOYDK.RUTHERFORD
CT.GOVERNOR
January 3, 2018
Thomasi. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street
Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: Management’s Response
Draft Audit Report Office ofthe Public Defender (OPD)
-
Report Dater December 2017
Period ofAudit: July 1, 2013 to September 22, 2016
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
Please accept the attached Management’s Response to the recommendations in the
above-cited report draft.
If you should need further information, please contact me directly at 410-767-8479.
Sincerely,
Paul B. DeWolfe
Public Defender
PBD/KLM/jps
Enclosure
Maryland Relay 711 or 1-800-735-2258forcallers outside the State ofMaryland
-

--- Page 16 ---
Office of the Public Defender
AUDIT REPORT – December 2017
Management’s Comment
Financial operations and Budgets (Performance Audit Follow-up)
As further clarification to “OPD’s regular need for deficiency appropriations”, please note that the
deficiencies relate to unfunded operating expenses carried over to the following fiscal year primarily for
case-related expenses. The significant amount of carryover expenses recorded for fiscal years 2015 and
2016 resulted from 2% cuts to the Appropriations, turnover relief for excessive vacancies and funding for
the relocation of IT operations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend OPD ensure that
a. applicant reported income supporting eligibility determinations is verified to reports from DLLR
in accordance with State regulations, and that applications are maintained on file (repeat);
b. eligibility determinations are reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel as required by
OPD’s Intake Manual, and that such reviews are documented (repeat); and
c. the automated case management system is used as the source for identifying eligibility
determinations requiring supervisory review.
Management’s Response
Management agrees and:
a. will continue to require DLLR reporting to verify income reported by applicants in accordance with
State regulations and to require applications to be maintained on file.
b. will require that supervisory reviews of eligibility determinations be performed and documented,
according to the policy outlined in the Intake Manual.
c. will implement the use of reports from the case management system to determine eligibility
determinations requiring supervisory review.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPD
a. assess administrative fees to applicants as required by State regulations (repeat), and
b. document its periodic review of cases not assessed a fee.
Management’s Response
Effective December 7, 2017, State regulations no longer require the assessment of administrative fees to
applicants for OPD representation.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OPD implement a process to periodically determine if existing attorney caseload
standards need to be modified, or new standards created, based on changes to OPD’s operations and
other relevant factors (repeat).
Management’s Response
Management agrees.
Our Deputy Public Defender recently attended a national workshop on establishing attorney work
standards. To develop new caseload standards, OPD must conduct time-keeping studies in every district
and division of necessary case-related tasks by area of law. The time-keeping feature is a planned part of
the new case management system, eDefender, which is forecast to be rolled out by calendar 2019. In the
interim, Management will apply the workshop principles and other best practices to the evaluation of our
attorney caseloads and standards, identify factors affecting them and determine requirements for
modification, if any, on at least an annual basis.

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Senior Auditor
Dianne P. Ramirez
Susan C. Skinner
Staff Auditors