Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Eastern Shore Hospital Center and Upper Shore Community Mental Health Center

NOTE: The Upper Shore Community Mental Health Center closed on March 1, 2010.
Date: 09/30/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743c2
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:35:33.071116
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
and
Upper Shore Community Mental Health Center
September 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC), located in Cambridge, Maryland,
provides comprehensive psychiatric and related services to patients from the nine
counties of Maryland’s Eastern Shore. The services provided include inpatient
treatment and community service programs. According to its records, during
fiscal year 2011, ESHC, which is accredited by the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, had a licensed capacity of 76
inpatients, a budgeted average daily population of 76 inpatients, and an actual
average daily population of 74 inpatients. According to the State’s records, fiscal
year 2011 ESHC operating expenditures totaled approximately $16.8 million.
Prior to March 1, 2010, the Upper Shore Community Mental Health Center
(USCMHC), located in Chestertown, Maryland, provided mental health services
to patients from Caroline, Cecil, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot Counties with a
licensed capacity of 64 inpatients, a budgeted daily population of 21 inpatients,
and an actual average daily population of 18 inpatients. During fiscal year 2010,
the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) closed USCMHC and
transferred the patient population to other State and local facilities commensurate
with individual patient needs. A decision was made to consolidate DHMH’s
mental hygiene facilities due to a reduction in the number of patients requiring
services and to eliminate the costs to maintain these facilities. As of February 28,
2010, all patients had been transferred from USCMHC.
After USCMHC was closed to patients, the facility became a tenant-occupied
facility, with oversight from ESHC. USCMHC continues to have an operating
budget that provides for four employees, utilities, communication, and other
expenditures, which are partially funded by tenant reimbursements. According to
the State’s records, during fiscal years 2010 and 2011, USCMHC operating
expenditures totaled approximately $6.2 million and $1.24 million, respectively.
Its fiscal year 2011 operating expenditures were funded by approximately
$471,200 in State general funds and approximately $768,800 from various State
and local tenants.
Asset Liquidation
As of June 30, 2010, the liquidation of certain USCMHC equipment was
finalized. Prior to the facility’s closure, USCMHC’s equipment totaled
approximately $890,900 and, during fiscal year 2010, equipment totaling
approximately $480,300 was transferred to other State and local facilities,
3

--- Page 6 ---
including ESHC. Additionally, equipment totaling approximately $158,700 was
approved for disposal. As of June 30, 2010, USCMHC had equipment totaling
approximately $251,900, which was mainly comprised of kitchen and
maintenance equipment in order for the USCMHC property to operate as a tenant-
occupied facility.
Status of the Findings From the Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 19, 2008. We determined that
ESHC and USCMHC satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Physician Services
Finding 1
The Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) awarded a service contract to a
physician it employed full-time, violating DHMH policy, and continued to
pay for these services after the contract period ended.
Analysis
On March 30, 2007, ESHC awarded a service contract, for the period from April
2, 2007 to June 30, 2008, valued at $8,250, to provide 24 hour/7 day on-call
clinical support and backup services, to a physician employed full-time by ESHC,
in violation of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH)
Physician’s On-Duty/Off-Duty Compensation Policy. Specifically, while the
service contract had been approved by ESHC’s Chief Operations Officer, the
Policy prohibits such service contract relationships when an employer-employee
relationship exists. According to this Policy, when an employer-employee
relationship exists, in order for a physician to provide after-hours coverage, the
employee must be paid through the State’s payroll system, and not as a service
contractor.
Additionally, we questioned the need for this contract since the physician’s
regular job responsibilities included providing on-call clinical support to
physicians working after-hours shifts for resolution of extraordinary problems.
Furthermore, ESHC continued to pay the physician’s monthly $550 rate for the
services for another two years, until July 31, 2010, even though the contract was
only allowed a three-month extension past the June 30, 2008 contract ending date.
4

--- Page 7 ---
According to the State’s accounting records, ESHC paid the physician a total of
$20,350 for these contracted services through July 2010, in addition to the
physician’s annual regular salary.
After the payments under the service contract were discontinued, this physician
provided on-duty after-hours coverage and was paid through the State’s payroll
system. However, the physician was also responsible for scheduling after-hours1
physician coverage and approving the related time records, including the
physician’s own time records. Specifically, our review of 26 after-hours time
records for the period from August 2010 to February 2011 disclosed that the
physician approved all the time records, which included 351 hours worked by the
physician. We calculated that the physician received compensation totaling
approximately $15,800 for these 351 hours. Without independent supervisory
approval of time records, ESHC lacks assurance regarding the accuracy of the
time worked and the propriety of the related payments.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ESHC
a. strictly adhere to the DHMH’s Physician’s On-Duty/Off Duty
Compensation Policy, and
b. ensure that independent supervisory personnel approve the after-hours
time records.
We advised ESHC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Patient Funds
Finding 2
Patient fund deposit verifications were not performed by an independent
employee and access to related records was not properly controlled.
Analysis
ESHC patient funds were not adequately controlled. Specifically, we noted the
following deficiencies:
 The employee that performed the verification of recorded collections to
deposits was not independent. This employee had routine access to
collections and, at times, processed cash receipts.
1After-hours work is defined as evening and weekend shifts in order to provide 24-hour/7day
physician coverage.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Access to the patient funds accounting systems was not properly restricted to
the employees who required such access. The accounting systems used to
record patient transactions were maintained on the business office network
and were available to three employees of the business office who did not need
the access to perform their job duties. Furthermore, all of these employees
had access to cash collections and the cash maintained in the safe, which is
used for cash disbursements to patients. In addition, we noted that user IDs
and passwords were not required to access these systems.
The Comptroller of the Treasury’s General Accounting Division Manual requires
that cash handling duties and record keeping duties be segregated. Furthermore,
deposit verifications should be performed by an employee independent of the cash
receipt function. The Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT)
Information Security Policy indicates that users should be uniquely identified in
information systems. According to ESHC’s records, during fiscal year 2011,
patient fund collections and disbursements totaled approximately $41,000 and
$56,000, respectively.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ESHC
a. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions,
b. restrict access to the accounting systems to those employees that require
such access to perform their job duties, and
c. ensure that all users are assigned unique IDs to access these systems.
We advised ESHC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) and the Upper Shore
Community Mental Health Center (USCMHC) of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene for the period beginning March 24, 2008 and ending February
23, 2011. As a cost-containment measure, on March 1, 2010, USCMHC closed
and transferred its patients to other state and local facilities. Currently, USCMHC
is partially occupied by tenants and is overseen by ESHC. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ESHC’s and
USCMHC’s financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate
their compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also
determined the status of findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The primary
areas addressed by the audit included payroll, procurements and disbursements,
pharmaceutical inventories, and patient funds. Our audit procedures included
inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and
observations of ESHC’s and USCMHC’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
ESHC provides payroll, personnel, and certain financial support services (such as
monthly reconciliations) to USCMHC. Since these support services represent a
significant part of our audit effort with respect to the activities of USCMHC, a
combined audit was conducted.
ESHC’s and USCMHC’s management is responsible for establishing and
maintaining effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of
financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including
safeguarding of assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ESHC’s and USCMHC’s ability to maintain reliable financial
records, operate effectively and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant
instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to ESHC and USCMHC that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, on behalf of
ESHC, to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results
of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
EASTERN SHORE HOSPITAL CENTER
RESPONSES TO DRAFT LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
SEPTEMBER 2011
Physician Services
Finding 1
The Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) awarded a service contract to a physician it
employed full‐time, violating DHMH policy, and continued to pay for these services after the
contract period ended.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ESHC
a. strictly adhere to the DHMH’s Physician’s On‐Duty/Off Duty Compensation Policy, and
b. ensure that independent supervisory personnel approve the after‐hours time records.
Center’s Response:
a. The Center concurs with the recommendation and will comply with DHMH’s Physician On‐
Duty/Off Duty Compensation Policy in the future. The Center did enter into a contract with the
Clinical Director at the direction and approval of the former Chief Executive Officer for one year
to provide 24 hour/7 day on‐call clinical support and back‐up services. The individual did work
two additional years without a contract. On or about July 1, 2010 after the CEO retired, this
practice was discontinued and the physician was placed on special payments payroll in
accordance with the DHMH “Physician On‐Duty/Off‐Duty Compensation Policy where he
continued to provide on‐duty services. This physician left State Service effective June 30, 2011.
b. The Center concurs with the recommendation and had instituted a procedure to ensure that
independent supervisory personnel approve the after‐hours time records beginning in November
2010, prior to the Legislative Audit visit.
Patient Funds
Finding 2
Patient fund deposit verifications were not performed by an independent employee and
access to related records was not properly controlled.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ESHC
a. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by an employee independent of the cash
receipts functions,

--- Page 13 ---
b. restrict access to the accounting systems to those employees that require such access to
perform their job duties, and
c. ensure that all users are assigned unique IDs to access these systems.
Center’s Response:
a. The Center concurs with the recommendation and implemented on July 1, 2011 an independent
cash verification process with the Chief Operating Officer as the individual assigned to this
function as recommended by the Legislative Auditors.
b. The Center concurs with the recommendation and restricted access to accounting systems to
those employees that require such access to perform their job duties effective July 1, 2011.
c. The Center concurs with the recommendation and has assigned unique IDs to those accounting
systems effective July 1, 2011.

--- Page 14 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CFE
Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors