Title: Department of Transportation - Secretary's Office
Date: 09/21/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d7245606746fe
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:52:44.606434
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Transportation
Secretary’s Office
February 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Audit of the Department’s Financial Statements 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) Grants
Finding 1 – MDOT Did Not Adequately Verify WMATA’s Grant 7
Calculations and Had Not Conducted Audits
Contract Procurements
Finding 2 – Certain Requirements of State Procurement Regulations 9
Were Not Always Followed
Temporary Employment Agreements
Finding 3 – Temporary Employment Agreements With Two Individuals 11
Were Not Monitored
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Transportation – Secretary’s Office (MDOT)
provides overall direction and guidance to the Department including its five
modal administrations (Maryland Aviation Administration, State Highway
Administration, Motor Vehicle Administration, Maryland Port Authority, and
Maryland Transit Administration). The other component of Maryland’s
transportation system is the Maryland Transportation Authority (MdTA).
Although Maryland’s Secretary of Transportation serves as the Authority’s
chairman, MdTA is not overseen by MDOT.
MDOT administers the bond issuance and debt service activities associated with
the Department’s consolidated transportation bonds and receives an appropriation
for all debt service requirements. In addition, MDOT provides operating and
capital grants to the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority for transit
services in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area as well as grants to other
governmental agencies (such as local transportation planning agencies) for
transportation-related purposes.
MDOT is also responsible for the operation of the Office of Transportation
Technology Services, which provides computing resources to the various units of
the Department of Transportation and operates as a computer service bureau for
these units. The computer service operations of the Office are addressed in a
separate audit and, as such, were not included in the scope of this audit.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014, MDOT’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $542 million, of which $463.7 million related
to operating and capital grants for transportation-related purposes. In addition,
debt service payments totaled approximately $200.5 million.
Audit of the Department’s Financial Statements
An independent accounting firm was engaged to audit the State of Maryland’s
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2013, and 2014. In
conjunction with these audits, the firm was engaged to prepare separate audit
reports on the Maryland Department of Transportation’s financial statements. In
the related audit reports, the firm stated that the Department’s financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial position of the
governmental activities, the major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund
information of the Department of Transportation, and respective changes in
4

--- Page 7 ---
financial position, for the years then ended, in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 2, 2012. We determined that
MDOT satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Grants
Background
The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) provides transit
services (Metrobus, Metrorail, and MetroAccess paratransit) in Montgomery and
Prince George’s Counties, the District of Columbia, and several cities and
counties in northern Virginia. WMATA was created in 1967 by an interstate
compact between the State of Maryland, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the
District of Columbia. The Maryland Department of Transportation – Secretary’s
Office (MDOT) enters into annual operating and capital grants agreements with
the Washington Suburban Transit Commission (WSTC), which is the financial
conduit for funding mass transportation projects in Montgomery and Prince
George’s counties. As directed by WSTC and in accordance with the agreements,
MDOT provides annual operating and capital grant funds to WMATA. These
grants, along with similar funding from the Commonwealth of Virginia and the
District of Columbia, fund WMATA’s operating deficits and its capital
improvement program expenditures (including bus and rail vehicle replacement,
capital improvements, debt service, and infrastructure repair).
Annual operating subsidy grant amounts are based initially on WMATA’s
budgeted operating deficit for the year. Adjustments to the grants are made in a
subsequent fiscal year’s subsidy calculation based on the actual amount of the
previous year’s operating deficit according to WMATA’s independent audited
financial statements. Annual capital grants are based on WMATA’s budgeted
annual capital projects improvement plan, after considering federal funding, and
on each jurisdiction’s proportionate share of bond debt payments. Grant
payments are made on a quarterly basis.
According to its grant award records, MDOT’s fiscal year 2014 operating and
capital grant awards to WMATA totaled approximately $409.6 million ($268.1
million for operating and $141.5 million for capital).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 1
MDOT did not establish an adequate process to verify that WMATA
operating and capital grant award amounts were properly calculated, and
had not audited the grants provided beyond fiscal year 2009.
Analysis
MDOT did not establish an adequate process to verify that WMATA operating
and capital grant award amounts were properly calculated. These calculations are
prepared by WMATA and are used to determine Maryland’s portion of the
operating and capital grant subsidies. Although we were advised that MDOT
conducted a review of the annual calculations, MDOT did not document its
review, could not explain the nature and extent of its review, and did not always
obtain critical documentation to verify the calculations. In addition, although
allowed by the annual grant agreements, the most recent audit conducted by
MDOT was issued in March 2011 and only included grants through fiscal year
2009. Consequently, there is a lack of assurance that Maryland’s portion of
WMATA’s allocated operating deficit and capital project costs was accurate and
supported.
The annual subsidy calculations are highly complex. Each of the three transit
areas (Metrobus, Metrorail, and MetroAccess) has one or more unique subsidy
formula based on a number of factors (such as, density-weighted populations,
ridership by jurisdiction of residence, revenue miles, and hours per jurisdiction).
Given the complexity of the calculations, the annual grant agreements allowed
MDOT to perform interim and final audits, within three years of the grant term.
In its most recent audit report issued in March 2011, MDOT’s Office of Audits
stated that its objective was to determine whether the fiscal years 2007 through
2009 subsidies allocated to Maryland by WMATA were calculated in accordance
with the Board’s instructions and approved formula. While the audit concluded
that the subsidy amounts were reasonably accurate and complied with WMATA
methodologies, the report stated that certain errors were observed, indicating there
was weak internal control over subsidy allocation calculations performed by
WMATA. For example, the audit noted instances of limited documentation,
omission of certain statistical data (certain bus routes) in calculations, and, in one
instance, the use of a methodology that was not consistent with Board resolutions.
The effects of these errors could not always be determined because of limited
documentation. MDOT agreed with the report’s recommendations and agreed to
work with WMATA to address these deficiencies, including requesting grant
adjustments for errors impacting the allocations.
7

--- Page 10 ---
We reviewed the available documentation pertaining to the calculation of the
fiscal year 2014 operating and capital grant subsidies totaling $409.6 million and
noted the following conditions:
 MDOT did not obtain appropriate documentation to support ridership figures,
which was one of the four factors used to determine a $106.6 million portion
of the Metrobus component of the operating subsidy. Ridership figures used
by WMATA in the subsidy calculation were based on 2008 ridership survey
data for which support was incomplete and, considering these data are several
years old, they may not represent current ridership patterns.
 MDOT could not explain why WMATA’s calculation of the $63.7 million
MetroAccess component of the operating subsidy was inconsistent with the
formula approved by WMATA’s Board of Directors. Specifically, the
approved formula required the allocation of the MetroAccess subsidy to each
jurisdiction to be based on actual direct costs from a prior year (net of actual
revenue). However, WMATA allocated the subsidy based on budgeted costs
for the current year (net of budgeted revenue) using the portion of the total
actual number of trips in each jurisdiction from a prior year. This resulted in
an allocation of almost 60 percent of the budgeted MetroAccess subsidy
($106.4 million) to Maryland. Although WMATA reported that Maryland
had 60 percent of the MetroAccess trips, the actual costs of the MetroAccess
trips may not have constituted 60 percent of the MetroAccess costs. We could
not readily determine the effect of this inconsistency.
 MDOT did not obtain documentation to support certain adjustments to the
operating subsidy calculations. For example, MDOT did not obtain
documentation to support WMATA’s calculation of an $11.6 million
adjustment that reduced the overall operating subsidy. This adjustment
purportedly represented Maryland’s share of WMATA’s actual operating
deficits for fiscal years 2011 and 2012 based on its audited financial
statements.
 MDOT did not obtain detailed capital improvement plan budget
documentation by project to support a $69.5 million component of the fiscal
year 2014 annual capital grant. Additionally, a required reconciliation of
fiscal year 2013 budgeted and actual capital expenditures allocated to each
jurisdiction was not obtained to support a $10.7 million increase in the fiscal
year 2014 grant.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDOT establish a comprehensive process to verify that
WMATA’s annual operating and capital grant subsidies are properly
calculated. Specifically, MDOT should
a. determine the critical components of WMATA’s grant subsidy allocation
calculations and obtain applicable supporting documentation for these
critical components;
b. perform a documented review of the annual grant subsidy allocation
calculations for propriety, and ensure the calculations are consistent with
supporting documentation and formula requirements established by
WMATA’s Board of Directors; and
c. conduct annual audits of WMATA’s operating and capital grant subsidy
calculations, and recover any payments made that were not in accordance
with the grant agreements.
Contract Procurements
Finding 2
MDOT did not always comply with State procurement regulations with
respect to bidding requirements and publishing contract awards. MDOT
also awarded contracts in amounts substantially higher than could be
supported by the related bids.
Analysis
MDOT did not always comply with State procurement regulations for securing
and recording receipt of competitive bid documents and publishing contract
awards on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM). In addition, MDOT awarded two
contracts for amounts substantially higher than could be supported by the related
bid documentation. We judgmentally selected for testing five significant
competitive procurements, totaling approximately $55.7 million, and all nine sole
source procurements awarded during the audit period, totaling $17.3 million.
 MDOT did not properly secure vendor bids for three information technology
related contract awards totaling $31.3 million. As directed by the related
requests for proposals, vendors sent competitive sealed bid proposals directly
to an email account of an employee in MDOT’s procurement office or to a
group email account. The bid documents were not password protected to
ensure bids were not prematurely accessed, and access to emails sent to both
email accounts was not properly restricted prior to the bid opening date.
Furthermore, while MDOT believed that access to the group email account
was limited to employees in its procurement unit, MDOT could not provide
9

--- Page 12 ---
documentation of the individuals who were capable of accessing the account
at the time the bids were received. Consequently, confidential bid information
could be accessed and disclosed to prospective bidders without detection.
 MDOT did not always record when bid documents were received and
opened. Specifically, MDOT could not provide any documentation (such as a
date stamp or email) that bids had been received by the submission deadline
for one contract totaling $20.9 million. Additionally, for this contract and for
the aforementioned three information technology contract awards totaling
$31.3 million, MDOT could not document when the bids were opened and
who witnessed the bid openings. Consequently, there is no assurance that the
bids met the bid submission deadlines and that the bids were opened in the
presence of at least two employees, as required.
 For two competitively bid contracts totaling $24.4 million and for the nine
sole source contracts totaling $17.3 million, MDOT did not publish the
awards on eMM, as required. Based on our review of eMM records, MDOT
had seven additional contract solicitations with bid opening dates between
March 7, 2012 and December 2, 2013 in which the resulting awards, totaling
approximately $8.6 million, had not been published on eMM, as of March 18,
2015.
 Two contracts totaling approximately $10 million were awarded for amounts
substantially higher than could be supported by the bid documentation.
Although the winning vendor bids for these contracts supported $5.6 million
relating to the initial contract periods, the basis for the values of the option
years ($4.4 million) could not be supported.
For example, a contract for consulting services was awarded for $3.5 million,
but the bid documentation only supported $1.9 million for the initial five-year
contract period. The remaining contract award of $1.6 million, which
pertained to the additional option periods, was established by MDOT without
determining and including in the request for proposals the estimated number
of labor hours needed to perform the services during those periods. Based on
our calculations using the labor hour estimates from the initial contract period
and the contractor’s labor rates for the option periods, we calculated that
$300,000 would have been a more reasonable estimate for the additional
option periods (a difference of $1.3 million). Awarding contracts with
inflated values increases the risk of misusing the contracts to procure
unnecessary and/or unrelated services.
10

--- Page 13 ---
State procurement regulations require that bids be secured and opened in the
presence of at least two employees, and that a record be maintained of the date
contract bids were received and opened. Automated bid submission features of
eMM could be used by MDOT to facilitate the documentation and security of the
bidding process. State procurement regulations also require that competitively
bid and sole source contract awards greater than $25,000 be published on eMM
within 30 days of the contract awards. Finally, bid evaluation documentation is
also required to be maintained to support contract award decisions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDOT comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that MDOT
a. establish procedures to properly restrict access to competitive sealed bid
proposals received electronically, including considering the use of the
automated bid submission features of eMM;
b. record the dates that the bid documents are received and opened, ensure
that at least two employees witness the bid openings, and maintain
documentation of employees present;
c. publish contract awards on eMM, as required; and
d. ensure contract award amounts are supported by bid documents or
maintain justification to support contract award amounts that differ
from the supporting bids.
Temporary Employment Agreements
Finding 3
MDOT did not monitor employment agreements with two individuals. As a
result, payments to one individual exceeded the contract amount by
$142,000. Payments totaling $249,000 were made for services provided by
the other individual after the agreement had expired.
Analysis
MDOT did not monitor employment agreements with two individuals, resulting in
payments exceeding the maximum amount allowed for one individual and
payments made to the other individual for services provided after the agreement
had expired.
 MDOT paid an individual approximately $142,000 more than the maximum
allowed by two consecutive employment agreements. Since 2011, MDOT
had entered into annual employment agreements with this individual to assist
MDOT with its Minority Business Enterprise program. According to the
11

--- Page 14 ---
agreements, payments were based on the number of hours worked, with a
maximum annual compensation of $60,000. However, for two annual
employment agreements beginning May 2013, the employee was paid
approximately $262,000. MDOT terminated the employment agreement
effective February 2015 prior to its ending date. According to MDOT’s
records, the individual was paid approximately $403,200 during the entire
contract period.
 MDOT paid $249,000 to a State university for the services of an individual
without an executed interagency agreement. Specifically, MDOT and the
university entered into an interagency agreement dated July 29, 2008 to
temporarily assign a university employee to MDOT for assistance with
Maryland State Police helicopter procurement and contract monitoring
activities. This agreement expired on June 30, 2011; however, MDOT
continued to use the services of this individual. In January 2015, MDOT paid
the university $249,000 for the services of this individual during fiscal years
2012 through 2014. This amount was billed by the university based on the
provisions in the expired agreement. According to MDOT’s records, the
university was paid approximately $480,000 for this employee during the
period from July 2008 through June 2014.
In September 2015, MDOT advised this individual that it no longer required
these services. MDOT also advised us that, based on discussions with
university personnel, it does not anticipate that the university will be billing
MDOT for the services of the individual during the period from July 2014 to
September 2015.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDOT
a. monitor temporary employment agreements to ensure payments do not
exceed maximum allowable amounts, and
b. ensure that executed agreements are established for the duration of the
period of performance.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – Secretary’s Office, including the Debt Service Requirements
Unit (MDOT), for the period beginning July 5, 2011 and ending January 15,
2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDOT’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain programs associated with transportation
activities (such as the consolidated transportation program), grants, contract
procurements and invoice processing, real estate sales, cash receipts, and certain
payroll functions. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
An independent accounting firm was engaged to audit the State of Maryland’s
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2013, and 2014. In
conjunction with these audits, the firm was engaged to prepare separate audit
reports on the Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) financial
statements. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the MDOT’s financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial
position of the governmental activities, the major fund, and the aggregate
remaining fund information of the Department of Transportation, and respective
changes in financial position, for the years then ended, in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. We
have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage pertaining to bond issuance and debt service payments. Our audit
procedures in this area were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient
basis for that reliance.
The State Highway Administration provides certain payroll support services (such
as the maintenance of employee leave records) to MDOT. These support services
13

--- Page 16 ---
are included within the scope of our audit of the State Highway Administration.
In addition, our audit did not include the computer operations of MDOT’s Office
of Transportation Technology Services that are addressed in a separate audit.
Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance
with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDOT’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDOT.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MDOT’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and the Maryland Department of
Transportation’s Management Information System (such as revenue and
expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MDOT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDOT’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDOT that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MDOT’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDOT regarding the
results of our review of its response.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 1
MDOT did not establish an adequate process to verify that WMATA operating and capital
grant award amounts were properly calculated, and had not audited the grants provided
beyond fiscal year 2009.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDOT establish a comprehensive process to verify that WMATA’s annual
operating and capital grant subsidies are properly calculated. Specifically, MDOT should
a. determine the critical components of WMATA’s grant subsidy allocation calculations and
obtain applicable supporting documentation for these critical components;
b. perform a documented review of the annual grant subsidy allocation calculations for
propriety, and ensure the calculations are consistent with supporting documentation and
formula requirements established by WMATA’s Board of Directors; and
c. conduct annual audits of WMATA’s operating and capital grant subsidy calculations, and
recover any payments made that were not in accordance with the grant agreements.
Response:
a. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. MDOT will document the process of
analyzing the WMATA grant subsidies. Additionally, MDOT will retain and verify
applicable supporting documentation used by WMATA to calculate the subsidy allocations
and review the necessary components that make up the allocations, including but not limited
to, those recommended by the auditor. These procedures will be in place during fiscal year
2016.
b. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. MDOT will implement a documented process
during fiscal year 2016 of the reviews it performs of WMATA’s annual operating and capital
grant subsidy allocation calculations and formulas based on the approved Board
requirements.
c. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. The Office of Audits will conduct annual
audits of WMATA’s operating and capital expenditures, and recover any payments made that
were not in accordance with the grant agreements. These audits will commence in Fiscal
Year 2017.

--- Page 20 ---
Contract Procurements
Finding 2
MDOT did not always comply with State procurement regulations with respect to bidding
requirements and publishing contract awards. MDOT also awarded contracts in amounts
substantially higher than could be supported by the related bids.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDOT comply with State procurement regulations. Specifically, we
recommend that MDOT
a. establish procedures to properly restrict access to competitive sealed bid proposals received
electronically, including considering the use of the automated bid submission features of
eMM;
b. record the dates that the bid documents are received and opened, ensure that at least two
employees witness the bid openings, and maintain documentation of employees present;
c. publish contract awards on eMM, as required; and
d. ensure contract award amounts are supported by bid documents or maintain justification to
support contract award amounts that differ from the supporting bids.
Response
a. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. In October 2014, DoIT implemented a new
policy requiring that Financial Responses be password protected in response to a Task Order
Request For Proposal (TORFP). When TSO received the new policy, instructions were
immediately forwarded to all of the Procurement Officers at TSO instructing them to follow
this new process. The three electronic information technology related contracts referenced
in the analysis were task orders off of a DoIT Master Contract, not procurements as defined
by statute or regulation. At the time the responses were received there was no requirement in
statute, regulation, or DoIT policy to secure the responses from a TORFP or a Purchase
Order Request For Proposal (PORFP). At that time, responses received were not required to
be password protected. Since there was no requirement for a TORFP response to be secured,
the group email account was used to receive responses. In an effort to respond to the
suggestion, MDOT has taken the following actions. The group email account has been
closed. Responses that are received by the Procurement Officers electronically will have the
financial portion password protected. When the financial portion of the response is ready to
be opened, the Procurement Officer requests the password from the contractor.
b. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. MDOT has established a policy and
forwarded it to all TSO Procurement Officers with instructions to follow this process.
Responses come to the Procurement Officers either electronically with the financial portion
password protected or in a sealed envelope. When the financial portion of the response is
ready to be opened, the Procurement Officer requests the password from the contractor and

--- Page 21 ---
opens the electronic financial response or envelope with a witness. The financial response is
logged in and signed by both the Procurement Officer and the witness. Additionally, the
Office of Procurement performs a quality control on procurements to ensure all
documentation is in the file, including this financial tabulation.
c. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. Procurement Officers at TSO have been
instructed to follow the requirement to post all contract awards on eMM in accordance with
the regulations. Additionally, the Office of Procurement performs a quality control on
procurements to ensure posting the awards on eMM is being done.
d. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. The type of contracts cited include elements
of task-order based work, the total cost of which is difficult to estimate. However, the
process to fairly evaluate the financial proposals is structured on estimated hours for labor
categories. In order to ensure fair and equitable treatment, the offerors then provide hourly
rates which allow the evaluation committee to evaluate the proposals. The resultant contract
award amount is based on a combination of the fixed price proposed, and an estimated
amount to provide for anticipated task orders. In the future, documentation to reasonably
justify the contract award amount will be included in the Procurement Officer’s
Determination.

--- Page 22 ---
Temporary Employment Agreements
Finding 3
MDOT did not monitor employment agreements with two individuals. As a result,
payments to one individual exceeded the contract amount by $142,000. Payments totaling
$249,000 were made for services provided by the other individual after the agreement had
expired.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDOT
a. monitor temporary employment agreements to ensure payments do not exceed maximum
allowable amounts, and
b. ensure that executed agreements are established for the duration of the period of
performance.
Response
a. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. The MDOT Office of Finance found the
over expended contract in December 2014 through our existing budget versus expense
review process. We immediately terminated the contract and brought it to the auditors when
they arrived on January 15, 2015. To improve oversight, the Accounting section is
monitoring the contractual list, the maximum contract amount, and hours against the
biweekly payroll journal for each payroll period. When the contract amount reaches 80% of
the maximum amount allowed, the office responsible for the contract will be notified.
In addition, MDOT’s Office of Minority Business Enterprise has established and
implemented procedures to monitor contract expenditures. These procedures ensure proper
oversight of the budget and expenditures associated with employment agreements to include
reviewing timesheet and number of hours worked, creation of a tracking spreadsheet,
retrieval and review of financial payment reports from MDOT’s Office of Finance Office,
and monthly reconciliation of payment spreadsheet. A review of these established
procedures will be conducted by the Director of the MBE Office with anyone in the MBE
office charged with managing a temporary employment agreement.
b. We concur with the auditor’s recommendation. We do not expect any future invoices for the
project referenced in the finding. We will ensure all future projects have executed
agreements in place for the entire period of performance.

--- Page 23 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Thomas L. Allen III
Andrew S. Bien
Christopher J. Fowler
James J. Podhorniak
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors