Title: Department of Housing and Community Development - Office of the Secretary, Division of Finance and Administration, and Division of Information Technology
Date: 04/18/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d72456067445a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:55:21.513144
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Housing and Community Development
Office of the Secretary
Division of Finance and Administration
Division of Information Technology
April 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational Change 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Cash Receipts
Finding 1 – DHCD Lacked Documentation That Collections Were 5
Verified to Deposit
Equipment
* Finding 2 – Physical Inventory Results Were Not Fully Reconciled 5
With Detail Records and Certain Items Were Not Accounted for
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 3 – DHCD Lacked Evidence of Competition for Purchases 6
Made With Corporate Purchasing Cards
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 8
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) provides
services to strengthen communities and provides affordable housing for people of
limited income. The mission of DHCD is to work with partners to finance
housing opportunities and revitalize places for Maryland citizens to live, work,
and prosper. To deliver these services, the Department is organized into six units.
This audit report includes the operations of the following three units:
Office of the Secretary
Division of Finance and Administration
Division of Information Technology
The remaining units of the Department (Division of Credit Assurance, Division of
Development Finance, and Division of Neighborhood Revitalization) are included
within the scope of, and reported upon, in a separate audit. According to the
State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2011, total DHCD expenditures
were approximately $322.3 million, of which $14.2 million related to the units
audited.
Organizational Change
Effective October 22, 2010, DHCD transferred the Maryland Affordable Housing
Trust (MAHT) from DHCD’s Office of the Secretary to DHCD’s Division of
Development Finance. Consequently, MAHT was not included in this audit, but
will be included within the scope of our audit of DHCD’s other units.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 19, 2009. Because of the
aforementioned organizational change, one of these findings will be addressed
during our audit of DHCD’s other units. We determined that DHCD satisfactorily
addressed two of the other three findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
DHCD lacked documentation that collections were verified to deposit.
Analysis
DHCD lacked documentation that its collections had been verified to deposit.
Although we were advised that certain verification procedures were in place, most
of the deposits we examined lacked evidence that the verification procedures were
performed. Our test of collections totaling approximately $13.9 million, received
during 20 days in fiscal years 2010 and 2011, disclosed that such documentation
was not on file for 18 days with receipts totaling $13.5 million. Consequently,
there was a lack of assurance that deposit verifications had been performed. We
were able to confirm that collections for all 20 days were, in fact, deposited.
According to DHCD’s records, collections received and deposited by DHCD
during fiscal year 2011 totaled approximately $17 million, and consisted
primarily of returns of certain grant funds, loan repayments, and interest from title
company escrow accounts.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHCD ensure that verifications of collections to deposit
are documented.
Equipment
Finding 2
Physical inventory results were not fully reconciled with detail records and
certain equipment items were not accounted for.
Analysis
DHCD’s physical inventory procedures were deficient and did not comply with
the Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual.
According to DHCD’s records, the value of its equipment totaled approximately
$5.6 million as of June 30, 2011. Although physical inventories of both sensitive
and non-sensitive equipment were conducted during calendar year 2010, as of
September 2011, the results were not fully reconciled to the related detailed
equipment records. For example, according to DHCD’s records, as of May 2011,
5

--- Page 8 ---
equipment totaling approximately $649,000 (including sensitive equipment
totaling $565,000) had not been accounted for during the physical inventories for
more than three years. This equipment included sensitive equipment items, such
as computers, totaling $167,000 that had not been accounted for since 2000.
Because physical inventory results and the related equipment records were not
fully reconciled, the proper disposition of these items, such as still on hand or
missing, had not been resolved. The lack of an adequate reconciliation was also
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual specifies the procedures for reconciling
physical inventories to detailed records, and for investigating, reporting to DGS,
and removing records for any missing items. The Manual also requires that
equipment be inventoried once a year for sensitive items and every three years for
non-sensitive items.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHCD comply with the aforementioned requirements
of the DGS Inventory Control Manual by fully reconciling the results of the
physical inventories to the related detail records, and by identifying,
investigating, and resolving all discrepancies (repeat).
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 3
DHCD lacked evidence of competition for purchases made with corporate
purchasing cards.
Analysis
DHCD lacked documentation that employees solicited bids from more than one
vendor when making purchases with a corporate purchasing card (CPC).
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that CPC purchases were made at the
most competitive and appropriate prices. A review of six CPC transactions, each
exceeding $500, that were made during our audit period disclosed no
documentation of bids or offers obtained from other vendors. These transactions
included, for example, a purchase of six computers at a total cost of $3,000 and a
purchase of three cameras at a total cost of $1,500.
We were advised by DHCD that, where practical, multiple vendors are researched
for CPC purchases, but documentation of such is not maintained. State
Procurement Regulations stipulate that, for small procurements (including
purchases under $5,000), competition should be sought to the extent practical
6

--- Page 9 ---
considering factors such as availability of vendors and the dollar value of the
procurement. The regulations also indicate that documentation is required for
both oral and written solicitations.
During fiscal year 2011, according to the bank’s records, DHCD’s CPC
transactions totaled approximately $760,000, of which approximately $478,000
was spent for purchases exceeding $500, including $264,000 for purchases
exceeding $1,000.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHCD
a. ensure that employees seek competition to the extent practical for CPC
purchases, as required by State Procurement Regulations; and
b. document actions taken to ensure competitive procurement.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the following units of the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) for the period beginning July 1, 2008 and
ending May 9, 2011:
Office of the Secretary
Division of Finance and Administration
Division of Information Technology
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHCD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurements and disbursements,
equipment, and certain State-funded loan program transactions. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of DHCD’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit included certain support services (such as payroll, maintenance of
accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by DHCD’s Division of
Finance and Administration to other units of DHCD. In addition, our audit did
not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of DHCD’s compliance with federal laws and
regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland engages
an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including DHCD.
8

--- Page 11 ---
DHCD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DHCD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHCD that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
DHCD’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHCD regarding the
results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 13 ---
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (DHCD)
Responses to Findings and Recommendations Contained in the
Legislative Audit Report of the Department
For the Period Beginning July 1, 2008 and Ending May 9, 2011
Finding 1
DHCD lacked documentation that collections were verified to deposit.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHCD ensure that the verifications of collections to deposit are documented.
DHCD’s Response:
DHCD concurs with the finding and recommendation. However, DHCD is confident that these
verifications were performed and has implemented procedures to ensure that these verifications are
documented when performed. As further evidence of the strength of DHCD’s cash receipt procedures, we
are unaware of any instance at any time when there has been a difference between a bank deposit and the
amount recorded in FMIS as collections.
Finding 2
Physical inventory results were not fully reconciled with detail records and certain equipment items
were not accounted for.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHCD comply with the aforementioned requirements of the DGS Inventory Control
Manual by fully reconciling the results of the physical inventories to the related detail records, and by
identifying, investigating, and resolving all discrepancies (repeat).
DHCD’s Response:
DHCD concurs with the finding and recommendation. DHCD had previously prepared a list of missing
assets totaling $523,000 which was approved by the then Acting Secretary and submitted to DGS during
the previous administration. These assets primarily consisted of outdated IT equipment which had been
donated to non-profit organizations in prior years without the appropriate excess and surplus paperwork.
The DGS delay in reviewing the listing caused them to reject the form when a new DHCD Secretary was
appointed in the interim. During this timeframe, DHCD located a few of the missing assets, so it was
determined that the most appropriate course of action was to retain these assets on the inventory records
and look for them again during the next physical inventory to see if other assets on the missing list could be
located. Very few additional assets were located during this process. DHCD will update the list of missing
assets and resubmit the forms to DGS by June 30, 2012. Upon approval by DGS, DHCD will remove all
items from the inventory records.

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
DHCD lacked evidence of competition for purchases made with corporate purchasing cards.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHCD
a. ensure that employees seek competition to the extent practical for CPC purchases, as required
by State Procurement Regulations; and
b. document actions taken to ensure competitive procurement.
DHCD’s Response:
DCHD concurs with the finding and recommendations. However, DHCD believes that cardholders have
and do seek competition to the extent practical and can specifically confirm that extensive research was
performed to ensure that the lowest prices and best functionality were obtained for the laptops and cameras
cited as examples in the audit analysis. In addition, 54% of the purchases reviewed did not require
documentation, since 32% were made from State-wide contracts and 22% from exempt or sole source
purchases from government entities. On November 3, 2011 DHCD issued changes to CPC procedures to
all cardholders requiring that documentation of price research efforts be submitted with the CPC envelopes
each month, even if no formal oral or written solicitations were done, and also encouraging supervisors to
check for and question price comparison practices and documentation when reviewing the cardholders’
transactions.

--- Page 15 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Terry S. Gibson
Senior Auditor
Jared J. Bardall
Jason M. Goldstein
Sandra C. Medeiros
B. Summer Raza
Staff Auditors