Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation
Date: 12/22/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d724560674410
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:45:55.575171
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation
December 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Office of the
Commissioner of Financial Regulation (OCFR) is responsible for supervising the
activities of the following entities: Maryland State Chartered banks, trust
companies, savings banks, credit unions, money transmitters, safe-deposit
companies, sales finance companies, installment loan lenders, consumer lenders,
credit services businesses, check-cashing outlets, debt collection agencies, debt
management companies, mortgage lenders (including lenders, brokers, and
servicers), and mortgage originators. OCFR also oversees retail accounts, retail
installment contracts, and credit grantor contracts. Additionally, OCFR issues
licenses for non-depository institutions after investigation of each applicant and
approves charters for banking institutions and credit unions to form new
institutions, open branches, make stock acquisitions, form affiliates, and merge
with other financial institutions. According to the State’s records, during fiscal
year 2015, OCFR’s operating expenditures totaled approximately $9.4 million.
Findings and Recommendations
Mortgage Licensee Penalties
Finding 1
The Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation (OCFR) did not
adequately document its determination of the amounts of financial penalties
assessed to mortgage licensees.
Analysis
OCFR did not adequately document its determination of the amounts of financial
penalties it assessed against mortgage licensees (lenders and originators) that
resulted from examinations conducted by its mortgage compliance unit. State law
provides that a civil penalty of up to $5,000 may be imposed on a licensee for
each violation of Maryland’s Mortgage Lender Law and stipulates criteria to
consider when determining the penalty amount. Criteria include the seriousness
of the violation, the nature of previous violations, and the effect on the public and
the mortgage industry. In addition, OCFR advised us that negotiations with the
non-compliant licensee may affect the amount of the penalty. However, OCFR
did not routinely document its consideration of the aforementioned criteria and
the extent to which each of the criteria factored into the determination.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Our test of 10 penalties assessed against licensees that were paid during fiscal
year 2015 disclosed that 8 of these penalties were reduced from the examiner’s
initial recommendations by a total of $232,200, including one penalty that was
reduced from $105,000 to $25,000. Specifically, the assessed penalties had been
reduced from an aggregate of $300,000 to an aggregate of $67,800. However,
OCFR could not provide us with specific documentation as to how the
aforementioned criteria were used to determine the initial or final penalty
amounts.
Examinations are performed by OCFR’s mortgage compliance unit for every
licensee within 18 months of initial licensure and every 3 years thereafter.
According to OCFR’s records, penalty payments received in fiscal year 2015
totaled approximately $169,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OCFR document its determination of penalty amounts
assessed against mortgage licensees, including how criteria established in the
law were used to determine the penalty amounts.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Labor,
Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) – Office of the Commissioner of Financial
Regulation (OCFR) for the period beginning August 2, 2012 and ending July 19,
2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OCFR’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included consumer credit and oversight of financial
institutions, including examinations and licensing, and cash receipts.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OCFR by the
DLLR – Office of the Secretary. These support services (for example, payroll,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OCFR’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue data). The extracts
are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
OCFR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OCFR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OCFR that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DLLR, on behalf of OCFR, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DLLR regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation
Response to Draft Legislative Audit Report for the audit period beginning August 2, 2012 and
ending July 19, 2015
December 18, 2015
As Commissioner of Financial Regulation, I am pleased to provide you and members of the Joint Audit
Committee with the Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation’s (“OCFR”) response to the
draft audit report dated December 3, 2015. We appreciate the thoroughness and consideration displayed
by your staff in conducting the audit and trust that the process has and will assist OCFR in maintaining
policies and procedures that ensure the highest performance standards.
The OCFR’s responses to the finding and corresponding recommendation contained in the Audit report
for the period beginning August 2, 2012 and ending July 19, 2015 are set forth below. The OCFR takes
seriously the recommendation in the Audit and, as evidenced below, has corrected the issue noted in the
Audit. This audit dated December 3 2015 has one finding and recommendation; mortgage licensee
penalties.
Audit Findings and Recommendations
Mortgage Licensee Penalties
Finding 1
The Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation (OCFR) did not adequately document its
determination of the amounts of financial penalties assessed to mortgage licensees.
Analysis
OCFR did not adequately document its determination of the amounts of financial penalties it assessed
against mortgage licensees (lenders and originators) that resulted from examinations conducted by its
mortgage compliance unit. State law provides that a civil penalty of up to $5,000 may be imposed on a
licensee for each violation of Maryland’s Mortgage Lender Law and stipulates criteria to consider when
determining the penalty amount. Criteria include the seriousness of the violation, the nature of previous
violations, and the effect on the public and mortgage industry. In addition, the OCFR advised us that
negotiations with the non-compliant licensee may affect the amount of the penalty. However, OCFR did
not routinely document its consideration of the aforementioned criteria and the extent to which each of
the criteria factored into the determination.
Our test of 10 penalties assessed against licensees that were paid during fiscal year 2015 disclosed that 8
of these penalties were reduced from the examiner’s initial recommendations by a total of $232,200,
including one penalty that was reduced from $105,000 to $25,000. Specifically, the assessed penalties
had been reduced from an aggregate of $300,000 to an aggregate of $67,800. However, OCFR could not
provide us with specific documentation as to how the aforementioned criteria were used to determine the
initial or final penalty amounts.
2

--- Page 11 ---
Examinations are performed by OCFR’s mortgage compliance unit for every licensee within 18 months
of initial licensure and every 3 years thereafter. According to OCFR’s records, penalty payments
received in fiscal year 2015 totaled approximately $169,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OCFR document its determination of the specific penalty amounts assessed
against mortgage licensees, including how criteria established in the law were used to determine
the penalty amounts.
AGENCY RESPONSE
The OCFR agrees with Finding 1 and the corresponding recommendation. The Auditor noted that the
OCFR failed to keep adequate documentation to determine how the fines recommended in examination
reports ended up as a lesser amount. After review of the 10 penalty cases mentioned, we feel confident
that the penalties issued were appropriate and the differing amounts were justified after consideration of
the six factors. We note that the six factors were considered when the fines were originally imposed but
agree that we did not fully and completely document their consideration.
In April 2015, the agency adopted a new policy, Assessment of Fines and Penalties Resulting from
Examination Findings Mortgage Compliance Unit. This policy confirms that it is more efficient and
effective for the mortgage compliance unit to attempt to consensually resolve examination findings prior
to formal enforcement action being taken. Examiners can and should recommend through the
examination resolution process that a company be fined based on the examination findings, although as
discussed above specific amounts are no longer placed into the reports of examination. In response to
discussions with the legislative audit team, in October 2015, the agency adopted a Sample Memorandum
that is to be completed if examination findings warrant a monetary penalty1 and that the mortgage
compliance unit determines that it should attempt to consensually resolve the matter. The six factors
that will be considered when determining the amount of a civil penalty to be sought by the mortgage
compliance unit are;
 seriousness of the violation,
 good faith of the violator,
 violator’s history of previous violations,
 effects on the public and mortgage industry,
 the assets of the violator, and,
 any other factors that are considered relevant.
Both the policy and the new Memorandum will clearly document the reasoning behind the calculation of
any monetary penalty negotiated by the mortgage compliance unit in an attempt to consensually resolve
examination findings.
1 Monetary penalties are levied based on F.I § 2-115, F.I. § 11-501 et. seq., F.I. § 11-601 et. seq., Title
12 of the Commercial Law Article, and any relevant regulation adopted thereunder.
3

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor
Kimberly J. Wagner
Staff Auditor