Title: Comptroller of the Treasury - Field Enforcement Division
Date: 07/02/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d724560674408
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:44:36.640371
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of the Treasury
Field Enforcement Division
July 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternative formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 2, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the following divisions of the Comptroller of the Treasury for
the periods noted:
Field Enforcement Division (FED) – July 1, 2007 to December 31, 2007
Regulatory and Enforcement Division (RED) – July 1, 2005 to June 30, 2007
Motor Fuel Tax Division (MFTD) – December 8, 2003 to September 30, 2005
Certain organizational changes that occurred within the Office of the Comptroller
are explained on pages 3 and 4 of this audit report.
Our audit disclosed that FED did not perform physical inventories of confiscated
property as required, record applicable transactions in the detail inventory records
in a timely manner, and establish adequate internal controls over cash received
from the sale of confiscated goods.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Organizational Changes and Agencies’ Responsibilities
Effective October 1, 2005, certain duties and responsibilities within the
Comptroller of the Treasury were reorganized. Specifically, the Motor Fuel Tax
Division was merged into the Regulatory and Enforcement Division (RED).
RED was responsible for the administration of the laws and regulations governing
1) State motor fuel and motor carrier taxes, and 2) the manufacture, storage,
transportation, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages and tobacco. RED
was also responsible for the enforcement of trade practice regulations and revenue
laws related to alcoholic beverages, tobacco, motor fuel, and sales and use taxes.
Furthermore, RED was responsible for collecting excise taxes on alcoholic
beverages and tobacco, reviewing motor carrier tax returns and refund requests,
and performing certain licensing functions.
Subsequently, the Comptroller of the Treasury reorganized RED into two separate
divisions effective July 1, 2007. Specifically, certain responsibilities were
transferred from RED to create the Motor-fuel, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax
Division (MATT), and the name of RED was changed to the Field Enforcement
Division (FED) for the remaining responsibilities. These organizational changes
are illustrated in the diagram on page 4 of this report.
FED is responsible for the enforcement of trade practice regulations and revenue
laws related to alcoholic beverages, tobacco, motor fuel, and sales and use taxes.
Additionally, FED is responsible for the issuance of certain business licenses and
testing motor fuel quality.
MATT administers laws and regulations pertaining to the manufacture, storage,
transportation, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and motor
fuel, and collects the related excise taxes. MATT’s primary responsibilities
consist of reviewing alcohol, tobacco and motor carrier tax returns and refund
requests, and performing certain licensing functions. Certain responsibilities of
MATT have been delegated to other units within the Comptroller of the Treasury.
For example, processing and distributing of alcohol and tobacco tax receipts and
motor fuel tax receipts are the responsibility of the Revenue Administration
Division.
According to the records of the Comptroller of the Treasury, revenues applicable
to alcohol and tobacco taxes totaled approximately $308 million during fiscal year
2007. Those same records showed that net revenues applicable to motor fuel and
3

--- Page 6 ---
mmotor carrier taxes and reelated fees tootaled approxximately $755.7 millionn during
fiiscal year 20007. In accorrdance with State law, aafter deductinng $7.8 milliion for
addministrative costs, the rremaining $7747.9 millioon were distrributed to thee
TTransportatioon Trust Fund ($731.3 mmillion), otherr special proograms ($3.44 million)
annd the Generral Fund ($113.2 million)).
TThe scope of this audit inncludes the aactivities of FFED and thee related formmer
divisions for tthe periods ooutlined in thhe cover lettter of this repport. We wiill
seeparately auddit and reporrt on the actiivities of MAATT.
Summaary of Orgganizationnal Changees
•Field
•Regulatory
From Enforcement
and Regulatory
Until October 1, Divisioon
Enforrcement and Sincce July
Sepptember Divisiion 2005 to Enforcement 1, 22007 •Motor‐fuel,
300, 2005 June 30, Alcohool and
•Motoor Fuel Division
2007 Tobaccco Tax
Tax DDivision
Divisioon
SStatus of FFindings Frrom Preceeding Auddit Reportss
WWe reviewedd the status of the two finndings includded in our prreceding auddit report
of the former Regulatory and Enforceement Divisiion, dated NNovember 1, 2005.
WWe determineed that this DDivision satiisfactorily adddressed these two findinngs. We
allso reviewedd the status oof the six finndings includded in our prreceding auddit report
of the former Motor Fuel Tax Divisioon, dated Junne 1, 2004. WWe determinned that
thhese six finddings were saatisfactorily addressed.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Confiscated Property
Finding 1
The Field Enforcement Division (FED) did not perform physical inventories
of confiscated property and update the related inventory records as required.
In addition, controls over cash received from sales of confiscated property
were inadequate.
Analysis
Physical inventories of confiscated property were not performed as required and
the related inventory records were not updated timely. In addition, controls over
cash received from sales of confiscated property were inadequate. Specifically,
we noted the following conditions:
• As of January 2008, FED had not conducted a physical inventory of
confiscated property since May 2005. FED’s Procedures Manual requires
that a physical inventory of all confiscated property be completed every six
months. In addition, FED had not updated the detail inventory records to
reflect sales and destructions of confiscated items since January 2007. For
example, during the period from January 2007 to January 2008, FED
completed three bulk sales of confiscated items (such as 100,000 packs of
cigarettes) totaling approximately $185,000. In addition, the aforementioned
inventory records had not been updated to reflect 16,700 packs of cigarettes,
approximately 2,800 containers of alcohol and 27,000 tins of chewing tobacco
that had been sold, returned or destroyed prior to January 2007.
• Cash receipts from sales of confiscated property (including motor vehicles)
were received by employees responsible for completing such sales. Although
such checks were to be forwarded to the Accounting Department for deposit,
the Department may not readily identify any checks that were not received
since it was not provided documentation alerting it to pending sales of
confiscated property. As a result, the related cash receipts could potentially be
misappropriated without detection. As previously noted, during the period
from January 2007 to January 2008, FED collected approximately $185,000
from sales of confiscated property.
According to its records, during fiscal year 2007, FED confiscated approximately
50,000 packs of cigarettes and 6,600 containers of alcohol (beer, wine and
distilled spirits) valued at approximately $207,000 and $175,000, respectively.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FED maintain the inventory records of confiscated
property on a current basis and conduct physical inventories of confiscated
property every six months as required. We also recommend that FED
require that individuals and entities that purchase confiscated property
remit related payments directly to the Accounting Department. We advised
FED on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the following divisions of the Comptroller of the Treasury for
the periods noted:
Field Enforcement Division (FED) – July 1, 2007 to December 31, 2007
Regulatory and Enforcement Division (RED) – July 1, 2005 to June 30, 2007
Motor Fuel Tax Division (MFTD) – December 8, 2003 to September 30, 2005
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the divisions’
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the eight findings included in our preceding audit reports on the former
Regulatory and Enforcement Division (two findings) and the former Motor Fuel
Tax Division (six findings).
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the divisions’ operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
divisions by the Comptroller of the Treasury – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services (such as processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the
Office of the Comptroller. Our audit also did not include certain support services
provided to the divisions by the Comptroller of the Treasury – Information
Technology Division related to the procurement and monitoring of information
technology equipment and services. These support services are included in the
scope of our audits of the Information Technology Division.
Our audit scope was limited with respect to certain of MFTD’s cash transactions
because the Office of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the State’s main
bank accounts during a portion of the audit period. Due to this condition, we
were unable to determine, with reasonable assurance, that all MFTD cash
transactions prior to July 1, 2005 were accounted for and properly recorded on the
related State accounting records as well as the banks’ records.
The divisions’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding related to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect FED’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the divisions that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The Office of the Comptroller’s response, on behalf of FED, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 13 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Peter J. Klemans, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Adam M. Auerback
Staff Auditor