Title: Department of Veterans Affairs
Date: 12/01/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ecc9d724560674756
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:59:27.495095
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Veterans Affairs
December 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
arren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ. BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
December 1, 2016
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Department ofVeterans Affairs (DVA) for the period
beginning December 8, 2012 and ending March 6, 2016. DVA assists veterans
and their families and survivors in obtaining federal, State, and local benefits
provided by law in recognition oftheir service to state and country. DVA also
manages five veterans’ cemeteries, maintains four veterans’ war memorials, and
operates and manages the Charlotte Hall Veterans Home.
Our audit disclosed that DVA did not use certain funds as intended and
improperly retained funds totaling $126,000, at the close offiscal year 2015, that
should have been reverted to the State’s General Fund. DVA also had a federal
fund deficit totaling approximately $1 million at June 30, 2015, which had
occurred several years earlier, but for which a deficiency appropriation was
obtained during fiscal year 2016. Federal fund allowance requests were not made
in a timely manner from the U.S. Department ofVeterans Affairs (USDVA), and
DVA has experienced significant delays in obtaining these reimbursements.
DVA did not reduce payments to the vendor operating the Charlotte Hall Veterans
Home when required staffing was not provided. We estimate DVA could have
reduced vendor payments by $180,000 for the 15-monthperiod reviewed.
Finally, we noted control and record keeping deficiencies over purchases and
disbursements, and cash receipts. For example, DVA did not always record
collections upon receipt, and independent verifications were not performed to
ensure all collections were deposited.
301 \A/est Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll free in Maryland 877-486-9964’ Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
DVA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish
to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis audit by
DVA.
Respectfully submitted,
Thomas I. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Special Funds
Finding 1 – The Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) did not use 6
certain funds as intended and improperly retained funds totaling
$126,000 at the end of fiscal year 2015 that should have been
reverted to the State’s General Fund.
Budget Closeout Transactions
* Finding 2 – Unsupported federal fund revenue transactions totaling 7
$1 million were recorded to offset deficit balances as of
June 30, 2015.
Federal Funds
Finding 3 – DVA did not request federal fund allowances for veterans’ 8
burials timely, and has experienced significant delays in obtaining
these reimbursements from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.
Purchases and Disbursements
* Finding 4 – DVA did not always use the appropriate payment method 9
for disbursement transactions and did not always document that
goods or services were received prior to payment.
Finding 5 – DVA did not reduce payments to the vendor operating the 10
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home, as permitted by the contract, when
required staffing was not provided.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 6 – DVA did not record collections upon receipt and independent 11
deposit verifications were either not performed or were performed
by individuals who processed or had access to the related collections.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) delivers services and administers
programs to assist veterans, their families, and survivors in obtaining federal,
State, and local benefits provided by law in recognition of their service to the
State and country. DVA provides administrative services through numerous
veterans’ service centers throughout the State, the United States Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, and the Charlotte Hall Veterans Home (CHVH),
and operates and maintains five veterans’ cemeteries, four veterans’ war
memorials, and offices in Annapolis and Baltimore. CHVH provides care for
Maryland veterans who are unable to care for themselves due to disability or
advancing age, or who have the need for skilled nursing care. According to the
State’s records, DVA’s operating expenditures for fiscal year 2015 totaled
approximately $31.4 million ($22.5 million in federal funds, $8.2 million in
general funds, and $727,000 in special funds).
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated December 6, 2013. We determined
that DVA satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The remaining three
findings are repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Special Funds
Finding 1
The Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) did not use certain funds as
intended and improperly retained funds totaling approximately $126,000 at
the end of fiscal year 2015 that should have been reverted to the State’s
General Fund.
Analysis
The Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) did not use certain funds as intended
and improperly retained funds at the end of fiscal year 2015 that should have been
reverted to the State’s General Fund.
• DVA did not use funds recovered from veteran’s families totaling $303,000 to
offset the burial costs paid for with general funds, as intended. DVA pays for
burial costs of veterans’ dependents using general funds and subsequently
recovers a portion of these funds from veterans’ families, but did not always
use the recovered funds to offset the general fund expenditures. For example,
during fiscal year 2014, DVA recovered $659,000 from veterans’ families but
only used $394,000 to offset the related general fund expenditures. As a
result, DVA had accumulated a special fund balance of $303,000 at the end of
fiscal year 2015. These recovered funds were budgeted as special funds to be
used to offset the burial costs that were paid for with general funds. DVA did
not use the special funds as intended and, as a result, general funds which
would otherwise have been reverted were used to cover these expenditures.
Advice recently obtained from the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM) and DVA attorneys general stated that DVA may retain these special
funds but should only use the funds for their authorized purpose.
• DVA improperly deposited $126,000 in energy credits received from utility
companies into a special fund intended for gifts and grants for the Charlotte
Hall Veterans Home (CHVH) and retained those funds at the end of fiscal
year 2015. While State law provides for the retention of gifts and grants for
CHVH, it does not provide for retention of the energy credits. We were
advised by DBM that DVA did not have authorization to spend these funds
during fiscal year 2015 and therefore these funds should have been reverted to
the State’s General Fund.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DVA
a. use the accumulated and future funds recovered from veterans’ families
for burial costs as intended, and
b. revert funds improperly retained for energy credits to the State’s General
Fund.
Budget Closeout Transactions
Finding 2
Unsupported federal fund revenue transactions totaling approximately $1
million were recorded to offset deficit balances as of June 30, 2015.
Analysis
DVA recorded federal fund revenue transactions totaling approximately $1
million in the State’s Financial Management Information System to offset deficit
balances that existed in federal programs as of June 30, 2015. According to the
Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD), these deficits
resulted from federal fund expenditures incurred during prior years dating back to
at least fiscal year 2007. Management personnel at DVA could not provide any
documentation supporting that the recorded federal fund revenue would be
received. GAD requires that detail documentation be maintained to support
revenue transactions as part of the year-end closing process.
This issue was commented upon in our preceding audit report of DVA as well as
in our Statewide Review of Budgetary Transactions for fiscal years 2011 through
2015. During the 2016 Session of the Maryland General Assembly, DVA was
provided with a $1 million deficiency appropriation to eliminate the
aforementioned deficit balance.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DVA ensure that all year-end revenue transactions
recorded in the State’s Financial Management Information System are
properly supported (repeat).
7

--- Page 10 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 3
DVA did not request federal fund allowances for veterans’ burials from the
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (USDVA) in a timely manner. In
addition, DVA has experienced significant delays in recovering $2.7 million
in burial funds from the USDVA.
Analysis
DVA did not request federal fund allowances for veterans’ burials from USDVA
in a timely manner, and has experienced significant delays in recovering $2.7
million in funds requested from the USDVA, resulting in lost interest income to
the State. The State’s five veterans’ cemeteries are eligible to receive an
allowance in an amount ranging from $722 to $747 for each veteran buried in a
State veterans’ cemetery. Each month the cemeteries submit a State application
for internment allowance to DVA’s Annapolis fiscal office where the applications
are approved and submitted to the USDVA for payment.
Our test of 20 monthly allowance requests for burials that occurred during the
period from July 2014 through February 2016, totaling $2.6 million, disclosed
that 14 requests totaling $1.8 million were submitted 37 to 169 days later than
they could have been. For example, a request for veterans’ burials in January
2015, totaling $170,000, was not submitted for payment until June 15, 2015. We
were unable to determine the timeliness of 2 of the requests tested, totaling
$269,000, because the documentation on file did not contain the request dates.
The 14 untimely requests resulted in lost interest income to the State of
approximately $5,000.
DVA has experienced significant delays in its reimbursement of these funds. As
of May 18, 2016, DVA had not received allowances from USDVA for burial
costs totaling $2.7 million ($1 million for fiscal year 2016; $1 million for fiscal
year 2015; $700,000 for fiscal year 2014; and $43,000 for fiscal year 2013).
Because State funds were used to cover the costs of these expenditures, we
estimate the State lost an additional $14,000 in interest income for the
aforementioned 14 untimely allowance requests. DVA made certain attempts to
obtain these reimbursements; however, these attempts have not been successful.
While acknowledging the amounts due, USDVA advised us that the delays in
processing the requests were primarily due to turnover of its personnel
responsible for processing, auditing, and paying burial payment requests.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DVA
a. submit allowance requests in a timely manner (such as within 30 days of
the month of the burial) to the USDVA, and
b. continue to work with the USDVA to obtain payment for the outstanding
allowance requests.
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 4
DVA did not always use the appropriate payment method for disbursement
transactions and did not always document that goods or services were
received prior to payment.
Analysis
DVA did not always use the appropriate payment method for disbursement
transactions. According to the State’s accounting records, during the period from
July 1, 2012 through February 26, 2016, DVA processed all of its $66.7 million in
disbursement transactions on the State’s Financial Management Information
System using the direct payment method rather than prepare purchase orders and
electronically match them with invoices and receiving reports. The majority of
these transactions ($56.5 million) were invoice payments to the vendor operating
CHVH which should have been matched to the purchase order to ensure amounts
paid were proper and did not exceed the maximum cost specified in the contract.
Based on our review, the amounts paid to the CHVH vendor as of February 2016
did not exceed the maximum contract amount.
DVA management advised us that DVA personnel manually compared the
purchase orders with vendor invoices, and documented on the invoices that goods
or services were received prior to payment. However, our test of 15 transactions
from fiscal years 2013 through 2016 totaling $674,000 paid to other vendors
disclosed 4 transactions totaling $52,000 where there was no documentation that
the receipt of the related goods or services had been verified prior to payment.
The Department of Information Technology’s Internal Control and Security
Policy and Procedures Manual states a match payment type should be used for
purchase of services and commodities. Such an automated process ensures that
invoices are only paid for purchases that were properly authorized and for goods
and services that were actually received. The failure to use the proper payment
method was noted in our preceding audit report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DVA
a. use the appropriate online method to process payment transactions to
ensure purchase orders are prepared for all applicable expenditures and
matched with the related invoices and receiving reports (when applicable)
prior to payment (repeat), and
b. adequately document that goods and services are received prior to
payment.
Finding 5
DVA did not reduce payments to the vendor operating CHVH, as permitted
by the contract, when required staffing was not provided.
Analysis
DVA did not reduce payments to the vendor operating CHVH when required
staffing was not provided, as permitted by the contract. Our review of the staffing
reports provided by the vendor for the period from January 2015 to March 2016
disclosed two nursing positions that were vacant for the entire 15-month period
and another position (Social Services Director) that was vacant for approximately
5 months. Based on the hourly rate for the three vacant positions and a 40-hour
week, we estimate DVA could have reduced the payments to the vendor by
approximately $180,000 during this period.
The contract with the vendor, effective October 2010, included certain minimum
staffing requirements and provided that DVA would pay the vendor a per diem
for each eligible individual served. Because the level of service is largely
dependent upon qualified and capable staff at the levels proposed by the vendor,
the contract also provided for DVA to reduce the vendor’s per diem payments for
the prorated salaries of positions that were vacant for more than 45 days. DVA
management advised us that vendor staffing reports were reviewed to identify
vacant positions but payments had never been reduced. The contract allowed for
exceptions to be approved by DVA based on circumstances in which a position
could not be filled within the 45-day allowable period; however, DVA was not
aware of any approved exceptions.
DVA paid the vendor approximately $18.6 million during fiscal year 2015, which
included $13.7 million in per diem payments. The remaining vendor payments
included an unrestricted State grant and reimbursement for other costs associated
with the operation of CHVH and other resident activities and services.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DVA obtain and review required staffing information
from the vendor for the entire contract period and recover any amounts due
for vacant positions, including those noted above.
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
DVA did not always record collections upon receipt, and deposit verifications
either were not performed or were performed by individuals who processed
or had access to the related collections.
Analysis
DVA did not always record collections upon receipt, and independent deposit
verifications were not performed. DVA’s collections were primarily received at
its Annapolis fiscal office, five veterans’ cemeteries, and CHVH. According to
the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, DVA’s collections totaled
approximately $1.8 million. Collections related to federal burial allowances,
reimbursements of funeral costs from veterans’ dependents, and CHVH
donations.
• DVA did not record monthly burial allowances upon receipt, which totaled
approximately $764,000 during fiscal year 2015. These collections were
received from the federal government at DVA’s Annapolis fiscal office until
April 2015 when responsibility for processing these collections was
transferred to one of DVA’s cemeteries. DVA deposited these funds without
initially recording the collections upon receipt at either location until February
2016. In addition, there were no deposit verifications performed at these
locations to ensure these funds were subsequently deposited.
• Prior to February 2016, the deposit verifications for other receipts were not
independent because they were performed by individuals who processed or
had access to the related collections. Although DVA implemented an
independent verification of these collections in February of 2016, the
verification of certain collections (related to CHVH) was not sufficient
because it did not include the initial source of recordation.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to perform deposit verifications were
noted in our two preceding audit reports. The Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual requires recording of checks immediately upon
receipt and that a reconciliation of the initial recordation of collections to the
11

--- Page 14 ---
amount deposited be performed by an employee independent of the cash receipts
function.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DVA ensure that
a. all collections are recorded immediately upon receipt; and
b. employees independent from the cash receipts functions perform
documented verifications that collections initially recorded are
subsequently deposited (repeat).
We advised DVA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties with
existing personnel.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Veterans
Affairs (DVA) for the period beginning December 8, 2012 and ending March 6,
2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DVA’s financial
transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, cash receipts,
federal fund reimbursements, payroll, and property. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of DVA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DVA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DVA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
13

--- Page 16 ---
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DVA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DVA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DVA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DVA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DVA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
14

--- Page 17 ---
APPENDIX
Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs LARRYHOGAN
GOVERNOR
BOYDK. RUTHERFORD
LT GOVERNOR
Office ofthe Secretary
GEORGEW. OWINGS Ill
SECRETARY
November 28, 2016
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Department ofLegislative Services
Office ofLegislative Audits
301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
I am submitting herewith the response ofthe Maryland Department ofVeterans
Affairs (Veterans Affairs) to the recommendations made in the draft audit report on
Veterans Affairs for the period beginning December 8, 2012, and ending March 6,
2016. Each individual response is cross-referenced to the respective finding and
recommendation from the draft audit report.
Sincerely,
George Owings III
.
Secretary
Ii[I’ WINEL\ND BUILDING, FOVRTII ILOC)R
16 FRNCISSTREET, \NN\POLIS, M\RYL\ND 214t)l
ToLLFREE: $66 793A577 •NN\POLIS: 41t)26tO-3$3$ • I \X: 41t) 2I6-792$
eteransmarvIand.go
TFYUSERSCALLVIAMDRELAY

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 1
a. Veterans Affairs concurs with the recommendation and has been in compliance for
the past two years, since the FY 2014 fiscal closeout. The finding related primarily to
FY 2014, a year of leadership transition in the Veterans Affairs fiscal unit.
b. Veterans Affairs concurs with the recommendation and is already in compliance.
None of the revenue was ever spent; all has been reverted.
Finding 2
Veterans Affairs concurs with the recommendation and is already in compliance. The
expenditures creating the deficit balances occurred over a decade ago, and the
resulting deficit was fully eliminated as a result of a deficiency appropriation approved
by the Legislature in 2016.
Finding 3
a. Veterans Affairs concurs with the recommendation and has already substantially
improved the timeliness of submission of allowance requests to the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs.
b. Veterans Affairs concurs with the recommendation and is already in compliance.
Veterans Affairs’ efforts, and those of new U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs fiscal
leadership in Baltimore, have resulted in much of the past due balance having been
settled since May 2016. The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs has been remitting
payment at an accelerated pace in an effort to resolve the backlog.
Finding 4
a. Veterans Affairs concurs with the recommendation and notes the progress in
compliance with State procurement guidelines since hiring its first-ever procurement
officer in 2015. Still, existing staffing and resource levels, and the geographical
dispersion of Veterans Affairs staff across the State, present significant obstacles to
full and timely compliance. Veterans Affairs will seek to achieve substantial
compliance with the recommendation by the end of FY 2018.
b. Veterans Affairs concurs with the recommendation and has already implemented
processes to document receipt of goods and services prior to payment. Veterans
Affairs will continue to take steps necessary to achieve full compliance by the end of
FY 2017.
Finding 5
Veterans Affairs concurs with the recommendation. Veterans Affairs notes that the
intent of the contract provision permitting a reduction in payment for unfilled
2 | P a ge

--- Page 19 ---
positions was to discourage the contractor from intentionally holding positions vacant;
and the contractor has not done so. Veterans Affairs also notes that, as of the date of
agency response to Finding 5, the current contract is only weeks from expiration. Prior
to close out of the current contract, and not later than March 31, 2017, Veterans
Affairs will conduct a review of required staffing information from the contractor and
will, to the extent reasonably possible, (a) determine if vacancies of greater than 45
days existed in the absence of extenuating circumstances, and (b) seek to recover the
portion of payments made to the contractor related to such vacancies.
Finding 6
a. Veterans Affairs concurs with recommendation and is already in compliance. All
collections are recorded immediately upon receipt in both a receipt log and in the
State’s accounting system.
b. Veterans Affairs concurs with recommendation and is currently performing
documented verifications that collections initially recorded are subsequently
deposited.
3 | P a ge

--- Page 20 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditor