Title: Department of Information Technology
Date: 09/12/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d724560674474
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:59:01.103930
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Information Technology
September 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Major Information Technology Development Projects (MITDP)
* Finding 1 – DoIT lacked sufficient documentation supporting its 8
reviews of annual MITDP status reports and system development
documents, and that quarterly portfolio reviews were conducted.
Finding 2 – DoIT had not established a process to independently 10
evaluate project managers hired through a vendor to oversee
MITDPs, specific project monitoring documentation and
reporting requirements, nor a means to ensure sufficient contract
personnel were assigned to monitor all 33 MITDPs valued at
$850 million.
Finding 3 – DoIT had not established comprehensive policies for 12
project changes to scope, schedule, or costs (rebaselining) and
Independent Verification and Validation assessments.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – The DoIT, Department of Budget and Management, and 15
Executive Department – Office of the Governor networks were
not properly secured in that certain contractors had been granted
unnecessary access and certain security capabilities were not fully
used.
Finding 5 – Computers covered by DoIT’s managed desktop services 16
were not properly maintained and secured with current malware
protection.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Statewide Contract Procurements
* Finding 6 – DoIT did not properly instruct State agencies procuring 17
services from DoIT’s statewide contract to secure competitive
bids received electronically and DoIT did not always properly
secure its own bids.
Universal Service Trust Fund
Finding 7 – DoIT did not recommend an appropriate reduction in 19
the Universal Service Fee in recognition of excess funds in the
Universal Service Trust Fund.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) is responsible for the State’s
information technology policies, procedures, and standards, and for overseeing
the implementation of major information technology projects for the State’s
Executive Branch agencies and commissions.1 DoIT also provides technical
assistance, advice, and recommendations concerning information technology to
these agencies and commissions. Furthermore, DoIT develops the Statewide
Information Technology Master Plan; manages the Major Information
Technology Development Project Fund (MITDP Fund); and coordinates,
purchases, and manages information technology and telecommunications services
to State agencies. The MITDP Fund supports many of the State’s major
information technology development projects.
DoIT also administers the Telecommunications Access of Maryland program,
which provides telecommunications relay service for Marylanders who are deaf,
hard of hearing, or speech disabled so they can communicate with others through
TTY (text telephone) using a standard phone; this program is supported by the
Universal Service Trust Fund.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, DoIT’s operating
expenditures totaled $99.2 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Based on our assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives,
our audit included a review to determine the status of five of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 1, 2013. We determined
that DoIT satisfactorily addressed three of the five findings. The remaining two
findings are repeated in this report. We did not follow up on the remaining two
findings that pertained to the One Maryland Broadband Network since this project
was completed shortly after our preceding audit report was issued.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of 5 of the 12 findings
contained in our performance audit report, dated September 27, 2012. The
performance audit report assessed DoIT’s information system data security
1 According to State law, DoIT does not have authority over or responsibility for the University
System of Maryland, Morgan State University, and St. Mary’s College.
5

--- Page 8 ---
policies and selected State agencies’ compliance with certain policies. We
determined that DoIT satisfactorily addressed these 5 findings.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Major Information Technology Development Projects
Background
State law provides the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) with the
responsibility for overseeing the development and implementation of major
information technology development projects (MITDPs). MITDPs are defined as
any information technology development project that meets one or more of the
following conditions:
 The project’s estimated total cost is at least $1 million.
 The project supports a critical business function associated with the public
health, education, safety, or financial well-being of the citizens of
Maryland.
 DoIT’s Secretary determines the project requires special attention.
State law requires DoIT to approve funding for MITDPs only when projects are
supported by an approved system development life cycle (SDLC) methodology.
The SDLC assists agencies through the planning and execution of successful
information technology projects. DoIT’s oversight responsibilities generally
include (1) reviewing critical project documents, including the management plan,
functional requirements documents, procurement documents, and system testing
plan; (2) conducting quarterly portfolio review meetings with agencies
implementing MITDPs; and (3) initiating Independent Verification and Validation
assessments. Since December 2013, DoIT has contracted with a vendor to
provide personnel for project oversight services. However, DoIT retains ultimate
oversight responsibility.
According to DoIT’s records, as of June 2015, there were 33 MITDPs valued at
approximately $850 million. More than 75 percent of the value of these projects
was related to agencies responsible for providing services in the health, education,
financial, and public safety sectors of State government. MITDPs are funded
from multiple sources including the State’s Major Information Technology
Development Fund, which DoIT administers. According to DoIT’s records, Fund
expenditures totaled approximately $27.3 million during fiscal year 2015,
including $1.7 million for project oversight.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 1
DoIT lacked sufficient documentation supporting its reviews of annual
MITDP status reports and system development documents, and that
quarterly portfolio reviews were conducted.
Analysis
DoIT lacked sufficient documentation to support that it effectively monitored
MITDPs through its reviews of information technology project annual status
reports and system development documents, and its quarterly portfolio review
meetings for MITDPs. We noted the following issues based on our test of five
MITDP projects valued at $355.5 million.
Information Technology Project Requests
DoIT was not ensuring that agencies’ annual project status reports, known as
Information Technology Project Requests (ITPRs), were current prior to
approving them. An ITPR includes a summary of the project scope, the needs
addressed, potential risks, possible alternatives, estimated costs, and funding
sources, and describes how the project meets the goals of the Statewide
Information Technology Master Plan. State law requires agencies to annually
complete and submit an ITPR for DoIT’s review and approval throughout the
MITDP life cycle. DoIT submits the approved ITPRs to the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM) and the Department of Legislative Services2 for
budget analysis purposes.
Our test of the ITPRs submitted for the aforementioned five projects during fiscal
year 2015 (for fiscal year 2016) disclosed that DoIT approved the ITPRs even
though certain information on ITPRs for three projects valued at $163.6 million
had not been updated from the prior year’s ITPR. For example, explanations of
the risks and the milestones achieved for two MITDPs were not updated. For one
of these two projects, although the ITPR indicated certain phases of the project
had been completed, the completion dates for 13 of the 17 milestones required to
be completed during these phases were not reported. Consequently, the accuracy,
completeness, and reliability of the information included on the ITPRs was not
assured.
2 ITPRs involve a two-step approval process to ensure State agencies follow a standardized
approach to requesting approval and funding for MITDPs. Step one is in the form of a Project
Planning Request and step two is in the form of a Project Implementation Request. An agency
initially submits a Project Planning Request each year until the project has completed the required
planning and requirements analysis phases, including a baseline project budget and schedule.
Once these phases are completed, the agency submits a Project Implementation Request each year
until the project has completed the design, development, testing, implementation, and operation
phases.
8

--- Page 11 ---
System Development Life Cycle
DoIT did not document its approval when agencies completed each system
development life cycle (SDLC) phase, as reported on the ITPR. Although not
required by State law, approval of each SDLC phase of the MITDP is critical
because these projects are often large and complicated, involve high costs, and
support a critical business function for the State. The SDLC is intended to reduce
the risk of project failure through the application of a proven and incremental
project development process performed in a logical manner. Currently, DoIT
documents its approval from general project planning to project implementation
but not for each phase within the SDLC. Generally, the SDLC involves nine
phases, such as planning, design, testing, and implementation.
Quarterly Portfolio Review Meetings
While DoIT’s policies require that quarterly portfolio review meetings be
conducted, specific documentation requirements were not established. In
practice, DoIT generally required that each quarterly portfolio review meeting be
documented with an attendance sign-in sheet and the agency’s self-assessments of
project status, including schedule, budget, expenditures, and risks. However,
DoIT frequently did not document significant matters discussed during these
meetings. Quarterly portfolio review meetings are a critical part of project
monitoring and are used to determine if corrective actions are needed to address
project risks.
We reviewed the most recent quarterly portfolio reviews, primarily for fiscal year
2015, for each of the five MITDP projects tested (total of 20 quarterly portfolio
reviews) and noted certain issues with 13 of the reviews. For 3 reviews, DoIT
could not provide any documentation that the meetings occurred. For 10
reviews, an attendance sign-in sheet was maintained, but DoIT did not document
the matters discussed, nor did DoIT document whether significant corrective
actions were required and, if so, what these actions entailed. One of these
projects was the same one mentioned previously in which the milestone
completion dates were not reported on the ITPR submitted during fiscal year
2015. In addition, agency’s self-assessments of project status were only provided
for 5 of the 10 reviews. Finally, DoIT did not document that it verified the
accuracy of the agency self-assessments of project status for any of the reviews.
DoIT advised us that it believes it provides sufficient oversight through regular
verbal communication with the agencies, including during these meetings, and
relies on the agencies to record the discussed corrective actions. Nevertheless,
complete documentation should be maintained by DoIT to demonstrate effective
monitoring of projects. A similar condition regarding the lack of sufficient
9

--- Page 12 ---
documentation of project monitoring efforts was commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure project status information reported on the ITPR is current and
complete as part of its annual review and approval process;
b. implement procedures to approve each SDLC phase when successfully
completed; and
c. establish and adhere to specific documentation requirements to support
that quarterly portfolio review meetings were performed, that agency
project status reports were verified for accuracy, and that its
recommended corrective actions resulting from the meeting were
documented (repeat).
Finding 2
DoIT had not established a process to independently evaluate project
managers hired through a vendor to oversee MITDPs, specific project
monitoring documentation and reporting requirements, nor a means to
ensure sufficient contract personnel were assigned to monitor all 33 MITDPs
valued at $850 million.
Analysis
DoIT had not established a process to independently evaluate the performance of
the vendor-supplied oversight project managers (OPM), nor had DoIT developed
specific documentation and reporting requirements for their project management
activities. Furthermore, DoIT had not established a means to ensure that the
vendor assigned sufficient OPM resources to monitor MITDPs on its behalf.
Consequently, assurance was lacking that the vendor was effectively monitoring
the development and implementation of all 33 MITDPs valued at $850 million.
DoIT had not established a formal process to independently assess whether OPMs
hired by its vendor to monitor assigned MITDP projects were properly
performing their duties and meeting expectations. According to the contract, the
vendor’s OPMs were required to follow project management methodologies
consistent with DoIT’s policies (such as, System Development Life Cycle) and
the Project Management Institute’s Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK). PMBOK is generally recognized as a best-practice standard in the
project monitoring industry by providing extensive guidance and formal
methodologies. OPMs were also responsible for reviewing and assessing MITDP
documentation (such as ITPRs and SDLC documentation), communicating with
10

--- Page 13 ---
project teams and stakeholders, contributing to DoIT’s MITDP reports, and
attending quarterly portfolio review meetings.
DoIT had processes in place to direct and approve the work of OPMs, including
establishing work orders, requiring the submission of bi-monthly activity reports,
and verifying hours worked. However, DoIT did not specify the types of
documentation that OPMs should gather while overseeing the projects nor specify
the information that should be included in the OPMs’ bi-monthly activity reports.
Consequently, we found that when activity reports were submitted, the
descriptions of the reported work performed by the individual OPMs varied in
content and specificity. This could impede DoIT’s ability to determine whether
OPMs were effectively monitoring project status, including the cost, scope, and
implementation schedule.
Additionally, DoIT did not establish a means to ensure an adequate number of
OPMs were assigned commensurate with the number and complexity of MITDPs.
Specifically, DoIT did not measure the workload of each OPM and determine if
an appropriate number of individuals were assigned to effectively monitor each
project, as recommended by PMBOK. Although the contract terms provided for
up to 20 OPMs to be assigned to meet DoIT’s project oversight needs, DoIT
could not explain why only 6 OPMs were assigned to oversee the MITDPs as of
June 2015.
In December 2013, DoIT executed a two-year contract (including three one-year
renewal options) totaling $32.2 million with this vendor to provide OPM
personnel for oversight support services, primarily for MITDPs. According to
DoIT’s records, payments to the vendor since the inception of the contract totaled
approximately $3.8 million as of December 2015.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT
a. establish a process to independently evaluate the performance of OPMs,
b. develop specific documentation and reporting requirements for OPM
project monitoring activities, and
c. establish a process to ensure an adequate number of OPMs are assigned
to meet the project oversight needs.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
DoIT had not established comprehensive policies for project changes to
scope, schedule, or costs (rebaselining) and Independent Verification and
Validation assessments.
Analysis
DoIT had not established comprehensive policies for project changes to scope,
schedule, or costs (rebaselining) and for the use of Independent Verification and
Validation assessments (IV&Vs). During the planning phases of the SDLC, a
project’s baseline for scope, schedule, and cost is established and is the
measurement against which a project team manages and is held accountable. A
project can be rebaselined for valid reasons (such as, changes in goals,
requirements, funding, or to correct inaccuracies), but rebaselining could also be
used to mask cost overruns or schedule delays. An IV&V serves as an
independent assessment on the overall health of the project; it identifies strengths
and areas that need improvement to help the project be successful, on time, and
within the allotted budget, and serves to strengthen DoIT’s routine project
oversight performed by OPMs.
Rebaselining
Since a rebaselining policy had not been established, DoIT management advised
us that it rebaselined projects based on its subjective judgment or at the request of
the agency implementing an MITDP. Furthermore, historical records to readily
identify all rebaselining occurrences during the life of each project, including the
reasons and project impact, were not maintained. According to DoIT’s records, 12
of the 42 projects it monitored in 2014 (29 percent) were rebaselined for one or
more reasons, such as changes in project scope, schedule, and/or budget.
PMBOK recommends that project managers establish a comprehensive
rebaselining policy and a formal process to track and explain the changes to the
baseline for scope, schedule, and cost. A comprehensive policy should address
the following elements:
 A description of valid reasons for rebaselining a project
 A description of the process for developing a new baseline
 A requirement that the new baseline be validated, and reviewed and approved
by management
 A requirement that rebaselining decisions be documented, including the
reasons, specific changes, and management’s review and approval
12

--- Page 15 ---
Independent Verification and Validation Assessments
Since an IV&V policy had not been established, DoIT management advised us
that the decision to initiate an IV&V was generally made during the project
development phase when its quarterly portfolio review meetings indicated an
MITDP had unaddressed risks with budget, scope, and/or schedule. However, the
lack of an IV&V policy resulted in unclear guidance and definitions of risk
factors to trigger an IV&V. According to its annual report on MITDPs as of
November 2015, and based on discussions with DoIT management, DoIT had
only initiated one IV&V for one of the 33 MITDPs. According to DoIT’s
records, as of June 30, 2015, DoIT had not documented a determination as to
whether to initiate an IV&V for any of the projects being monitored at that time,
including 19 projects that were in the more critical implementation/development
phases of the SDLC. Additionally, DoIT management could not document how
IV&V results should be considered during its project oversight.
IV&Vs can be performed throughout the SDLC as an independent means to
determine whether the system is being built using practices that lead to a
successful implementation (verification), and whether the completed system will
provide the needed functionality to satisfy the intended business purpose
(validation). Establishment of an IV&V process early in the project planning
phase allows the IV&V team members to have an unbiased view into the project
planning, scheduling, budgeting, and resource allocation. Implementing IV&V
processes during the planning phase ensures the development contractor’s
compliance with mandated scope and functionality of the software and helps
prevent cost overruns. Based on our research, we determined that a
comprehensive IV&V policy could incorporate the following elements:
 A description of the systematic methodology to be used by the IV&V vendor
for periodically calculating project risk based on parameters including project
significance, agency project management performance, vendor performance,
funding, schedule slippage, cost overruns, and significant scope changes
 Requirements for documenting considerations for whether and when to
initiate an IV&V
 Guidelines for taking corrective actions to mitigate risks when an IV&V is not
performed
 Guidelines for determining the IV&V scope and whether the IV&V should be
initiated at one or more points during the project, or should represent
continuous monitoring throughout the project
 Guidelines for considering IV&V results and documenting follow-up efforts
to determine the status of recommended actions (such as, reassessing
resources and staffing, suspending, or terminating a project)
13

--- Page 16 ---
 Provisions for when the IV&V vendor should conduct a post-implementation
assessment once the project has been in production for several months to
determine if business and technical objectives were achieved
Recommendation 3
We recommend DoIT establish and adhere to comprehensive policies,
including the aforementioned suggested provisions, governing project
rebaselining decisions and recordkeeping, and the use of IV&Vs.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
DoIT has statewide Information Technology (IT) responsibilities as well as
support service responsibilities on an agency-specific level as follows:
 DoIT manages the development and operations of the State’s data network
known as networkMaryland.
 DoIT is responsible for statewide applications such as the Financial
Management Information System, personnel system, and employee benefit
system. The Office of Legislative Audits separately examines controls for
these statewide applications within the separate audits of the Financial
Management Information System – Centralized Operations and the DBM
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits.
 In addition to its Statewide role, DoIT has responsibility for IT and
telecommunication services and support for DoIT, DBM, and the Executive
Department – Office of the Governor (EOG). This includes infrastructure
development, acquisition and maintenance, and application development and
maintenance.
 During fiscal year 2015 DoIT began providing network protection termed
Security as a Service (SECaaS) and managed desktop services (which
included malware protection) to certain State agencies with the goal of
expanding these services to numerous State agencies in the future.
Our audit of DoIT included a review of the security controls over DoIT’s
statewide responsibilities and agency specific responsibilities, including SECaaS
and managed malware protection.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 4
The DoIT, DBM, and EOG networks were not properly secured in that
certain contractors had been granted unnecessary access and certain security
capabilities were not fully used.
Analysis
The DoIT, DBM, and EOG networks were not properly secured in that certain
contractors had been granted unnecessary access and certain security capabilities
were not fully used.
 Contractors had unnecessary network level access to the DoIT and DBM
networks. Both DoIT and DBM were developing several systems with
extensive use of third-party contractors. These contractors worked both on-
site at DoIT and DBM locations and remotely. We were advised that these
contractors only required access to the specific development servers involved
with their projects and certain support servers. Although DoIT had
implemented various controls to help secure the DoIT and DBM networks
from contractors working remotely, appropriate controls were not in place for
those working on-site. Consequently, we determined that 57 of 213
contractors had unnecessary network level access to DoIT and DBM
workstations and numerous critical servers other than the development and
support servers that they needed to access.
 Our test of advanced security appliances determined that DoIT did not fully
utilize the expanded capabilities of these appliances to provide enhanced
perimeter security over the DoIT, DBM, and EOG networks. Specifically, we
noted that four available features (including the ability to allow or deny traffic
based on the application traversing the network) that would provide enhanced
network security were not used.
 Although the network-based intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS)
used by DoIT for the DoIT and DBM networks had the capability to decrypt
and analyze encrypted network traffic received, this feature was not enabled.
Furthermore, we determined that host-based intrusion protection systems
(HIPS) were not in use on DoIT and DBM servers that processed encrypted
traffic. The absence of IDPS coverage for such encrypted traffic created a
network security risk as such traffic could contain malicious exploits which
are not detected or dropped. Complete IDPS coverage includes the use of a
properly-configured, network-based IDPS that analyzes encrypted traffic,
and/or the use of an HIPS on critical servers, to aid significantly in the
detection and prevention of, and response to, potential network security
breaches and attacks.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT
a. restrict each DoIT and DBM contractor’s network level access to only
those servers and workstations that each contractor needs to access;
b. fully utilize the expanded capabilities of the advanced security appliances
to properly secure the DoIT, DBM, and EOG networks; and
c. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks from encrypted traffic and identify how IDPS and/or HIPS coverage
should be best applied to its network and implement this coverage.
Finding 5
Computers covered by DoIT’s managed desktop services were not properly
maintained and secured with current malware protection.
Analysis
Computers covered by DoIT’s managed desktop services were not properly
maintained and secured with current malware protection. DoIT provided
managed desktop services, including malware protection, for DoIT, DBM, EOG,
and three other State agencies. In total, these six agencies operated approximately
1,700 computers.
 Numerous DoIT managed computers were running outdated versions of the
malware protection software. We identified 188 computers that were running
an outdated version of the malware protection software as of July 2015. Of
these 188 computers we determined that 113 computers were using an
outdated version released in December 2012. Updated versions of the
software were released in May 2014 and April 2015.
 We identified 113 workstations with local administrator rights defined on
these workstations. For DoIT and DBM employees (other than system and
network administrators) we identified 32 workstations that had assigned local
administrative rights to the user. DoIT could not provide any documentation
which authorized and supported administrative rights defined for these 32
employees. Administrative rights are the highest permission level that can be
granted to users and it allows users to install software and change
configuration settings. Accordingly, if these computers were infected with
malware, the malware would run with administrative rights and expose these
workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstation’s user
account operated with only user rights.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 Numerous workstations and servers had not been updated with the latest
releases for software products that are known to have significant security-
related vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products
frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, DoIT had
not updated workstations and servers for these patches. For example, as of
July 2015, we identified 662 computers that were running older versions of a
commonly vulnerable application. The older versions had software release
dates ranging from October 2008 to June 2015, with a majority of the release
dates between January and June 2015.
The State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy states that agencies, at a
minimum, must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by
implementing anti-malware solutions that, to the extent possible, include a
capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure that all managed computers are running current versions of their
malware protection software,
b. ensure that administrative rights on managed workstations are restricted
to system and network administrators, and
c. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for
commonly vulnerable applications on all managed computers.
Statewide Contract Procurements
Finding 6
DoIT did not properly instruct State agencies procuring services from
DoIT’s statewide contract to secure competitive bids received electronically
and DoIT did not always properly secure its own bids.
Analysis
DoIT did not properly instruct State agencies that procured services from DoIT’s
Consulting and Technical Service Plus (CATS+) statewide information
technology contract to secure competitive bids received via email. In January
2015, DoIT issued guidance to State agencies regarding competitive bids received
via email. (Prior to January 2015, DoIT had not issued guidance on this topic.)
The issued guidance required that financial proposals be password protected;
however, it did not require that technical proposals be password protected, and it
did not specify that bids be opened in the presence of two State employees.
DoIT’s guidance should be consistent with State procurement regulations which
17

--- Page 20 ---
require competitive bids (both technical and financial proposals) be secured and
opened in the presence of two State employees. Consequently, there is a risk that
confidential competitive bid information could be accessed and disclosed without
detection to other prospective bidders.
Furthermore, our tests disclosed that DoIT did not properly secure its own bids.
We tested two CATS+ contracts that DoIT (as user agency) solicited and awarded
in April and May of 2015 for its own operations. Our test disclosed that, for one
contract totaling $1 million, only the financial proposals were password protected
and, for the other contract totaling $100,000, neither the technical nor the
financial proposals were password protected. Also, DoIT did not document that
these proposals had been opened in the presence of two State employees.
According to DoIT’s records, during the period from August 2013 to July 2015,
113 contracts totaling $479.5 million were awarded through the CATS+ master
contract, including 15 contracts totaling $108.2 million awarded by DoIT for its
operations and responsibilities. The statewide CATS+ contract includes
preapproved contractors obtained via a competitive proposal process to provide
information technology consulting and technical services in 17 different
functional areas (such as software engineering, information system security, and
management consulting). State agencies may then issue task order requests and
perform their own competitive solicitation for services through the preapproved
contractors.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DoIT
a. revise its guidance for the CATS+ contract to require that access to
competitive bid proposals received electronically be properly restricted
and ensure this guidance is established for all its statewide contracts
(repeat),
b. ensure that agencies using DoIT’s statewide information technology
contracts are specifically instructed to document the opening of
competitive bid proposals in the presence of at least two State employees,
and
c. properly secure its own bids consistent with this guidance.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Universal Service Trust Fund
Finding 7
DoIT did not recommend an appropriate reduction in the Universal Service
Fee in recognition of excess funds in the Universal Service Trust Fund.
Analysis
DoIT did not recommend an appropriate Universal Service Fee reduction for
fiscal year 2015 that considered the Universal Service Trust Fund (USTF) balance
and projected expenditures for that year. According to State law, the Universal
Service Fee, which is determined annually by DoIT and implemented by the
Maryland Public Service Commission (PSC), is to be set at an amount that is
necessary to generate sufficient revenues to fund the costs of the
Telecommunications Access of Maryland (TAM) program for the following year.
In the past several years, the USTF balance has increased and it currently
significantly exceeds the amount needed to fund annual TAM program costs.
The TAM program provides telecommunications relay service for Marylanders
who are deaf, hard of hearing, or speech-disabled so they can communicate with
others through TTY (text telephone) using a standard phone. State law provides
that the Universal Service Fee be collected from customers of communications
companies that provide landline telephone service, wireless or cellular telephone
service, or Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP) service in Maryland. The
communications companies remit the Universal Service Fee collections to the
Comptroller of Maryland for deposit into the USTF, which is used exclusively to
fund the expenses of the TAM program.
During fiscal year 2013, USTF revenue totaled approximately $7.8 million and
TAM program expenditures totaled $4.0 million; the USTF fund balance was $6.7
million as of June 30, 2013. Based upon DoIT’s recommendation, the PSC
reduced the monthly Universal Service Fee in fiscal year 2014 from the maximum
allowed by law of $0.18 per subscriber account to $0.11. However, the USTF
balance continued to increase to $10.3 million as of June 30, 2014, reflecting both
an increase in revenue and a decrease in expenditures, and DoIT did not
recommend a fee reduction for fiscal year 2015. The increase in the USTF
balance is due in part to a law change (Chapters 571 and 572, Laws of Maryland
2012), effective July 1, 2012, that expanded the companies required to collect and
remit the Universal Service Fee revenues from just those providing landline
phone service to include companies providing wireless or cellular telephone
service, or VoIP service.
19

--- Page 22 ---
According to State records, the USTF balance was $12.4 million as of June 30,
2015. Accordingly, we estimate that the fiscal year 2015 USTF balance could
support the TAM program for at least three years without a Universal Service Fee
being assessed by communications companies to subscribers. Subsequent to our
audit, DoIT recommended a fee reduction in December 2015, and in April 2016,
PSC approved a rate reduction to $0.05.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DoIT
a. annually determine the minimum balance needed in the USTF,
considering the fund balance and projected TAM expenditure activity for
that year; and
b. recommend a change in the Universal Service Fee, as necessary.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) for the period beginning February 9, 2012 and ending June
30, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DoIT’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included monitoring of DoIT’s statewide information
technology contracts, the administration of the Universal Service Trust Fund and
the Major Information Technology Development Project Fund, information
systems security and controls, and DoIT’s operating expenses. We also
determined the status of five of the seven findings contained in our preceding
audit report and certain findings contained in our performance audit report on
information system data security dated September 27, 2012.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to DoIT by
the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Office of the Secretary.
These support services (such as legal, internal audit, and budgeting) are included
within the scope of our audit of DBM.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DoIT operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
21

--- Page 24 ---
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DoIT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DoIT’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DoIT that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DoIT’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DoIT regarding the results of our
review of its response.
22

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 1
DoIT lacked sufficient documentation supporting its reviews of annual MITDP status
reports and system development documents, and that quarterly portfolio reviews were
conducted.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure project status information reported on the ITPR is current and complete as part
of its annual review and approval process;
b. implement procedures to approve each SDLC phase when successfully completed; and
c. establish and adhere to specific documentation requirements to support that quarterly
portfolio review meetings were performed, that agency project status reports were
verified for accuracy, and that its recommended corrective actions resulting from the
meeting were documented (repeat).
Department Response
a. Concur
The Oversight Project Managers (OPMs) will work with the Agencies to ensure that all information,
including project funding requests and spending, provided on the ITPRs are accurate at the time of
submission and that the appropriate amount of oversight funding is budgeted in the ITPR.
b. Disagree
OPMs review the suite of documentation required for each SDLC phase and are continuously engaged
with the project team to provide guidance and perform these reviews as documentation is completed.
While not a formal approval transition from step to step is discussed within the program management
team. Legislative approval is sought when moving an MITDP from the Project Planning Request (PPR)
phase to the Project Implementation Request (PIR) phase.
As the current SLDC waterfall model is transforming into a Lean Agile model, the phases and suite of
documentation for planning and implementation will also adjust accordingly. DoIT will become involved
in the planning and project management of the work being executed. DoIT will work collaboratively with
DLS when developing the model to assure the needs of the future state/process are defined, and the
application of the process is logical.

--- Page 27 ---
Auditor’s Comment: While a project’s transition between the 9 SDLC steps may have
been discussed within the project management team, DoIT did not have procedures to
approve each phase when successfully completed. Approval of each phase of a project is
critical to help mitigate development risk for projects that are often large and
complicated, involve high costs, and support critical business functions. Nevertheless,
DoIT’s transition to a Lean Agile model will necessitate a new methodology for
reviewing and approving project development activities, and DoIT has agreed to pursue
the matter with the Department of Legislative Services.
c. Concur
Standard process requires OPMs to maintain Portfolio Review documentation such as sign in sheets,
project schedules, and financial information for the MITDP Portfolio Reviews. DoIT had incorporated
into its process that corrective actions were the Agencies responsibility to document and submit to DoIT
following the portfolio reviews. DoIT Management will put measures in place to ensure OPMs submit the
appropriate documentation following each Portfolio Review.
Since 2016, a revision was made to the portfolio review process which adjusts the frequency of portfolio
reviews based on the monthly project’s performance and health assessments identified during DoIT
Executive Management meetings. This allows for continued visibility into the project’s state. At the
outcome of these monthly meetings, Portfolio reviews will be held per the Secretary’s discretion based on
concerns communicated from the assessments of the project.

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 2
DoIT had not established a process to independently evaluate project managers hired
through a vendor to oversee MITDPs, specific project monitoring documentation and
reporting requirements, nor a means to ensure sufficient contract personnel were assigned
to monitor all 33 MITDPs valued at $850 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT
a. establish a process to independently evaluate the performance of OPMs,
b. develop specific documentation and reporting requirements for OPM project
monitoring activities, and
c. establish a process to ensure an adequate number of OPMs are assigned to meet the
project oversight needs.
Department Response
a. Concur
DoIT recognizes the need to define and measure the effectiveness of OPM performance. As part of the
Department's transformation to Lean Agile development the previous waterfall methodology related
metrics will no longer be applicable. DoIT will concurrently define the appropriate metrics and compile
these into a performance scorecard as part of the development/transformation efforts to which the OPM’s
will be evaluated against.
b. Concur
Currently OPM’s are to provide standard weekly status reports, monthly MITDP health assessment
charts, project reporting for mid-year and end of year reports to DLS and other reports and documents as
requested. As stated above in Recommendation 2a., DoIT will also identify the specific documentation
and reporting requirements an OPM should adhere to in a Lean Agile development environment.
c. Concur
Current OPM assignments are made based upon level of effort required per individual project and by
certain criteria (project size, visibility, health, risk factors, project phase). Additional resources for the
contract are utilized for business process analysis and procurement support required to support MITDP
efforts. The number of factors involved in properly balancing workloads makes it difficult to have a
formula.
As with response 2a DoIT will develop metrics for OPM assignments concurrently with our transition to
Lean Agile.

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 3
DoIT had not established comprehensive policies for project changes to scope, schedule, or
costs (rebaselining) and Independent Verification and Validation assessments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend DoIT establish and adhere to comprehensive policies, including the
aforementioned suggested provisions, governing project rebaselining decisions and
recordkeeping, and the use of IV&Vs.
Department Response
Concur
Although there is currently no formal written policy regarding rebaselining practices, OPMs were
responsible for monitoring and reporting on project rebaselining. Any baseline changes that occur
are reported in Portfolio review meetings and during schedule status discussions. A rebaselining
policy will be developed that fits with the transition to Agile development.

--- Page 30 ---
Finding 4
The DoIT, DBM, and EOG networks were not properly secured in that certain contractors
had been granted unnecessary access and certain security capabilities were not fully used.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT
a. restrict each DoIT and DBM contractor’s network level access to only those servers and
workstations that each contractor needs to access;
b. fully utilize the expanded capabilities of the advanced security appliances to properly
secure the DoIT, DBM, and EOG networks; and
c. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks from
encrypted traffic and identify how IDPS and/or HIPS coverage should be best applied
to its network and implement this coverage.
Response
a. Disagree.
Contractors on the network that use State owned devices should not be restricted any more than
any other state owned device at the network layer. Contractors that use their own devices are
restricted to only the devices they work on or have to VPN in from the guest network. We do
however agree we should implement security rules that are based upon an individual user's role
and the applications that the user is authorized to use based on that role.
b. Concur.
DoIT will look into using the application identify feature more fully as part of a comprehensive
review of our security posture.
c. Concur.
We believe that DoIT should perform and document a review of network security risks from
encrypted network traffic. Gartner and NIST have published best practices for addressing this
concern, and DoIT has started implementing inspection of encrypted traffic for agencies with
specific requirements to do so. DoIT will both complete a comprehensive analysis of the risks,
and implement decryption and inspection on encrypted traffic prior to the next audit cycle.

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 5
Computers covered by DoIT’s managed desktop services were not properly maintained
and secured with current malware protection.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure that all managed computers are running current versions of their malware
protection software,
b. ensure that administrative rights on managed workstations are restricted to system and
network administrators, and
c. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for commonly vulnerable
applications on all managed computers.
Response
a. Concur.
DoIT has standardized on an anti-malware platform and is in the process of deploying this
centralized, enterprise quality solution- for this activity to all computers managed by DoIT.
b. Concur.
DoIT tracks the numbers of Administrative Privileged users and is actively reducing those
numbers. We have, in the past 12 months, consciously engaged in the practice of limiting
administrative rights on computers managed by DoIT with the intent to only provide
administrative rights to system and network administrators.
c. Concur.
DoIT routinely scans servers and workstations to verify software and hardware are up to date.
Patches and updates are installed regularly through a centralized enterprise software
distribution server.

--- Page 32 ---
Finding 6
DoIT did not properly instruct State agencies procuring services from DoIT’s statewide
contract to secure competitive bids received electronically and DoIT did not always
properly secure its own bids.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DoIT
a. revise its guidance for the CATS+ contract to require that access to competitive bid
proposals received electronically be properly restricted and ensure this guidance is
established for all its statewide contracts (repeat),
b. ensure that agencies using DoIT’s statewide information technology contracts are
specifically instructed to document the opening of competitive bid proposals in the
presence of at least two State employees, and
c. properly secure its own bids consistent with this guidance.
Department Response
a. Concur
Based on DoIT’s previous audit in 2013, the OLA found that DoIT “did not secure competitive bids
received electronically”. Given that the word “bid” commonly means pricing, and that COMAR
21.02.01 defines a “Bid” as a statement of price, terms of sale, and description of the supplies/services,
DoIT assumed that it could satisfy the audit finding by securing the financial proposals alone. However,
DoIT realizes that its assumption was wrong and is revising its policies and procedures accordingly.
b. Disagree
DoIT does not have the authority to create a policy that contradicts COMAR and it does not have the
discretion to waive regulatory requirements. COMAR 21.05.03.03 (G) (1) requires proposals to be
opened in the presence of at least two State employees, and that is the practice at DoIT. Moreover,
DoIT’s policy for opening electronic proposals is not inconsistent with procurement regulation simply
because it did not expressly require proposals to be opened in the presence of two employees. With that
being said, DoIT agrees that proposal openings should be documented and it is revising its procedures to
satisfy the recommendation.
Auditor’s Comment: The audit recommendation does not suggest that DoIT should
implement a policy that contradicts State procurement regulations (Title 21 of the Code
of Maryland Regulations). Rather, DoIT should provide instructions to ensure that
certain requirements of those Regulations are properly adhered to by State agency
personnel using DoIT’s statewide information technology contracts. Nevertheless, DoIT
has agreed to revise its procedures to address the recommendation.

--- Page 33 ---
c. Concur
With its move to a new headquarters, DoIT has identified secure holding locations to support this
recommendation.

--- Page 34 ---
Finding 7
DoIT did not recommend an appropriate reduction in the Universal Service Fee in
recognition of excess funds in the Universal Service Trust Fund.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DoIT
a. annually determine the minimum balance needed in the USTF, considering the fund
balance and projected TAM expenditure activity for that year; and
b. recommend a change in the Universal Service Fee, as necessary.
Department Response
a. Disagree
TAM took the following into consideration when determining the amount needed for effectively and
efficiently providing services to Maryland consumers:
FY’14 was the first year that changed in the manner in which the USTF was assessed. Prior to FY’14,
the surcharge was based on a per land-line basis only. In 2014 the General Assembly expanded the
revenue base to include VoIP and Wireless/cellular and changed the surcharge from per line to per
account.
In May, 2015 the FCC released Report and Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (CG
Docket No. 13-24) and (CG Docket No. 03-123) "In the Matter of
Misuse of Internet Protocol Captioned Telephone Service (IPCTS), Telecommunications Relay Services
and Speech-to-Speech Services for Individuals with Hearing and Speech Disabilities". This Report serves
as a warning to the States that the FCC may turn over responsibility for these services (no longer provide
the funding). When the responsibility is turned over to the States for IP and IP CTS, it is estimated that it
will cost the State an additional $9m to $11m per year. Therefore, it is imperative that the surplus remain
in our account so we are prepared to take on the responsibility of this upcoming unfunded mandate from
the FCC.
Auditor’s Comment: While we were aware of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) report, the report did not indicate when, if ever, FCC could decide to
turn over certain responsibilities to the states. If that occurs, we assume DoIT would
request a fee change at that time to cover any additional costs. Since DoIT has since
requested and obtained a fee reduction, it appears that FCC’s possible action is no longer
a significant concern.

--- Page 35 ---
b. Concur
In January of 2016, DoIT/TAM recommended in a letter to the PSC that the surcharge be cut in half from
the current $.11 fee. The Hearing to discuss this with the PSC has already been re-scheduled two
times. The Hearing is currently scheduled for April 6, 2016.

--- Page 36 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Marissa L. Eby, CPA
Senior Auditors
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Christopher D. Jackson, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Amanda M. Jones
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Staff Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Information Systems Staff Auditor