Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
Date: 12/06/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067453a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:31:24.761308
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
September 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center, located in Jessup, Maryland, provides
comprehensive psychiatric evaluation and treatment services to individuals in a
maximum security environment. The Center has a licensed capacity of 298
resident patients and, during fiscal year 2015, had a budgeted average daily
population of 248 residents and an actual average daily population of 242
residents. The Center is accredited by The Joint Commission, which evaluates
and monitors health care organizations nationwide to ensure the highest quality of
care is provided. According to the State’s records, Center expenditures totaled
approximately $61 million during fiscal year 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated December 6, 2012. We determined that the
Center satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Internal controls were not sufficient to ensure that all collections were
deposited.
Analysis
The Center had not established adequate controls to ensure all collections were
deposited. According to the State’s records, the Center’s collections totaled
approximately $403,000 during the period from July 1, 2014 through May 8,
2015, the majority of which related to collections for patient funds and dietary
services. These collections were received through the mail and in person.
 The employee responsible for verifying that all collections were deposited had
access to the collections prior to deposit and, consequently, was not
independent. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report. Furthermore, the documents on which collections were initially
3

--- Page 6 ---
recorded were not forwarded directly to this employee. Instead, the
documents and related collections were first forwarded to other employees for
processing and deposit preparation. Consequently, the initial record of
collections could be altered to conceal misappropriations.
 The Center did not adequately account for prenumbered receipt forms, which
were the initial record of patient fund collections. Specifically, there was no
independent inventory maintained and no accounting of these forms as to
issued, voided, or on hand. An adequate accounting for the receipt forms is
critical since they are used in the verification of collections to deposit.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that a
reconciliation of the initial record of collections to the amounts deposited be
performed by an employee independent of the cash receipts functions, and that
prenumbered receipt forms be periodically accounted for as to issued, voided, or
on hand.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center ensure that
a. the employee who performs the deposit verification does not have access
to collections prior to deposit (repeat);
b. the original records of collections are given directly to the employee
responsible for performing the deposit verifications; and
c. prenumbered receipt forms are periodically accounted for as to issued,
voided, or on hand, by an employee who does not handle cash receipts.
We advised the Center on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Clifton T. Perkins Hospital
Center of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period
beginning February 17, 2012 and ending April 28, 2015. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
4

--- Page 7 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, patient funds, payroll,
disbursements, and materials and supplies. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Center’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Center’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Center that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of the Center, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
The Administration’s Response to the Audit of the Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center
of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
for the Period Beginning February 17, 2012 and Ending April 28, 2015.
Finding 1
Internal controls were not sufficient to ensure that all collections were deposited.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center ensure that
a. the employee who performs the deposit verification does not have access to
collections prior to deposit (repeat);
b. the original records of collections are given directly to the employee responsible
for performing the deposit verifications; and
c. prenumbered receipt forms are periodically accounted for as to issued, voided,
or on hand, by an employee who does not handle cash receipts.
We advised the Center on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Administration’s Response:
a. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The Deputy CFO will not
have access to a separate locked compartment within the safe where the cash
receipts will be kept until deposited with the bank. Due to the other duties of the
Deputy CFO, it is not practical to eliminate his access to the safe. This will be
implemented effective October 1, 2015.
b. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. CTPHC agrees to have
the individuals initially collecting the receipts to scan copies of the receipts to a
folder on the Deputy CFO’s computer. These scanned documents will then be
used to verify that receipts are deposited. The scanned receipts will be
downloaded to DVD or thumb drive periodically to be kept for audit purposes.
This will be implemented October 1, 2015.
c. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The CFO will verify the
pre-numbered receipt forms issued, voided or on hand on a monthly basis
beginning with the month ending October 31, 2015.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor
Thomas L. Allen, III
Staff Auditor