Title: State Lottery Agency
Date: 12/08/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744c7
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:16:15.873824
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Lottery Agency
May 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Financial Information 7
Video Lottery Terminal Program 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – SLA’s Network Was Not Adequately Secured 9
Finding 2 – Mainframe Security Reporting and Review Procedures Were 11
Not Adequate
Finding 3 – Service Level Agreements and the Related Independent 12
Reports Did Not Address Certain Risks
Video Lottery Terminal Program
Finding 4 – Supervisory Review and Approval of the Resolution of 13
Incidents and Instances of Non-Compliance Was Not Documented
Finding 5 – SLA Did Not Adequately Monitor Video Lottery Terminals 14
for Periods of Inoperability
Finding 6 – SLA Lacked Adequate Procedures Over the Issuance of 15
Licenses and Registrations and the Related Fees
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
State Lottery Agency (SLA)
May 2012
 A number of security and control deficiencies were noted with regard to
SLA’s information systems. For example, the network was not
adequately secured against external threats, and mainframe security
reports were not comprehensive or independently reviewed.
SLA should take the recommended actions to improve information systems
controls and security.
 Supervisory review and approval of the resolution of incidents
(complaints from the public) and instances of non-compliance with
established internal control policies investigated by its employees located
at various casinos was not documented.
SLA should ensure that supervisory review is performed and documented to
ensure proper disposition of these incidents and instances of non-compliance
reported.
 SLA did not adequately monitor video lottery terminals (VLT) operations
for periods of VLT inoperability.
SLA should promptly obtain and review reports identifying periods of VLT
inoperability and take appropriate actions.
 Documented supervisory reviews did not exist for the issuance of all
licenses, and independent comparisons were not performed to ensure the
proper fees were collected for licenses issued.
SLA should ensure that supervisory reviews of all licenses issued are
performed and documented, and that appropriate fees were collected.
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Lottery Agency (SLA) administers and operates various lottery games
to generate revenue primarily for the State’s General Fund, the Maryland Stadium
Authority, and certain other governmental funds and agencies. In fiscal 2011,
there were 4,200 licensed lottery agents that sold instant tickets and online tickets
to the public through the use of computerized terminals. Online games include
traditional games, such as Pick 3/Pick 4; multi-state games, such as Mega
Millions and Power Ball; and monitor games, such as Keno. SLA’s
responsibilities for the operation of these games require continuous oversight and
marketing of lottery gaming operations as well as the development of new games.
SLA has entered into an agreement with an online gaming contractor to help
fulfill these responsibilities as well as to perform the daily operation and
maintenance of the gaming system.
The State Lottery Commission, which consists of nine members appointed by the
Governor with the advice and consent of the State Senate, has oversight
responsibilities for SLA’s operations. In November 2008, the Commission
assumed responsibility for regulating the operation of the video lottery terminal
program.
Financial Information
According to SLA’s audited financial statements for the fiscal year ended June
30, 2011, gross revenues totaled approximately $1.8 billion of which:
 $1 billion was used for prize claims;
 $114 million was distributed for agent commissions and claims fees;
 $111 million was used to pay SLA’s operating expenses;
 $20 million was transferred to the Maryland Stadium Authority in accordance
with the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland;
 $499 million was credited to the General Fund of the State; and
 $67 million was credited to Other Governmental Funds/Agencies, as
authorized by State law.
SLA engages an independent accounting firm to perform an annual audit of its
financial statements and monthly audits of special-purpose financial statements,
and to provide assistance in technical accounting matters. In the related audit
reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011 the firm
7

--- Page 10 ---
stated that SLA’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, its
financial position, results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then
ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Video Lottery Terminal Program
Chapter 4 of the 2007 special session established the operational and regulatory
framework for the video lottery terminal (VLT) program in the State. In
November 2008, Maryland voters approved a constitutional amendment
authorizing up to 15,000 VLTs at five specified locations in the State. Upon
approval of this amendment, the law which authorized the licensing of VLT
gaming became effective.
Three of the five licenses to operate a VLT facility (casino) in Maryland have
been awarded for the Cecil, Worcester, and Anne Arundel County locations. The
gaming contractor licensees are responsible for the daily operations of the casino
with onsite monitoring being performed by SLA. SLA has also entered into an
agreement with a contractor to operate a central computer system that performs
VLT accounting and provides monitoring, command, and control functions for the
VLTs. The casinos in Cecil and Worcester Counties began VLT gaming
operations on September 27, 2010 and January 4, 2011, respectively. Ground
breaking for the Anne Arundel County facility took place on January 27, 2011
and it is expected to open during fiscal year 2012. As of December 2011, the
State had received one bid for the Baltimore City location and two bids for the
Allegany County location and was in the process of reviewing these bids.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated December 8, 2008. We determined that SLA
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
SLA’s Division of Information Technology manages the development,
maintenance, and support of SLA’s information technology infrastructure,
including all related networking, telecommunications, and business information
systems. The Division’s staff operates a mainframe computer which hosts
numerous systems used for multiple purposes including: SLA agent
administration, tracking of SLA annuity winners, claims administration, financial
systems operations and monitoring, and review of sales. In addition, the Division
operates an internal network which includes email, application, and database
servers. Furthermore, the internal network connects to networkMaryland, the
Internet, and a contractor network used for support of SLA games.
The SLA wide area network (WAN) also supports the oversight and monitoring
of the VLTs in the casinos. WAN connections are operational for the Cecil
County and Worcester County casinos and a contractor providing accounting,
monitoring, and control functions for the casinos, on behalf of SLA.
As previously mentioned, SLA engaged two contractors to provide support for
SLA games (including processing and oversight and monitoring of video lottery
terminals and the online gaming system). SLA entered into service level
agreements with these two contractors which defined the terms and requirements
for the contractual services. In addition, to provide assurance that the terms of the
agreements were complied with, SLA received periodic, independent reports from
another contractor which included descriptions of the contractors’ controls and
security procedures and the results of tests designed to ensure that these controls
and security procedures were effective for designated periods.
Finding 1
The SLA network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic and the
network was not adequately protected by the intrusion detection and
prevention system.
Analysis
The SLA network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic and the
network was not adequately protected by the intrusion detection and prevention
system (IDPS). Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
9

--- Page 12 ---
 The firewalls installed to protect the SLA network allowed unnecessary and
insecure connections to network devices in the internal network. The
firewalls’ rules were not configured to adequately secure connections into
these networks from the Internet, networkMaryland, and other untrusted
sources. Therefore, critical network devices were susceptible to attacks which
could result in a loss of data integrity or the interruption of critical network
services.
 Network traffic from a contractor to SLA’s secondary claims center and
backup data center was not filtered by any SLA device. As a result, critical
network devices at the centers were susceptible to attacks.
 The IDPS was not properly used to protect critical portions of the network.
Specifically, the IDPS was not properly positioned to monitor and filter
network traffic from two untrusted third-party networks. Also, the device
used for intrusion detection and prevention had not been supported by its
vendor since December 2009. As a result, the IDPS device did not protect the
SLA network from new types of attacks.
The State of Maryland’s Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Information Security Policy requires firewalls be configured to achieve a “least
privilege” security strategy. The Policy also requires that intrusion
detection/prevention tools be employed to monitor system events, detect attacks,
and identify unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential
information.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SLA
a. configure its firewalls to achieve a least privilege security strategy giving
entities, individuals, and devices only those access privileges needed to
perform assigned tasks;
b. filter network traffic between the aforementioned contractor and the
SLA’s secondary claims center and backup data center to achieve a least
privilege security strategy;
c. implement IDPS coverage for all critical portions of its network; and
d. ensure that its intrusion detection and prevention devices are supported
by their vendors and that the devices are kept up to date for all
significant vendor updates.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
Mainframe security reporting and review procedures were not adequate.
Analysis
Mainframe security reporting and review procedures were not adequate.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 SLA was generating a mainframe security report on a daily basis; however,
this report did not include several significant security events such as creating
and changing users’ assigned capabilities.
 The mainframe administrator (responsible for creating and changing users,
assigning special privileges, and assigning menu functions to users) was
solely responsible for reviewing the mainframe security report. As a result,
any security actions performed by the administrator were not subject to an
independent review. In addition, although we were advised that the
mainframe security report was reviewed on a daily basis, these reviews were
not documented.
These conditions could result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities (affecting
the integrity of the mainframe data), which could go undetected by management.
The State of Maryland’s Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Information Security Policy requires an audit trail process to ensure accountability
of system and security-related events; and a process to ensure that all systems
have the ability to log and report specific security incidents and all attempted
violations of system security.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SLA
a. redesign the security report to include all critical security related events;
and
b. perform independent reviews of this security report, document these
reviews, and retain the documentation for future reference.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
The service level agreements and the related independent reports did not
address certain security and operational risks.
Analysis
The service level agreements and the related independent reports did not address
certain security and operational risks. For example, we noted that the agreements
did not contain a provision that required the contractors to perform daily
documented reviews of audit logs, which is a DoIT requirement for State
agencies. Furthermore, we noted that the independent reports, which were
intended to provide assurance that the provisions of the agreements were met, did
not address several information technology security related provisions of the
agreements. For example, the independent reports did not indicate whether
intrusion detection, malware prevention, vulnerability scanning, and antivirus
protection had been implemented by the contractors. We provided SLA with
complete lists of provisions which should be included in the agreements and
existing provisions in the agreements that were not addressed by the independent
reviews and reports.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SLA
a. attempt to amend the aforementioned service level agreements to add
language to address the provisions that we presented to SLA;
b. require contractors to obtain and review the independent reports that
address all critical contractual provisions relating to security, availability,
processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy contained in the
contracts between SLA and the contractors and;
c. ensure future contracts contain provisions to address significant security
and operational risks.
Video Lottery Terminal Program
Background
According to State law, each video lottery terminal (VLT) operator, manufacturer,
gaming contractor, and video lottery employee must be licensed by the State
Lottery Agency (SLA). Applicants for licenses must provide various financial
information and are subject to a background investigation. According to SLA’s
records, as of May 2011, 1,448 licenses had been issued. In addition, vendors
providing non-gaming services at the casinos (such as janitorial services) must be
registered by SLA. As of June 6, 2011, 93 vendors were registered by SLA
according to its records. Licensees and registered vendors are provided with
12

--- Page 15 ---
security badges that provide them access to the casino, including non-public
areas.
Up to a maximum of 15,000 VLTs may be installed at the five authorized
locations throughout the State. As of January 10, 2012, the Cecil County and
Worcester County casinos had 2,300 operational VLTs, which are owned by the
State. Under contracts with the State, nine VLT vendors provide maintenance and
support and are required to meet certain timeframes to return inoperable VLTs to
operation or SLA may assess liquidated damages.
Each gaming contractor operating a casino is required to comply with certain
SLA-approved internal control and operational policies. State law requires an
SLA employee or agent to be present during the operation of any video lottery
terminal location for the purpose of receiving complaints from the public (referred
to as “incidents”) and conducting investigations into the operation of the VLTs
and the maintenance of the VLTs, associated equipment, and software.
Finding 4
Supervisory review and approval of the resolution of incidents and instances
of non-compliance at the casinos was not documented.
Analysis
Although SLA employees assigned to monitor casino operations completed
compliance control reports documenting incidents and instances of non-
compliance with established internal control policies and their resolution, there
was no documented supervisory review and approval of these reports. As a result,
there was a lack of assurance that the appropriate action to resolve the incidents
was taken. We sighted the compliance control reports completed from November
2010 to March 2011 at the two casinos in operation (for example, the Cecil
County casino had 57 such reports during this period). We noted numerous
incidents on the reports (such as, access to the rear of the casino not being
monitored as required by the established internal control policies, the actual VLT
payout rate not being in accordance with SLA’s agreed upon rate, and VLT
machines experiencing unanticipated shutdowns). Although we were advised that
these reports were reviewed during periodic site visits to the casinos by SLA
supervisory employees, there was no documentation of these reviews.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SLA supervisory personnel document their review and
approval of the compliance control reports to ensure proper disposition.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 5
SLA did not adequately monitor the VLT operations for periods of VLT
inoperability.
Analysis
SLA lacked adequate procedures to monitor the VLT operations for periods of
inoperability to ensure that contractual requirements had been fulfilled and that
the opportunity to collect gaming revenues had been maximized. Furthermore,
SLA did not assess liquidated damages against the contractors providing the
VLTs when terms of the contract were not met. According to the related
contracts, the contractors were required to ensure inoperable VLTs were returned
to an operational state within 90 minutes, and SLA could assess liquidated
damages if the contractor failed to return an inoperable VLT to an operational
status within 90 minutes. The damages may be up to $50 for each hour or
fraction thereof in excess of the 90 minutes.
Beginning in February 2011, reports were available to SLA from its central VLT
system that noted the time it took the contractors to return the VLTs to an
operational status; however, we were advised by SLA management that as of
August 2011, SLA had not obtained or reviewed these reports. We obtained the
reports for the period February 2011 to August 2011 (which we did not verify).
These reports indicated 78 instances of inoperability exceeding 90 minutes
involving 125 VLT machines. We calculated that liquidated damages totaling
$60,000 could have been assessed for machines that were down for more than 90
minutes. According to SLA’s records, the average revenue per VLT at the two
operating facilities was $182 per day.
Although SLA was unaware of the number and length of the periods of
inoperability, upon our inquiry, management informed us that, in its opinion, due
to the fact that the casinos have been opened less than a year and that there could
be a number of undisclosed reasons for the machines being inoperable, liquidated
damages would not have been assessed. Nevertheless, SLA should have been
monitoring the activity.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SLA
a. regularly obtain and review the reports identifying the time the VLT
machines are inoperable;
b. assess liquidated damages as permitted by the contract when deemed
appropriate; and
c. formally document its reasons when liquidated damages are not assessed.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 6
Adequate procedures and controls were not established over the issuance of
licenses and registrations and the related fees.
Analysis
SLA lacked sufficient controls over certain aspects of the licensing functions for
the VLT operations. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 SLA did not ensure that independent supervisory review of each license
issued was documented. Our test of 10 licenses issued to certain employees
who were issued badges to access the casino disclosed that SLA could not
provide us with documentation supporting the independent review of 3
principal employees. A principal employee is a video lottery employee who
owns, controls, or manages a license or otherwise exercises control over the
video lottery function of a licensee.
 SLA had not established procedures to ensure that, upon termination, licensed
and registered individuals were returning their related badges to SLA.
 Therewas no independent comparison performed to ensure that an appropriate
fee was collected before the background investigations were performed and
licenses issued. These fees, which ranged from $187 for a non-gaming
employee to $35,000 for a manufacturer license, are initially received by an
employee in the SLA Finance Office. The Finance Office employee then
notifies the VLT Licensing Unit that the fees were received. However, the
Unit did not ensure the appropriate fee was collected before the background
investigations were conducted and licenses issued.
 SLA did not have a procedure in place to ensure that all vendors doing
business with the casinos were properly registered. Registration with SLA is
required so that it can ensure the business relationship is in the best interest of
the State and that the companies are registered with the State of Maryland. In
this regard, a May 2011 SLA internal audit report identified 23 unregistered
vendors doing business with a casino during calendar year 2011.
Based on the above conditions, there was a lack of assurance that all licenses were
properly issued by SLA, access to the casino facilities was properly controlled,
that all license fees were properly received before background checks were
performed and licenses were issued, and vendors were properly registered.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SLA
a. ensure that independent supervisory personnel review licenses issued
and, on a test basis, verify the related approval documentation, and that
these procedures are documented and retained for future reference;
b. establish procedures to ensure that all badges are returned upon
termination;
c. ensure that applicable fees are collected before background checks are
performed and licenses are issued; and
d. establish procedures to ensure that all vendors are properly registered.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the State Lottery Agency (SLA) for the period beginning March
17, 2008 and ending March 6, 2011. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SLA’s financial
transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The audit
addressed the operation of the lottery games and VLT operations, including the
accountability and controls over proceeds and payouts. In addition, the audit
addressed certain SLA financial operational areas such as purchases and
disbursements, checking accounts, accounts receivable, cash receipts, and
information technology systems. Our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, and observations of
SLA’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided
in this report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable,
but were not independently verified.
SLA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect SLA’s ability to
maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes
findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to SLA
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
SLA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SLA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
18

--- Page 22 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
The SLA network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic and the network was not
adequately protected by the intrusion detection and prevention system.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SLA
a. configure its firewalls to achieve a least privilege security strategy giving entities,
individuals, and devices only those access privileges needed to perform assigned tasks;
b. filter network traffic between the aforementioned contractor and the SLA’s secondary
claims center and backup data center to achieve a least privilege security strategy;
c. implement IDPS coverage for all critical portions of its network; and
d. ensure that its intrusion detection and prevention devices are supported by their
vendors and that the devices are kept up to date for all significant vendor updates.
SLA Response:
SLA agrees with the recommendations and as of April 2012 is in full compliance as follows:
a. Least privileged security status was implemented during the MSLA network infrastructure
upgrade that was completed in April 2012.
b. All traffic between our claims center and the backup data center is now being filtered as the
result of the installation of the new Cisco ASA firewall in our secondary claims center in
April 2012.
c. IDPS has been implemented with the installation of our IDS in April 2012.
d. All intrusion detection and prevention devices were replaced with currently supported
hardware and software during the infrastructure upgrade that was completed in April 2012.

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 2
Mainframe security reporting and review procedures were not adequate.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SLA
a. redesign the security report to include all critical security related events; and
b. perform independent reviews of this security report, document these reviews, and
retain the documentation for future reference.
SLA Response:
SLA agrees with the recommendations and as of November 2011 was in full compliance as
follows:
a. The security report has been redesigned and now includes all critical security events.
b. An independent review of the security reports is being performed and documented.
Finding 3
The service level agreements and the related independent reports did not address certain security
and operational risks.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SLA
a. attempt to amend the aforementioned service level agreements to add language to
address the provisions that we presented to SLA;
b. require contractors to obtain and review the independent reports that address all
critical contractual provisions relating to security, availability, processing integrity,
confidentiality, and privacy contained in the contracts between SLA and the
contractors and;
c. ensure future contracts contain provisions to address significant security and
operational risks.

--- Page 24 ---
SLA Response:
SLA agrees with the recommendations and will work with the vendors to attempt to amend the
service level agreements and require contractors to obtain and review independent reports that
address all critical contractual provisions as specified by the auditors. Furthermore, SLA agrees
to ensure future contracts contain provisions to address significant security and operational risks.
Video Lottery Terminal Program
Finding 4
Supervisory review and approval of the resolution of incidents and instances of non-compliance
at the casinos was not documented.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SLA supervisory personnel document their review and approval of
the compliance control reports to ensure proper disposition.
SLA Response:
SLA agrees with the recommendation and supervisory personnel are documenting their review
and approval of the compliance control reports to ensure proper disposition.
Finding 5
SLA did not adequately monitor the VLT operations for periods of VLT inoperability.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SLA
a. regularly obtain and review the reports identifying the time the VLT machines are
inoperable;
b. assess liquidated damages as permitted by the contract when deemed appropriate; and
c. formally document its reasons when liquidated damages are not assessed.

--- Page 25 ---
SLA Response:
SLA agrees with the recommendations.
Procedures have been implemented to monitor VLTs that have been inoperable for more than 90
minutes and to assess liquidated damages against the manufacturer service providers when
deemed appropriate. As of April 30, 2012, the agency has assessed and subsequently collected
$22,200 in liquidated damages for periods of VLT inoperability for the period of February 2011
through February 2012. VLT inoperability is reviewed on a monthly basis, and liquidated
damages are assessed when deemed appropriate or reasons for not assessing damages are
formally documented.
Finding 6
Adequate procedures and controls were not established over the issuance of licenses and
registrations and the related fees.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SLA
a. ensure that independent supervisory personnel review licenses issued and, on a test
basis, verify the related approval documentation, and that these procedures are
documented and retained for future reference;
b. establish procedures to ensure that all badges are returned upon termination;
c. ensure that applicable fees are collected before background checks are performed and
licenses are issued; and
d. establish procedures to ensure that all vendors are properly registered.
SLA Response:
SLA agrees with the recommendations. License approvals are now reviewed on a monthly basis
by independent personnel to ensure that cases are properly documented and approved.
Procedures have been established to ensure that badges are returned upon termination.
Procedures also have been established to ensure that all fees are collected prior to performing
background checks and also to ensure that all vendors are properly registered.

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Laura J. Tucholski, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Alexander M. Prodey
Ryan P. Stecher
Staff Auditors
Eric Alexander
Information Systems Staff Auditor