Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Field Enforcement Division
Date: 05/11/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d724560674406
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:44:09.640525
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Field Enforcement Division
February 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFIcE o LEGISLATIVE AuDITs
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Desehenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
February 10, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Comptroller ofMaryland
—
Field Enforcement Division (FED) for the period beginning November 6, 2013
and ending October 2, 2016. FED is responsible for the enforcement oftrade
practice regulations and revenue laws related to alcoholic beverages, tobacco,
motor fuel, and sales and use taxes. FED is also responsible for monitoring and
enforcing the use ofbusiness licenses and testing motor fuel quality.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis
audit by FED.
Respectfully submitted,
_T ) 4&
Thomas J. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street’ Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
‘
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
‘
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline $77-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Field Enforcement Division (FED) of the Comptroller of Maryland is
responsible for the enforcement of trade practice regulations and revenue laws
related to alcoholic beverages, tobacco, motor fuel, and sales and use taxes.
Additionally, FED is responsible for monitoring and enforcing the use of business
licenses and testing motor fuel quality. According to the State’s records, FED’s
expenditures totaled approximately $5.5 million during fiscal year 2016.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of FED’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less
significant finding was communicated to FED that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to FED. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland –
Field Enforcement Division (FED) for the period beginning November 6, 2013
and ending October 2, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine FED’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
3

--- Page 6 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included confiscated property, payroll, cash receipts,
business licenses, and alcohol licensee inspections.
Our audit did not include certain support services (such as processing of invoices,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided to FED
by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These support
services are included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller. In addition, our audit did not include certain support services
provided to FED by the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology
Division related to the procurement and monitoring of information technology
equipment and services and the operation of the Annapolis Data Center. The
operation of the Annapolis Data Center includes the development and
maintenance of FED applications, and maintenance of the operating system and
security software environment. These support services are included in the scope
of our audits of the Information Technology Division.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
FED’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
FED’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
4

--- Page 7 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Walter L. Horan IV
Staff Auditor