Title: Baltimore City Community College
Date: 11/14/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d72456067429a
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:41:21.030472
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Baltimore City Community College
November 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Legislation 5
Financial Statement Audits 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Facilities Planning and Operations Department
* Finding 1 – Baltimore City Community College’s (BCCC) Facilities 7
Planning and Operations Department circumvented State regulations
in the procurement of certain goods and services. Based on our
review, certain of these procurements and related payments appeared
questionable.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
* Finding 2 – Several BCCC employees shared their corporate purchasing 10
cards, precluding effective accountability and control, and did not
have required documentation to support certain payments.
Payroll
Finding 3 – BCCC granted salary incentives or increases totaling 11
$129,250 to four senior management positions without adequate
justifications, including three increases that were not approved by its
Board of Trustees.
Affiliated Foundation
Finding 4 – BCCC did not maintain a current and comprehensive 13
agreement with its affiliated foundation, as required. In addition,
the most recent agreement did not contain any financial or
operational goals and outcomes to be achieved by the foundation
even though BCCC subsidized a significant percentage of the
foundation’s expenses during fiscal years 2015 and 2016.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 5 – Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by 15
BCCC was stored without adequate safeguards.
* Finding 6 – Malware protection for BCCC computers was not sufficient 16
to provide BCCC with adequate assurance that its computers were
properly protected.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7 – BCCC did not immediately restrictively endorse checks and 17
deposit collections timely at its Liberty Campus.
Equipment
Finding 8 – BCCC did not maintain complete and accurate equipment 18
records, could not locate certain equipment, and could not document
that it conducted physical inventories of equipment as required. In
addition, 40 computers purchased several years ago were never
placed into service.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 20
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) is an urban two-year institution
and operates under the jurisdiction of BCCC’s Board of Trustees. BCCC
primarily offers associate of arts degrees and certificate programs in the business
and health services fields, as well as general studies for students to continue their
education at four-year institutions. BCCC has one main campus, five satellite
locations, and more than 80 off-campus sites throughout Baltimore. BCCC’s
reported full-time equivalent enrollment for credit courses in the Spring 2016
semester was 1,073. According to the State’s accounting records, BCCC’s fiscal
year 2016 revenues totaled approximately $76 million, which included a State
General Fund appropriation of approximately $41 million.
Legislation
Chapter 847, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective May 27, 2017, modified the
composition of the Board of Trustees and certain of its responsibilities and duties.
Significant changes included the requirement that the Chair of the Board be
jointly appointed by the Senate President and the Speaker of the House of
Delegates. In addition, the chief executive officer of the Baltimore City Public
Schools and a representative of the Mayor of Baltimore were appointed as ex-
officio members. Finally, the law granted the Board expanded powers and
responsibilities over the operations of BCCC, including monitoring the
achievement of academic outcomes, budgeting, workforce planning, and the
development or sale of unused or underutilized real estate holdings.
Financial Statement Audits
BCCC engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2014, 2015, and 2016. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that BCCC’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial position of BCCC and the
foundation, and the respective changes in their financial position and, where
applicable, cash flows thereof for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report on BCCC dated December 9, 2014. We
determined that BCCC satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The
remaining four findings are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Facilities Planning and Operations Department
Finding 1
The Baltimore City Community College’s (BCCC) Facilities Planning and
Operations Department circumvented State regulations in the procurement
of certain goods and services. Based on our review, certain of these
procurements and related payments appeared questionable.
Analysis
BCCC’s Facilities Planning and Operations Department circumvented State
regulations in the procurement of certain goods and services. We determined that
certain of these procurements and related payments appeared questionable.
According to State records, expenditures (excluding payroll) in this Department
totaled $2.9 million in fiscal year 2016. Based on a referral to our fraud, waste,
and abuse hotline, we analyzed the expenditures incurred by this Department for a
multi-year period, which identified these conditions.
BCCC Artificially Divided Purchases Circumventing State Procurement
Regulations
The Department artificially divided purchases, circumventing State procurement
regulations. Our analysis of State expenditure data for fiscal years 2014 through
2016 disclosed that the Department made 178 payments to seven vendors for
goods and services totaling approximately $420,000, each of which was less than
$15,000. The Department procured these goods and services without determining
whether they were available from existing statewide contracts or without
undertaking public solicitations, entering into written contracts, and publishing
the awards.
For example, during fiscal year 2016, BCCC artificially divided purchases for
electrical supplies from one vendor totaling $41,000 into 27 smaller
procurements, each under $5,000, rather than combine the purchases into a larger
procurement, which would have been available under a statewide contract. In
another case, during fiscal year 2015, BCCC artificially divided purchases from
another vendor for building repairs totaling $40,400. BCCC divided these
purchases into 19 smaller procurements, rather than combine them into a larger
procurement. By failing to combine purchases and use an existing statewide
contract or seek a competitive procurement, BCCC did not maximize the State’s
purchasing power or ensure that it obtained the best prices.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Similar conditions regarding the failure to consolidate procurements to maximize
purchasing power were included in our preceding audit report. State procurement
regulations prohibit agencies from purchasing items from alternate sources when
the items are available through statewide contracts and the total cost for the year
for all purchases exceeds $10,000. When items are not available under statewide
contracts, State procurement regulations require documented bids and written
contracts for procurements over $5,000, and generally require a formal written
competitive procurement and publication of the solicitation on eMaryland
Marketplace for procurements over $15,000.
Insufficient Controls Allowed Certain Questionable Procurements
Department employees directly solicited, received, and evaluated the bids and
selected the vendors. BCCC central procurement personnel were only required to
execute purchase orders for the vendors selected by the Department. Had these
purchases exceeded $15,000, BCCC’s central procurement personnel would have
publicly solicited and evaluated the bids and selected the vendors, rather than the
Department controlling the entire process.
We reviewed 16 Department procurements totaling $140,000, each under
$15,000, including 11 from the aforementioned seven vendors. For 6
procurements totaling $65,000, we identified relationships between competing
bidders. For example, for 3 procurements of electrical services, BCCC obtained
bids from the same two companies owned by an individual or a close relative of
the individual. Payments for these 3 procurements totaled $33,000 during fiscal
years 2014 through 2016. Department employees directly solicited bids for these
procurements and, therefore, it should have been readily apparent that they were
soliciting bids from the same individual or the individual’s close relative.
Certain Payments Were Questionable and Were Not Supported by Proper
Invoices
Invoices included questionable charges and did not always provide sufficient
detail to allow BCCC to substantiate the propriety of the amounts billed. Based
on our analyses of expenditure activity, we selected 15 payments for maintenance
services totaling approximately $76,000 and noted the following conditions
applicable to 14 payments totaling $73,900:
 Six payments totaling $42,000 were for services that appeared questionable
based on the invoice descriptions of work performed. For example, BCCC
paid a $7,495 invoice for maintenance work on a room that did not exist and a
$14,250 invoice for maintenance on HVAC equipment that did not exist.
BCCC management could not explain these payments nor provide us with
documentation to support the services were provided.
8

--- Page 11 ---
 BCCC made seven other payments totaling $28,000 even though the
proposals and invoices submitted by the vendors lacked sufficient details to
allow BCCC to determine the propriety of the billings and to ensure costs
were reasonable for the services performed. For example, the proposal and
invoice from one vendor for $4,375 in electrical work did not state the
location where the work was performed, nor did the documents state the cost
of materials and the labor hours to support the amount being charged.
 A $3,900 invoice for the installation of four cell phone charging stations did
not include details (such as labor rates and hours) and appeared excessive.
BCCC purchased the cell phone charging stations from one vendor and
procured the installation services from another vendor. According to the
invoice for the purchase of the charging stations, the units “mount securely to
any flat surface within minutes.” Therefore, the amount paid for the
installation services appears unreasonable.
BCCC’s Response to These Allegations Was Inadequate
BCCC’s compliance hotline received several allegations regarding the
aforementioned questionable activity, but BCCC’s actions in response to these
allegations were inadequate. Specifically, upon receipt, BCCC referred these
allegations to a senior management employee for investigation, who interviewed
relevant employees, but BCCC did not conduct a detailed review of the
transactions prior to concluding that the allegations were unsubstantiated.
Consequently, BCCC did not refer these allegations to the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) – Criminal Division and did not advise the Governor’s Chief
Legal Counsel, as required.
The Governor’s Executive Order, Standards of Conduct for Executive Branch
Employees, requires that all State departments and agencies immediately report
any instance of possible criminal or unethical conduct by an employee or
contractor of the State to the Governor’s Chief Counsel. Furthermore, internal
OAG policy requires the agency’s legal counsel to report all such instances to the
OAG – Criminal Division.
As a result of our review, we referred our findings to the OAG – Criminal
Division. A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act
has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCCC
a. use existing Statewide contracts for the procurement of goods and
services, when available;
b. discontinue the practice of artificially dividing purchases to circumvent
State procurement regulations and lessen its purchasing power;
c. comply with State procurement regulations for competitive procurement,
including the use of written contracts and the publication of solicitations
and awards on eMaryland Marketplace and (repeat);
d. ensure that vendor invoices contain sufficient details to determine the
propriety and reasonableness of the services performed and amounts
billed;
e. conduct thorough reviews of vendor invoices, including those related to
the aforementioned payments, investigate and resolve any discrepancies,
and recover any amounts that are determined to be improperly billed;
and
f. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division
before taking any actions related to the questionable payments noted, and
refer any other questionable activity to the Office of the Attorney General
– Criminal Division and advise the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 2
Several BCCC employees shared their corporate purchasing cards (CPC),
precluding effective accountability and control, and did not have required
documentation to support certain payments.
Analysis
BCCC employees in the Facilities Planning and Operations Department shared
their CPCs, precluding effective accountability and control, and did not have
documentation, such as detailed invoices, to support certain payments, as required
by State CPC policy. According to the issuing bank’s records, BCCC’s corporate
purchasing card expenditures during fiscal years 2014 through 2016 totaled $5.3
million. The Department’s CPC activity, which involved cards issued to six
employees, totaled $1.1 million during this period. Based on the same referral to
our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline that was noted in Finding 1, we analyzed the
activity for the six CPCs issued to Department employees.
 We identified numerous instances in which cardholders in the Department
shared their cards with other employees, precluding effective accountability
10

--- Page 13 ---
and control. In addition, we were advised by a Department management
official that a former management employee had directed another former
employee to pay vendors using the card information this individual
maintained for the Department’s cardholders.
 Payments were not always adequately supported. Our review of five
payments for maintenance services totaling $10,900 disclosed three purchases
totaling $6,500 that were not supported. Other than the purchasing card
customer receipt documentation, there were no invoices or itemized vendor
receipts describing the goods and services purchased. As a result, we were
unable to determine the propriety of these payments. Furthermore, the
purchasing logs reflected that these three purchases had been approved by the
cardholders’ supervisor, raising concerns about the thoroughness of the
supervisory review of these transactions. A similar condition regarding the
lack of support for CPC charges was noted in our preceding audit report.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual prohibits the sharing of cards and account numbers.
Additionally, the Manual requires itemized documentation, such as detailed
invoices, to be retained as support for all CPC transactions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCCC
a. prohibit cardholders from sharing their cards with other employees; and
b. ensure that proper documentation, such as itemized vendor invoices, is
obtained to support all CPC transactions (repeat).
Payroll
Finding 3
BCCC granted salary incentives or increases totaling $129,250 to four senior
management positions without adequate justifications, including three
increases that were not approved by its Board of Trustees.
Analysis
BCCC granted salary incentives or increases totaling $129,250 to four senior
management positions without adequate justifications and, in three cases, without
required approval from its Board of Trustees. We tested 11 salary increases
totaling $235,000 awarded from June 2015 to April 2017 and noted the following
conditions:
11

--- Page 14 ---
 In March 2016, BCCC paid a senior management employee a $25,000
incentive bonus for fiscal year 2015 without any documentation that the
employee fulfilled the conditions for the bonus. Specifically, the senior
management employee’s contract stipulated that, upon successful completion
of certain goals, the employee would receive an annual incentive payment of
no more than $25,000. The contract further provided that these goals would
be set by November 1, 2014 for the first evaluation period (fiscal year 2015)
and by July 1 of each year thereafter. While the Board authorized the bonus
because it determined that the senior management employee had a successful
review by the Board, BCCC lacked documentation that the goals were
established and that the employee met the goals to earn the bonus as required
by the terms of the employment contract.
 BCCC increased the salaries for three senior management positions without
adequate justification and Board approval. Based on our review of available
documentation, the salaries for two employees increased by $28,600 and
$26,800, respectively, because they would be performing additional duties not
included in their position descriptions. Our review of their current position
descriptions disclosed, however, that the additional duties were generally
within the employees’ existing responsibilities. In the third instance, BCCC
hired a senior management employee at an annual salary that was $48,850
greater than the salary of the former employee in that position, with no
documentation to support the increase. In response to our inquiry about this
increase, BCCC advised that an individual with additional skills and
experience was required for this role, and accordingly, the salary was
increased. However, we noted that the Board of Trustees was not given an
opportunity to assess the appropriateness of the final salary.
The aforementioned four senior management employees were all receiving
compensation in excess of $100,000. In this regard, State law authorizes BCCC’s
Board of Trustees to establish salaries and terms of employment for BCCC
employees. The Board delegated this authority to the BCCC President with the
provision that all personnel actions be submitted to the Board of Trustees and, for
salaried positions exceeding $100,000, be approved by the Board.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCCC ensure that salary increases and incentives are
appropriately justified, in accordance with the terms of employment
contracts, and approved by the Board of Trustees, as required.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Affiliated Foundation
Finding 4
BCCC did not maintain a current and comprehensive agreement with its
affiliated foundation, as required. In addition, the most recent agreement
did not contain any financial or operational goals and outcomes to be
achieved by the foundation even though BCCC subsidized a significant
percentage of the foundation’s expenses during fiscal years 2015 and 2016.
Analysis
BCCC did not have a current agreement with its affiliated foundation to delineate
the structure of the relationship between the college and foundation, as required.
Furthermore, the most recent agreement with the foundation, dated September
2015, did not contain any operational goals or outcomes to be achieved by the
foundation even though, during fiscal years 2015 and 2016, BCCC provided the
majority of the foundation’s funding. The foundation’s stated purpose is to
advance the mission of BCCC by strengthening philanthropic giving to the
College, supporting students with scholarships, and working to advance BCCC as
a vital part of Baltimore City’s economy and community. During fiscal years
2015 and 2016, the foundation’s operating costs totaled $637,066 and
scholarships and grants awarded totaled $177,694.
BCCC did not have a current agreement with the foundation delineating the
relationship between the two entities, as required by State regulations. As of May
2017, the most recent agreement with the foundation expired in June 2016. State
regulations require BCCC to document its relationship with the foundation
through a written agreement.
Furthermore, the expired agreement did not contain any provision for BCCC to
fund the foundation’s staffing even though BCCC has historically paid these
costs, nor did the expired agreement establish any formal goals or outcomes for
the foundation on which to base BCCC’s financial support. According to the
foundation’s audited financial statements, BCCC paid the salaries and benefits for
the foundation’s three employees, which totaled $524,846 during fiscal years
2015 and 2016, representing 65 percent of the foundation’s total revenue during
those years (see Table 1 on page 14). The foundation’s remaining revenue for
this two-year period totaled $278,679, which included donations and grants of
$221,477.
Absent any formal foundation goals or desired outcomes in those areas, we also
were advised by BCCC management that it was unaware of any current plan by
the foundation to enhance public giving or reduce non-scholarship costs. The
13

--- Page 16 ---
foundation’s audited financial statements for fiscal year 2017, which were issued
after the conclusion of our audit fieldwork, disclosed that grants and scholarship
activity increased, after the foundation’s release of restricted investment funds for
that purpose.
Table 1
BCCC Foundation Financial Activity
Fiscal Years 2015 and 2016
Fiscal Fiscal Total 2015 and 2016
Year Year
Dollars Percent
2015 2016
Donations and Grants $99,839 $121,638 $221,477 28%
BCCC Payroll Subsidy 235,537 289,309 524,846 65%
Other Revenue 49,572 7,630 57,202 7%
Total Revenue $384,948 $418,577 $803,525 100%
Scholarships and Grants $102,965 $74,729 $177,694 22%
Operating Expenses
298,557 338,509 637,066 78%
(Management and Other)
Total Expenses $401,522 $413,238 $814,760 100%
Source: Foundation Audited Financial Statement
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCCC establish a comprehensive agreement with its
foundation that establishes formal goals and outcomes for the foundation
and identifies the related BCCC funding to be provided. In addition, the
foundation agreement should identify any planned steps or actions to
enhance fundraising and/or reduce non-scholarship costs.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
BCCC’s Information Technology Services Division (ITSD) manages the
development, maintenance, and support of BCCC’s information and technology
infrastructure including all related networking, telecommunications, and business
information systems. The ITSD maintains an integrated administrative and
academic computer network, which includes separate email and file servers,
Internet connectivity, and multiple firewalls. ITSD also maintains critical
14

--- Page 17 ---
enterprise applications as well as departmental systems supporting student, human
resource, and financial information systems. Finally, ITSD is responsible for all
classroom and student computer lab software and hardware configurations.
Finding 5
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by BCCC was
stored without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by BCCC was stored in
clear text. Specifically, we determined that as of the date of our test work in
March 2017, BCCC records indicated that it stored PII, including social security
numbers, and full names with dates of birth in clear text in numerous databases.
For example, we noted 327,679 unique social security numbers in one of those
databases. In addition, ITSD management advised us that this sensitive PII was
not protected by other substantial mitigating controls. Furthermore, BCCC had
not performed an inventory of its systems to identify all sensitive PII, determined
if it was necessary to retain the PII, and deleted PII identified as unnecessary.
Finally, we determined that the databases and server hosting this PII were not
capable of encrypting this information.
This sensitive PII is commonly associated with identity theft. Accordingly,
appropriate information system security controls need to exist to ensure that this
information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed. The State of
Maryland’s Information Security Policy requires that agencies protect confidential
data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to encrypt or otherwise properly protect
sensitive PII were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCCC
a. perform a complete inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. update its databases and systems with encryption capability and then
encrypt all sensitive PII not otherwise properly protected or employ other
substantial mitigating controls to protect this data (repeat).
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 6
Malware protection for BCCC computers was not sufficient to provide
BCCC with adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Analysis
Malware protection for BCCC computers was not sufficient to provide BCCC
with adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
 BCCC did not determine if current malware protection software, along with
current malware protection signature files, was installed and operational on
the 815 active workstations and servers in its critical administrative domain as
of April 11, 2017. BCCC used a central management console and malware
inventory management software to monitor and maintain malware protection
software for each of these computers. However, our April 11, 2017 review of
the malware protection central management console and inventory
management software identified 140 computers with no evidence that
malware protection software had been installed. Further, of the 675
computers with malware protection software installed, we identified 60
computers that were running an outdated version of the software and another
61 computers that were using malware protection signature files that were
more than nine days old (these signature files are generally updated daily).
 We determined that users of 140 workstations were assigned local
administrative rights on their workstations, even though these users were not
system/network administrators and, documentation was not maintained that
authorized and supported the necessity of the assigned administrative rights.
Consequently, if the above workstations were infected with malware, the
malware would run with administrative rights and expose these workstations
to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts
operated with only user rights. Furthermore, since 350 workstations were
configured with the local administrators group defined to include large user
groups, numerous BCCC users could have logged into these workstations with
administrative rights. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
 Certain BCCC workstations had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities, which could lead to a malware infection. Although the
vendors for these software products frequently provide software patches to
address these vulnerabilities, BCCC had not updated these workstations for
these patches. For example, we identified 385 workstations with an outdated
commonly vulnerable application with some of the installed software dating
16

--- Page 19 ---
back to February 2002. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCCC
a. ensure, on an ongoing basis, that all active computers have current
signature files, and up-to-date malware protection software installed, and
operational;
b. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to specific
system/network administrators and those users specifically allowed such
rights, with any such assignments to non-information technology
administrators being justified, approved, documented, and regularly
reviewed to determine whether they are still needed (repeat); and
c. ensure that all workstations are kept up-to-date for critical security
related updates for commonly vulnerable applications (repeat).
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
BCCC did not immediately restrictively endorse checks and deposit
collections timely at its Liberty Campus.
Analysis
BCCC did not immediately restrictively endorse and deposit collections timely at
its Liberty Campus. According to BCCC records, collections deposited during
fiscal year 2016 at the Liberty Campus totaled approximately $5.8 million.
Our review disclosed that checks were routinely placed in a safe for up to two
business days prior to being restrictively endorsed, while BCCC employees
researched the proper disposition of the funds. In addition, our test of 20 high
dollar amount checks received during the audit period, totaling approximately
$1.7 million, disclosed that 12 checks totaling $1.6 million were deposited
between 4 to 7 business days after receipt.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
checks be restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt and be deposited no
later than the first working day after the day of receipt.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCCC
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt, and
b. ensure that receipts are deposited timely.
Equipment
Finding 8
BCCC did not maintain complete and accurate equipment records, could not
locate certain equipment, and could not document that it conducted physical
inventories of equipment as required. In addition, 40 computers purchased
several years ago were never placed into service.
Analysis
BCCC could not document that it conducted physical inventories of equipment,
did not maintain complete and accurate records, and could not locate certain
equipment. According to BCCC’s records, its equipment inventory was valued at
$30.7 million as of June 30, 2016.
 BCCC’s detailed equipment records were not complete and accurate, and
certain equipment could not be located. Specifically, our test of the detailed
records for 15 computers costing $10,600 disclosed that, for 12 costing
$8,400, the detailed records did not include the specific locations of the
computers such as room numbers and, for 9 of the computers costing $6,300,
the records had incomplete or inaccurate information such as serial and model
numbers. In addition, BCCC could not locate 10 of the 15 computers costing
$7,000 that were purchased in August 2015.
 BCCC lacked documentation that complete physical inventories of sensitive
and non-sensitive equipment were conducted during our audit period.
Although BCCC personnel advised us that an inventory of all equipment was
completed in fiscal year 2014, BCCC did not maintain documentation, such as
count sheets, to support that these inventory counts had been conducted and
the results reconciled to the detailed records.
 BCCC had not placed computer equipment in service several years after its
acquisition, and the unused equipment remained in storage. Our review as of
June 2017 disclosed 40 desktop computers costing $28,000, purchased during
the period between September 2014 and June 2015, which were not placed in
service because the software to be installed on the computers had not been
upgraded for compatibility with the computers’ new operating system. BCCC
18

--- Page 21 ---
placed them in storage without any expected service date. Since technology is
constantly changing, the value and future use of this equipment is
questionable.
The Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual requires
that equipment records reflect information including, but not limited to, item
description, serial number, and physical location. The Manual further requires
that physical inventories be conducted for sensitive equipment items annually and
for non-sensitive equipment items every three years and the results reconciled to
the related detail records. Finally, the Manual provides that when items are no
longer needed, they are to be declared as excess property and not be placed in
storage without DGS approval.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCCC
a. ensure that the equipment records are complete and accurate;
b. investigate the aforementioned missing equipment and take appropriate
corrective action;
c. conduct documented physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive
equipment, as required, and reconcile the results to the detail inventory
records; and
d. refrain from purchasing equipment that is not needed for immediate use.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Baltimore City Community
College (BCCC) for the period beginning October 24, 2013 and ending November
29, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine BCCC’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, financial aid, cash receipts, payroll, affiliated foundation, and
information technology. Furthermore, we reviewed purchases and disbursements,
including corporate purchasing card expenditures, within BCCC's Facilities
Planning and Operations Department relevant to a referral to our fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of BCCC’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including BCCC.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
BCCC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
20

--- Page 23 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from BCCC’s financial system for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as student accounts receivable. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
BCCC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect BCCC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to BCCC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
21

--- Page 24 ---
BCCC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BCCC regarding the
results of our review of its response.
22

--- Page 26 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
October 24, 2013 to November 29, 2016
Finding 1
The Baltimore City Community College’s (BCCC) Facilities Planning and Operations
Department circumvented State regulations in the procurement of certain goods and
services. Based on our review, certain of these procurements and related payments
appeared questionable.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCCC
a. use existing Statewide contracts for the procurement of goods and services, when
available;
b. discontinue the practice of artificially dividing purchases to circumvent State
procurement regulations and lessen its purchasing power;
c. comply with State procurement regulations for competitive procurement, including the
use of written contracts and the publication of solicitations and awards on eMaryland
Marketplace and (repeat);
d. ensure that vendor invoices contain sufficient details to determine the propriety and
reasonableness of the services performed and amounts billed;
e. conduct thorough reviews of vendor invoices, including those related to the
aforementioned payments, investigate and resolve any discrepancies, and recover any
amounts that are determined to be improperly billed; and
f. consult with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division before taking any
actions related to the questionable payments noted, and refer any other questionable
activity to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division and advise the
Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel.
BCCC Response: We concur.
a. BCCC has and will continue to use Statewide contracts for the procurement of goods and
services, when available.
b. Internal controls over split purchases have improved in order to detect and prevent split
purchases
c. Solicitations and awards of $5,000 or more are being published on eMaryland Marketplace
and comply with State procurement regulations for competitive procurement and use of
written contracts.
d. Vendor invoices are reviewed to ensure that they contain sufficient details to determine the
propriety of reasonableness of the services performed and amounts billed.
e. Our review disclosed that one vendor had transactions that were not valid. We disputed three
transactions for this vendor totaling $5,955.50 that was credited later.
f. In addition to investigation by the senior BCCC management employee, BCCC
ComplianceLine allegations that evidence questionable ethics are referred to the Office of
Human Resources for the EEO/Compliance officer. As a matter of practice, any issues of

--- Page 27 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
October 24, 2013 to November 29, 2016
conflict of interest or employee ethical conduct are referred to the Office of Human
Resources for disposition by the EEO/Compliance officer. However, the EEO/Compliance
officer is not required to communicate which allegations are reported to the AG –Criminal
Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel. Future issues related to questionable
payments or activity will include consultation with the AAG as recommended.
Finding 2
Several BCCC employees shared their corporate purchasing cards (CPC), precluding
effective accountability and control, and did not have required documentation to support
certain payments.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCCC
a. prohibit cardholders from sharing their cards with other employees; and
b. ensure that proper documentation, such as itemized vendor invoices, is obtained to
support all CPC transactions (repeat).
BCCC response: We concur.
While the College does concur, it should be noted that this problem was identified and resolved
by the College before the audit commenced. The internal controls of the College identified the
problem and the internal controls of the College resolved the problem.
After this situation occurred, the card administrator continued the process of routine notifications
to all cardholders, reviewers, and others regarding the rules of safeguarding the card and the card
number, among other notifications regarding important card facts, rules and procedures.
a. New and existing cardholders receive training on the use of corporate purchase cards.
b. Documentation is reviewed monthly to ensure proper support is provided for card
transactions.
In summary, the processes, procedures, and actions above confirm how the College is able to
properly identify a problem, resolve a problem, and enhance controls to prevent recurrence. All
these actions occurred before the audit review during the normal course of business.
Auditor’s Comment: When we brought this issue to BCCC’s attention during the audit,
there was no evidence to suggest that BCCC was aware that employees were sharing
corporate purchasing cards or had identified the extent of the related activity.

--- Page 28 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
October 24, 2013 to November 29, 2016
Finding 3
BCCC granted salary incentives or increases totaling $129,150 to four senior management
positions without adequate justifications, including three increases that were not approved
by its Board of Trustees.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCCC ensure that salary increases and incentives are appropriately
justified, in accordance with the terms of employment contracts, and approved by the
Board of Trustees, as required.
BCCC Response: We do not concur.
First, as the finding correctly notes, the Board has delegated the authority to establish salaries
and terms of employment for BCCC employees to the President. There is no BCCC policy that
requires salaried positions exceeding $100,000 to be approved by the Board of Trustees.
Secondly, any salary increases or incentive pay, pursuant to an employment contract, were
approved by the BCCC Board of Trustees.
Auditor’s Comment: Although the response states that there is no BCCC policy
requiring Board of Trustees approval for salary positions exceeding $100,000, it also
states that BCCC obtained approval for the increases and incentive pay identified in our
finding. On numerous occasions during the course of our audit, we requested evidence of
these approvals but it was never provided.
Finding 4
BCCC did not maintain a current and comprehensive agreement with its affiliated
foundation, as required. In addition, the most recent agreement did not contain any
financial or operational goals and outcomes to be achieved by the foundation even though
BCCC subsidized a significant percentage of the foundation’s expenses during fiscal years
2015 and 2016.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCCC establish a comprehensive agreement with its foundation that
establishes formal goals and outcomes for the foundation and identifies the related BCCC
funding to be provided. In addition, the foundation agreement should identify any planned
steps or actions to enhance fundraising and/or reduce non-scholarship costs.
BCCC Response: We concur.

--- Page 29 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
October 24, 2013 to November 29, 2016
The College agrees that a new comprehensive agreement with the BCCC Foundation needs to be
updated. That agreement will establish formal goals and outcomes, as appropriate.
Finding 5
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by BCCC was stored
without adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCCC
a. perform a complete inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or other substantial
mitigating controls, and
d. update its databases and systems with encryption capability and then encrypt all
sensitive PII not otherwise properly protected or employ other substantial mitigating
controls to protect this data (repeat).
BCCC Response: We concur.
a. BCCC began to compile an inventory of sensitive PII on September 29, 2017. The inventory
will be completed by December 31, 2017.
b. An analysis of the PII inventory will be completed, and all unnecessary PII (outside of the
legacy systems) will be deleted by April 30, 2018.
c. Necessary PII will be protected through all available means, including encryption and/or
other substantial mitigating controls, by June 30, 2018.
d. As legacy databases and systems are replaced, all sensitive PII will be protected through
encryption.
Finding 6
Malware protection for BCCC computers was not sufficient to provide BCCC with
adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCCC
a. ensure, on an ongoing basis, that all active computers have current signature files, and
up-to-date malware protection software installed, and operational;

--- Page 30 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
October 24, 2013 to November 29, 2016
b. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to specific system/network
administrators and those users specifically allowed such rights, with any such
assignments to non-information technology administrators being justified, approved,
documented, and regularly reviewed to determine whether they are still needed
(repeat); and
c. ensure that all workstations are kept up-to-date for critical security related updates for
commonly vulnerable applications (repeat).
BCCC Response: We concur.
a. BCCC implemented process improvements on October 17, 2017 to ensure that all active
computers have current malware protection software and signature files installed. Daily
checks are performed to ensure that all active computers are up to date and failures are
tracked and remedied.
b. BCCC limits the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to key personnel within
a specific security group and maintains an exceptions list of users with administrative rights
who are not in the group. BCCC will begin quarterly reviews of the exceptions list in
January 2018, documenting approvals and justifications. By April 1, 2018, BCCC will
establish a procedure to regularly review all exceptions.
c. BCCC will maintain critical security related updates for commonly vulnerable applications
on all workstations.
Finding 7
BCCC did not immediately restrictively endorse checks and deposit collections timely at its
Liberty Campus.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCCC
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt, and
b. ensure that receipts are deposited timely.
BCCC Response: We concur.
a. BCCC has implemented the controls to address coding issues and
b. will address the timing of processed checks due to the physical proximity of the mail room
and the cashiers’ office.

--- Page 31 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
October 24, 2013 to November 29, 2016
Finding 8
BCCC did not maintain complete and accurate equipment records, could not locate certain
equipment, and could not document that it conducted physical inventories of equipment as
required. In addition, 40 computers purchased several years ago were never placed into
service.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCCC
a. ensure that the equipment records are complete and accurate;
b. investigate the aforementioned missing equipment and take appropriate corrective
action;
c. conduct documented physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive equipment, as
required, and reconcile the results to the detail inventory records; and
d. refrain from purchasing equipment that is not needed for immediate use.
BCCC Response: We concur.
a. The issues discussed in the finding relate to the physical location of the assets. Once the
physical inventory is taken as discussed in letter “c”, below, the proper documentation will
be completed and sent to DGS, including the Annual Report of Missing or Stolen Property to
ensure that BCCC’s records are complete and accurate and the asset locations are properly
updated based on the physical inventory.
b. As discussed above, without a physical inventory, assets listed as being in one location in the
property system may indeed not be missing but instead located in another location. Once the
physical inventory is taken, the proper documentation will be completed and sent to DGS,
and the location and other relevant information regarding the equipment will be updated in
the property inventory system. Any assets not located will be reported to DGS as is required.
c. As part of a recent DGS audit, in FY17, BCCC hired an outside company to take a complete
inventory of BCCC’s sensitive and non-sensitive equipment. BCCC’s AAG has been
assisting us to resolve the issue. BCCC will await instructions from the AAG and DGS on
how to proceed to complete the inventory. Once the inventory has been taken, it will be
reconciled to the detail inventory records.

--- Page 32 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
October 24, 2013 to November 29, 2016
d. BCCC concurs with this recommendation. Kindly be advised that the college does not
engage in the practice of purchasing computer equipment and not deploying same in a timely
manner. In relation to recommendation “d” this was an isolated incident.
The 40 computers were purchased in FY15 (September, 2014 and June, 2015). They were
property tagged and paid for. Because the last physical inventory was in FY14, it was not
obvious to BCCC administration that these computers were sitting in ‘storage’. This would
have been evident with a physical inventory.
It is our understanding that the Department does intend to upgrade the software, and once
that occurs, the computers will be deployed. If the software upgrade does not take place
before the end of October 2017, these computers will be re-allocated and deployed in labs
before the Thanksgiving Break.

--- Page 33 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
Marissa L. Riddle, CPA
Senior Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Albert E. Davison
Zain Khalid
Elliot Ortiz
Andrea G. Lynch Pyon, CFE
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Staff Auditors
Robert H. Dean
Justin P. Vlahacos
Information Systems Staff Auditors