Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, Baltimore
Date: 04/08/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d72456067473c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:57:28.965257
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore
September 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1 – UMB lacked an independent verification of adjustments 6
to financial aid awards posted to student accounts, and certain
employees had incompatible system access capabilities that
allowed them to both adjust and disburse financial aid awards.
Finding 2 – There was no independent verification to ensure that all 7
fund requests for reimbursement of federal financial aid were
received.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 3 – Several employees, including some who did not require 7
the applicable system capabilities for their job duties, could
process certain student account transactions, such as tuition
waivers, without independent verification.
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 4 – Certain employees were assigned system access 9
capabilities to process purchase orders and disbursement
transactions without independent review and approval.
Interagency Agreement
Finding 5 – Through an interagency agreement, UMB acquired 10
certain information technology services totaling $539,000 on
behalf of the Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center, which
allowed the Center to avoid using a competitive procurement
process for those services.
Payroll
Finding 6 – UMB did not always use available output reports to 11
ensure that only valid payroll adjustments were processed.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 – The UMB network was not sufficiently secured in that 12
properly configured firewall rules and effective intrusion
detection prevention system coverage did not exist.
Finding 8 – UMB procedures were not sufficient for maintaining and 14
securing numerous workstations against malware.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) provides professional and
graduate level instruction through its schools of Dentistry, Law, Medicine,
Nursing, Pharmacy, and Social Work, and its Graduate School. UMB students
who receive instruction in health care professions obtain clinical experience at
various health care facilities, including the University of Maryland Medical
Center, which is a component of the University of Maryland Medical System
Corporation.
For the Fall 2015 semester, UMB’s enrollment totaled 6,329 students. UMB’s
budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and student fees, a State
general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants and
contracts. According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2015 revenues totaled
approximately $1.05 billion, which included a State general fund appropriation of
$199.1 million. These records also indicated that UMB’s expenditures for fiscal
year 2015 totaled approximately $1.05 billion.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated April 8, 2013. We determined that
UMB satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1
The University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) lacked an independent
verification of adjustments to financial aid awards posted to student
accounts, and certain employees had incompatible system access capabilities
that allowed them to both adjust and disburse financial aid awards.
Analysis
Sufficient controls were not established to ensure the propriety of financial aid
posted to student accounts. According to UMB’s records, during fiscal year 2015,
financial aid awarded to students, including grants and scholarships, totaled
approximately $138 million.
Adjustments to financial aid award amounts were not independently verified for
propriety. UMB’s financial aid system automatically calculates award amounts
and generates recommended financial aid award packages for students based on
various eligibility criteria. UMB employees may manually record adjustments to
those award amounts based on individual student situations, such as when a
student drops classes and may no longer be eligible for the original award amount.
However, these adjustments were not subject to independent supervisory review
and approval, using available output reports, to ensure their propriety.
Additionally, seven employees responsible for manually recording adjustments to
financial aid awards in student accounts also had system access capabilities that
allowed them to release (disburse) the aid even though these capabilities were not
necessary to perform their job duties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMB
a. use available output reports to independently verify that all adjustments
to financial aid were proper, and
b. eliminate incompatible user capabilities so that the same individual
cannot both adjust and release (disburse) financial aid.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 2
There was no independent verification to ensure that all fund requests for
reimbursement of federal financial aid were received.
Analysis
UMB did not have an adequate process to ensure that funds were deposited in the
State’s bank account for all requests to the federal government for reimbursement
of financial aid. UMB received federal financial aid for student grants and loans
totaling approximately $122 million for the 2014-2015 academic year, primarily
from the United States Department of Education (USDOE).
An independent employee did not use available output reports of federal financial
aid funds requested to verify that all requested funds were received and deposited
into the State’s bank account. This procedure is a particularly important control
based on representations we received from the USDOE regarding the
requirements for changing the bank account into which requested funds are
deposited. In this regard, USDOE’s procedures and documentation requirements
would allow the employee responsible for requesting federal financial aid to
redirect the funds to be deposited into a different bank account. Accordingly,
there was a lack of assurance that all funds due to UMB were received and
deposited into the State’s account.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that an employee independent from the process of requesting
federal financial aid use available automated reports of requests made to
verify that all requested funds were properly deposited into the State’s bank
account.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 3
Several employees, including some who did not require the applicable system
capabilities for their job duties, could process certain transactions, such as
tuition waivers, without independent verification.
Analysis
Controls over critical transactions posted to student accounts in UMB’s automated
system were not sufficient. Several employees processed these transactions
without independent verification of their propriety, and other employees had
system access capabilities that allowed them to process certain of these
7

--- Page 10 ---
transactions even though they did not require these capabilities to perform their
job duties.
Several employees responsible for processing tuition waivers, making and
recording residency determinations, writing off delinquent student accounts, or
removing system holds from student accounts that were intended to prevent
students with delinquent accounts from registering for classes could do so without
independent verification of the transactions. Automated output reports of these
transactions either were not generated or were not used in a manner that provided
for an adequate independent verification. For example, the employee responsible
for verifying the propriety of tuition waivers posted to student accounts could also
record the waivers. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that all tuition
waivers, which totaled approximately $3.1 million for the Fall 2014 and Spring
2015 semesters, were valid.
In addition, 11 employees had system access capabilities that allowed them to
write-off student account balances or modify student residency status even though
they did not require these capabilities to perform their job duties.
During the 2014-2015 academic year, student account charges totaled
approximately $145.2 million. Each of the aforementioned transactions could
significantly affect a student’s account balance and, therefore, must be adequately
controlled.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMB
a. establish procedures, including the use of available output reports, to
independently verify the propriety of critical transactions posted to
student accounts; and
b. remove the aforementioned unnecessary employee system access
capabilities.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 4
Certain employees were assigned system access capabilities to process
purchase orders and disbursement transactions without independent review
and approval.
Analysis
UMB did not establish adequate controls over certain purchasing and
disbursement transactions processed in its automated system. As a result,
unauthorized transactions could be processed that may not be readily detected.
 Eighteen employees had been assigned system access capabilities that allowed
them to process purchase orders that were not subject to independent review
and approval. In lieu of an on-line approval process, UMB’s procedures
required these users to submit a paper copy of purchase orders that exceeded a
specified dollar amount to their supervisors for review. However, output
reports were not generated and used to ensure that all applicable purchase
orders were subject to this independent review and approval process. UMB
processed purchase orders during fiscal year 2015 totaling approximately
$113.5 million.
 Two employees had been assigned system access capabilities that allowed
them to process certain types of disbursement transactions, such as
honorariums and stipends, and release the transactions to the Comptroller of
Maryland’s General Accounting Division for payment without further
automated or manual review and approval. According to UMB’s records,
these two employees processed disbursements totaling approximately
$404,000 and $95,000, respectively, for these types of transactions during the
period July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2015.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMB ensure that all purchase orders in excess of the
dollar amounts specified by UMB and all disbursement transactions are
subject to independent review and approval.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Interagency Agreement
Finding 5
Through an interagency agreement, UMB acquired certain information
technology services totaling $539,000 on behalf of the Maryland Longitudinal
Data System Center, which allowed the Center to avoid using a competitive
procurement process for those services.
Analysis
UMB acquired certain information technology services for the Maryland
Longitudinal Data System Center through an existing interagency agreement
between UMB and the Center, allowing the Center to avoid using a competitive
procurement process for those services. UMB’s interagency agreement and
related contract extensions with the Center were for research services and covered
the period from July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2016 at a total cost of approximately $1.2
million for the three years. However, the Center and UMB improperly used the
agreement to procure additional services from third-party vendors, and oversight
of the vendors remained under the control of the Center.
Specifically, through the interagency agreement, the Center requested UMB to
contract with two vendors to obtain the services of two specific individuals for
information technology services during the period from July 2014 to March 2016,
at a cost of approximately $539,000. The interagency agreement was amended to
support these additional costs and services. Additionally, UMB’s agreement with
the Center included a facilities and administrative fee, ranging from 10 to 15
percent that UMB added to its billings to the Center, even though UMB did not
exercise any contractual responsibilities other than procuring the contracts and
processing related payments to the companies. Specifically, the daily supervision
and monitoring of the individuals and companies, including assigning tasks and
ensuring that defined responsibilities were fulfilled, was performed by the Center.
The Center provided UMB with a sole source explanation that stated that the
requested individuals had previously worked as contractors on the initial
development of the Center’s information technology system. However, this
explanation did not justify why no other vendor could provide the services nor did
it explain why the Center needed UMB to conduct the hiring. Furthermore, UMB
did not provide prior notification of the sole source procurements to the
University System of Maryland (USM) Office as required. USM Procurement
Policies and Procedures requires prior notification be given in writing for any
sole source procurement exceeding $100,000.
10

--- Page 13 ---
UMB believes that the contracted services were within the scope of work for the
interagency agreement because the data provided by the information system was
used for the research covered by the agreement and, therefore, it was justified in
acquiring these services on behalf of the Center. However, the specific contracted
services were beyond what was anticipated in the original scope of work and the
work was performed for, and directed by, the Center and not UMB. UMB also
advised that the proposed contract amounts were evaluated and considered to be
reasonable. However, because these services were obtained under an interagency
agreement between State agencies, the Center avoided using a competitive
procurement process and obtaining control agency approval for the procurements
as required by State procurement regulations. Accordingly, assurance was
lacking that these services were obtained at the most advantageous cost to the
State. We confirmed with staff at the Board of Public Works that the use of an
interagency agreement to procure these contractual services was not appropriate.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMB
a. discontinue using interagency agreements which enable another agency to
avoid a competitive procurement process; and
b. notify the USM Office of all sole source procurements in excess of
$100,000, including the aforementioned contracts, as required.
Payroll
Finding 6
UMB did not always use available output reports to ensure that only valid
adjustments to its payroll were processed.
Analysis
Available output reports were not always being reviewed to ensure that only
authorized payroll adjustments, such as payments for overtime and accumulated
leave, were processed by UMB’s payroll department. Each pay period, UMB
submitted its approved payroll to the University of Maryland, College Park
(UMCP) to be forwarded to the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) for final
processing. Although output reports of payroll processed by CPB were available,
not all UMB departments used these reports to verify that only approved payroll
adjustments were processed. Our review of procedures in place at five
departments disclosed three, with 1,168 employees, that were not using the output
reports for verification purposes.
11

--- Page 14 ---
According to UMB’s records, the University had 6,743 regular employees as of
October 2015. According to the State’s records, UMB’s payroll expenditures
totaled approximately $741.3 million for fiscal year 2015.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMB establish procedures requiring independent
review and approval of the payroll output reports subsequent to CPB
processing for all departments to ensure that only properly approved payroll
adjustments were processed by UMB’s payroll department.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
UMB’s Center for Information Technology Services (CITS) provides information
technology support to UMB, including its six professional schools, its graduate
school, and its administrative and academic units by developing and maintaining
University-wide administrative applications, such as the student information
management system and the financial system.
CITS also operates UMB’s campus-wide network, which is used for both
administrative and academic purposes, with connections to numerous buildings on
the UMB campus. The internal network has Internet connectivity and network
connections to USM institutions over the Maryland Research and Education
Network. In addition, the campus network is connected to the networks of several
affiliated entities (for example, the University of Maryland Medical System
Corporation). The internal network includes a perimeter firewall and redundant
firewalls at the core of the network to logically segment administrative portions of
the campus network from untrusted network segments (for example, student
computer labs and private companies leasing space from the University). CITS
personnel maintain the aforementioned UMB perimeter and core firewalls.
Finding 7
The UMB network was not sufficiently secured in that properly configured
firewall rules and effective intrusion detection prevention system coverage
did not exist.
Analysis
The UMB network was not sufficiently secured in that properly configured
firewall rules and effective intrusion detection prevention system coverage did not
exist.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 The core firewalls contained 4,433 rules allowing access to the internal
network from various sources which were not used by any network traffic for
an extended period of time (139 days at the time of our test work). These
rules allowed access to the UMB internal network by certain untrusted parties,
including students, and allowed access to critical servers supporting the
student information management system and financial system. Firewall rules
allowing access to the UMB internal network which remain unused and
unnecessary for extended periods of time represent a security risk to the UMB
network which could be exploited to attack critical devices and systems. The
USM IT Security Standards states that firewalls should be configured to block
all services not required and disable unused ports, and hide and prevent direct
accessing of trusted network addresses from untrusted networks.
 Effective intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage for encrypted
network traffic received from untrusted parties did not exist. Specifically, the
UMB network-based IDPS devices did not have the capability to decrypt
encrypted traffic and the host-based intrusion detection prevention software
(HIPS) installed on 123 servers was not properly used to address exploits in
encrypted traffic. The absence of effective IDPS coverage for encrypted
traffic created a network security risk as such traffic could contain malicious
exploits which are not detected or dropped. According to the National
Institute of Standards Guide to Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems,
complete IDPS coverage includes the use of a properly-configured, network-
based IDPS that decrypts and analyzes encrypted traffic, and/or the effective
use of a HIPS on critical servers, to aid significantly in the detection and
prevention of, and response to, potential network security breaches and
attacks.
 Network traffic originating from numerous untrusted sources (for example,
the University of Maryland Medical System Corporation) on the UMB
campus-wide network to over 100 UMB administrative network segments (for
example, the Finance Division) was not subject to the UMB network-based
IDPS protection. In addition, the aforementioned HIPS coverage for any of
this traffic was deemed to be ineffective. Therefore, there was no effective
IDPS coverage for this network traffic. The aforementioned IT Security
Standards states that institutions must establish automated and manual
processes for intrusion detection and/or prevention.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMB
a. perform periodic documented reviews of its firewall rules to ensure that
only necessary rules remain active and delete/disable rules based on these
reviews; and
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identify how IDPS and/or HIPS coverage should be best applied to
its network, and implement this coverage for traffic (including encrypted
traffic) from all untrusted parties.
Finding 8
UMB procedures were not sufficient for maintaining and securing numerous
workstations against malware.
Analysis
Procedures were not sufficient for maintaining and securing numerous UMB
workstations against malware.
 Certain workstations were configured with users having administrative rights.
Administrative rights are the highest permission level that can be granted and
allow users to install software and change configuration settings. Our test of
206 workstations disclosed that 14 employees’ user accounts (other than
system and network administrators) were defined with administrative rights
rather than with user rights. As a result, if the workstations used by accounts
with administrative rights were infected with malware, the malware would run
with administrative rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of
compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only user
rights.
 Certain workstations tested had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, UMB had not
updated all of its computers for these patches. For example, of 10 computers
tested for one of these software products, we noted that 7 computers were
running older versions of this software that had not been updated for periods
ranging from 2 to 57 months.
 UMB did not effectively use application restriction software on over 1,000
CITS maintained workstations. Such software can restrict unauthorized
applications from executing on workstations in an effort to protect these
14

--- Page 17 ---
workstations from malware (such as ransomware). Specifically, UMB
personnel advised us that application restriction software was installed on only
173 of the CITS maintained workstations but was not configured to restrict
unauthorized applications from executing on these workstations. The United
States Computer Emergency Readiness Team recommends that application
restriction software be used to protect computer networks from ransomware.
The USM IT Security Standards states that institutions must install software to
protect systems from malicious programs such as viruses, trojans, and worms.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that UMB
a. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to only
those individuals requiring such rights;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates on its
computers; and
c. develop, implement, and enforce an application restriction software
policy that properly protects CITS maintained workstations.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) for the period
beginning September 7, 2011 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, cash receipts, information systems security and control, payroll,
working funds, student financial aid, and corporate purchasing cards. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit included support services provided by UMB to certain other USM
institutions (such as processing certain construction vendor payments). Our audit
did not include certain support services provided to UMB by the USM Office.
These support services (such as bond financing) are included within the scope of
our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation
of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal
financial assistance programs and an assessment of UMB’s compliance with those
laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including the components of the USM.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
UMB’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
16

--- Page 19 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data) and the
State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor
administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card
activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from UMB’s financial systems for the
purpose of testing certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts
receivable. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
UMB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMB that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMB, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 22 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE
SEPTEMBER 7, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1
The University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) lacked an independent
verification of adjustments to financial aid awards posted to student
accounts, and certain employees had incompatible system access capabilities
that allowed them to both adjust and disburse financial aid awards.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMB
a. use available output reports to independently verify that all adjustments
to financial aid were proper, and
b. eliminate incompatible user capabilities so that the same individual
cannot both adjust and release (disburse) financial aid.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. Procedures were implemented during the audit requiring documented
supervisory review and approval of manual financial aid award adjustments
prior to the entry of the adjustment into the system. Additionally, the daily
output report of financial aid disbursements is reviewed, and the review is
documented, by an independent employee who does not have the capability to
modify and disburse financial aid awards in the system. For FY 15, total
manual financial aid award adjustments processed were $620,460.
b. Incompatible user capabilities were eliminated during the audit, so the same
individual cannot both adjust and disburse financial aid awards to student
accounts.
Finding 2
There was no independent verification to ensure that all fund requests for
reimbursement of federal financial aid were received.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that an employee independent from the process of requesting
federal financial aid use available automated reports of requests made to
verify that all requested funds were properly deposited into the State’s bank
account.

--- Page 23 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE
SEPTEMBER 7, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
University response
The procedure for requesting federal financial aid is tightly controlled at UMB,
with just three employees (one primary and two backup) authorized in the federal
system to execute financial aid draws. A verification was regularly performed to
ensure that authorized draws were deposited, but as the State Treasurer’s Office
(STO) also informed us, we believed that there were verification procedures in
place at the United States Department of Education (USDOE) that would have
precluded one of those employees from executing draws to any account other than
the State’s bank account. When the weakness identified in this finding was
brought to our attention, we instituted an additional independent verification that
will also ensure that all draws identified in the federal funds request system were
deposited to the authorized State bank account. So, although we agree to
implement the recommendation, the best this additional work will provide is
another detective control. To create a preventative control, the auditor should
instruct the STO to establish a restriction with the USDOE that would prevent any
State agency or institution of higher education from changing the bank account to
which federal funds are directed unless the STO has first authorized such a
change.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 3
Several employees, including some who did not require the applicable system
capabilities for their job duties, could process certain transactions, such as
tuition waivers, without independent verification.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMB
a. establish procedures, including the use of available output reports, to
independently verify the propriety of critical transactions posted to
student accounts; and
b. remove the aforementioned unnecessary employee system access
capabilities.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. UMB has established procedures to ensure that the propriety of critical
transactions posted to student accounts is now verified by someone who
does not have the ability to process such transactions. Output reports are

--- Page 24 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE
SEPTEMBER 7, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
being used where they are available. Where output reports are not already
available, they are being created to aid in the independent verifications.
b. UMB has removed the unnecessary employee system access capabilities
via system enhancements to limit access points on certain critical screens.
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 4
Certain employees were assigned system access capabilities to process
purchase orders and disbursement transactions without independent review
and approval.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMB ensure that all purchase orders in excess of the
dollar amounts specified by UMB and all disbursement transactions are
subject to independent review and approval.
University response
We agree with the recommendation. For the processing of purchase orders, we
will evaluate the capabilities that exist within our automated financial system and
determine if an output report can be generated and used to ensure that all purchase
orders in excess of specified dollar thresholds are subject to independent review
and approval. Additionally, for the processing of the specific types of
disbursement transactions questioned, which represents less than one percent of
the total disbursements processed by the two employees, we removed the
employees’ voucher release abilities before audit fieldwork was completed.
Therefore, all voucher batches that they create are subject to an independent
review and approval before submission for payment.
Interagency Agreement
Finding 5
Through an interagency agreement, UMB acquired certain information
technology services totaling $539,000 on behalf of the Maryland Longitudinal
Data System Center, which allowed the Center to avoid using a competitive
procurement process for those services.

--- Page 25 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE
SEPTEMBER 7, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMB
a. discontinue using interagency agreements which enable another agency to
avoid a competitive procurement process; and
b. notify the USM Office of all sole source procurements in excess of
$100,000, including the aforementioned contracts, as required.
University response
a. The interagency agreement with the Maryland Longitudinal Data System
Center (MLDSC), which has been in place for several years, established
UMB as the collaborative research and policy services branch of the
MLDSC for the purpose of conducting research and analysis as required
by a United States Department of Education grant to the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE). At the core of the federal grant funded
research, was a need to develop an information technology system to
collect and organize the data that UMB was to analyze. The services to
create that system were originally procured by MSDE on behalf of
MLDSC, but were not completed. Since a complete system was needed
for UMB to analyze the data, and since the sole source request from the
UMB principal investigator was to procure the services of the contractors
who had developed the system thus far, UMB evaluated the request and
determined that it fit the criteria for a sole source procurement under the
existing agreement. It was clear that the contractors had unique
qualifications to complete a system that they themselves had developed
and that a fully functioning system was necessary to carry out the
requirements of the existing interagency agreement. UMB will continue
to follow the instructions provided by the Department of Budget and
Management regarding interagency agreements and USM Procurement
Policies and Procedures when evaluating procurement requests under
interagency agreements. MLDSC, as stated in response to the same
finding taken in their audit report, stated that they would no longer procure
vendor services under interagency agreements. The system is fully
developed and operational and the contractors’ services ended as of June
30, 2016.
b. We agree to notify the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance,
University System of Maryland, of sole source procurements in
accordance with the USM Procurement Policies and Procedures.

--- Page 26 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE
SEPTEMBER 7, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
Payroll
Finding 6
UMB did not always use available output reports to ensure that only valid
adjustments to its payroll were processed.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMB establish procedures requiring independent
review and approval of the payroll output reports subsequent to CPB
processing for all departments to ensure that only properly approved payroll
adjustments were processed by UMB’s payroll department.
University response
We agree with the recommendation. Procedures have been revised to require all
departments to compare the preliminary and final payroll report (i.e., cost center
report/payroll register) to verify that only properly approved payroll adjustments
were processed by UMB’s payroll department.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7
The UMB network was not sufficiently secured in that properly configured
firewall rules and effective intrusion detection prevention system coverage
did not exist.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMB
a. perform periodic documented reviews of its firewall rules to ensure that
only necessary rules remain active and delete/disable rules based on these
reviews; and
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identify how IDPS and/or HIPS coverage should be best applied to
its network, and implement this coverage for traffic (including encrypted
traffic) from all untrusted parties.

--- Page 27 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE
SEPTEMBER 7, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. UMB will perform periodic reviews of the firewall rules, evaluate the
rules, and appropriately delete rules to ensure that only necessary and
properly constructed rules remain active. These reviews are documented
and retained for future reference in accordance with UMB’s Firewall
Review Procedure.
b. UMB completed an assessment of network security risks relative to the
UMB WAN’s third party network traffic flowing to critical systems and
has purchased and implemented a state-of-the-art next generation firewall.
The new firewall provides an additional intrusion detection prevention
system (IDPS) that expands network-based coverage and serves as another
layer of network security, and will enable inspection of SSL traffic to
critical systems.
Finding 8
UMB procedures were not sufficient for maintaining and securing numerous
workstations against malware.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that UMB
a. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to only
those individuals requiring such rights;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates on its
computers; and
c. develop, implement, and enforce an application restriction software
policy that properly protects CITS maintained workstations.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. UMB policy restricts administrative rights on workstations for non-IT
related employees. UMB will ensure that administrator rights on
workstations are restricted to only those individuals requiring such rights.
b. UMB will continue to apply the latest patches and updates to ensure that
workstations are kept up-to-date, and investigate solutions when updates
are incompatible with a critical business software application.
c. UMB is in the process of implementing application restriction software to
prevent unauthorized software from executing.

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David O. Mauriello, CPA
Robert A. Wells, CPA
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Joseph J. Burke, III
Lindsay M. Fertig, CPA
Kathryn A. Jones
Aleksandr T. Strack
Staff Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Staff Auditors