Title: State Retirement Agency
Date: 03/02/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d19cc9d724560674684
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:41:27.080635
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Retirement Agency
May 2022
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses from this
public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 20, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Retirement Agency for
the period beginning May 8, 2017 and ending April 30, 2021. The Agency
provides administrative support services and investment functions for the State
Retirement and Pension System of Maryland, a cost-sharing multiple employer
public employee retirement system.
Our audit disclosed that the Agency discontinued reviewing and approving
investment reconciliations received from its custodial bank in 2019.
Consequently, the Agency was unable to explain certain significant discrepancies
and material monthly differences, as well as certain missing reconciliations.
Furthermore, we found certain risks existed within the Agency’s computer
system. However, in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted those findings
from this audit report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative
Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best
practices before the report is made available to the public. The term
“cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3A-301(b), and using our professional judgment we have determined that the
redacted findings fall under the referenced definition. The specifics of the
cybersecurity findings were previously communicated to the Agency and those
parties responsible for acting on our recommendations.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our determination that the
Agency satisfactorily addressed all of the five prior report findings.
The Agency’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. However, consistent with the requirements of State law, we have redacted
the elements of the Agency’s response related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Agency. We also wish to acknowledge the Agency’s willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Retirement Agency provides administrative support services and
investment functions for the State Retirement and Pension System (System) of
Maryland, a cost-sharing multiple-employer public employee retirement system
consisting of a State pool and a Municipal pool. The State pool includes State
agencies, boards of education, community colleges, and libraries; and the
Municipal pool includes participating local governmental units that elected to join
the System.
The System was established by the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland and comprises the following individual systems:
 Teachers’ Retirement and Pension Systems,
 Employees’ Retirement and Pension Systems,
 State Police Retirement System,
 Judges’ Retirement System, and
 Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System.
Responsibility for the administration and operation of the System is vested in a
15-member Board of Trustees. According to the State’s records, the Agency’s
operating expenditures totaled approximately $43.2 million during fiscal year
2021.
Select System Financial Information
According to its records, as of June 30, 2021, the System had approximately
169,000 retirees and beneficiaries, and approximately 194,000 active participants.
Figure 1 provides select System financial information.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Select System Financial Information
(expressed in billions)
Net Unfunded
Total Net
Fiscal Total Investment Benefit Actuarial
Position at
Year Contributions Income Payments Accrued
June 30
(Loss) Liability
2021 $3.1 $14.3 $4.3 $67.6 $18.9
2020 $3.0 $1.9 $4.2 $54.6 $20.2
2019 $2.9 $3.3 $4.0 $53.9 $20.2
2018 $2.8 $3.9 $3.8 $51.8 $20.0
2017 $2.8 $4.5 $3.6 $49.0 $19.7
Source: Audited System Financial Statements
Note: The Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liability is the amount by which the Actuarial Accrued Liability
exceeds the Actuarial Value of Assets as determined by the System’s actuary.
Financial Statement Audits
The Agency engages an independent accounting firm to perform an annual audit
of the System’s financial statements. In the related auditor reports, the firm stated
that the System’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
respective financial position of the System as of June 30, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020,
and 2021, and the changes in plan net position for the years then ended, in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings in our
preceding audit report dated June 8, 2018. We determined that the Agency
satisfactorily addressed the five prior report findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Investment Fund Managers
Background
The Agency uses public and private fund managers to provide investment services
for its assets, which totaled approximately $57.3 billion, as of March 31, 2021.
Public fund managers invest in publicly traded assets, such as those found on a
stock exchange, while private fund managers invest in privately held entities, such
as limited partnerships, and private equity and private real estate fund
investments. According to its records as of March 31, 2021, the Agency had
contracts with over 400 individual fund managers.1 Approximately $40.9 billion
was invested by the Agency’s public fund managers, and $16.4 billion was
invested by private fund managers.
Fund managers are generally paid a fixed management fee, but can also earn
incentive fees based on performance. Management fees for public fund managers
are paid through an invoicing process, and are generally calculated by applying a
specified contract rate to an ending investment value. Management fees for
private fund managers are normally based on a specified contract rate applied to
the investment amount committed by the Agency to the manager. Private fund
managers deduct their fees directly from an Agency established investment
account, and report amounts deducted in accordance with contract requirements.
During fiscal year 2021, management fees paid to fund managers totaled $532.5
million. In addition, during calendar year 2020, the managers and partners for
certain private alternative investments earned approximately $203.6 million in
interest incentives that are normally only paid if performance thresholds are
achieved.
The Agency also contracts with a third-party custodial bank to perform various
functions relating to investment activity, including monthly reconciliations of
independently compiled investment records to investment values reported by the
Agency’s public fund managers. Monthly reconciliations are not performed for
private investments since the actual value of these investments is normally not
readily available through, for example, a public exchange, but may instead require
other unique valuation methods, such as the use of appraisals. The custodial bank
is also responsible for making management fee payments to certain fund
1 The Agency has a limited number of its own employees who also perform functions similar to
the public fund managers. These Agency employees are not included in the Investment Fund
Managers’ audit findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
managers based on authorization from the Agency. The Agency paid the
custodial bank $10.1 million during our audit period.
Finding 1
The Agency discontinued reviewing and approving investment
reconciliations received from its custodial bank resulting in the failure to
identify missing reconciliations and investigate monthly discrepancies and
differences ranging between $315.5 million and $1.1 billion.
Analysis
The Agency discontinued reviewing and approving investment reconciliations
received from its custodial bank in March 2019. Consequently, the Agency was
unable to explain certain significant discrepancies in reconciliations it received, as
well as certain material differences identified, which in the aggregate ranged
between $315.5 million and $1.1 billion for selected months. In addition, we
noted certain missing reconciliations. Adequate review and approval of these
reconciliations is critical to help ensure the validity and accuracy of investment
records maintained by public fund managers.
 Investment reconciliations submitted by the custodial bank were not always
complete. Specifically, our review of reconciliations for seven months (a total
of 487 different investment reconciliations) submitted by the custodial bank
between September 2020 and March 2021 disclosed that the bank did not
include the ending investment balance from the bank’s records and/or the fund
manager’s records on 168 reconciliations. In addition, 44 reconciliations had
material differences in which fund manager records exceeded the bank’s
records in certain months by an aggregate total ranging between $315.5
million and $1.1 billion, for which there was no documented explanation,
investigation, or resolution by the bank or the Agency (see Figure 2).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
Investment Reconciliations Reviewed
Reconciliations
Reconciliations Cumulative
Missing Bank
Number of with Unexplained Unexplained
Month and/or Fund
Reconciliations Difference of Differences
Manager
$500,000 or More (in Millions)
Balance
September 2020 67 23 9 $879.9
October 2020 67 23 10 $856.8
November 2020 67 23 17 $1,053.8
December 2020 67 24 4 $315.5
January 2021 67 23 4 $764.3
February 2021 76 22 0 $0
March 2021 76 30 0 $0
Total 487 168 44
Note: A specific investment could be included in the count for more than one month.
Source: The Agency’s Records
 Our review of records for 12 public fund managers2 disclosed that
reconciliations for the period April 2017 to February 2021 were not being
submitted by the bank for 2 of the fund managers. These 2 fund managers
controlled investments totaling approximately $68 million and $126 million.
The custodial bank began submitting the missing reconciliations in February
2021, although the Agency was not aware of the missing reconciliations until
we brought this issue to its attention in June 2021.
The Agency’s Investment Division Operations Manual requires timely
supervisory review of reconciliations and that all material differences identified in
reconciliations, such as the aforementioned discrepancies, be explained or
corrected. In addition, the Manual requires that all missing reconciliations be
researched. Properly completed reconciliations are critical for ensuring the
accuracy of fund manager records and management fees that are based, in part, on
those records. We were advised by Agency management that review and
approval of the reconciliations were discontinued due to employee turnover at the
Agency and the custodial bank.
2 Judgmentally selected from fund managers that had certain missing or incomplete
reconciliations.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Agency comply with its Investment Division
Operations Manual, and
a. ensure that its custodial bank properly completes and submits all
required fund manager reconciliations, including an explanation and
resolution of all material differences identified; and
b. obtain and review the aforementioned missing and incomplete
reconciliations and resolve any differences.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that Finding 2 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with the Agency’s responses, have been redacted from
this report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit the State Retirement Agency for the
period beginning May 8, 2017 and ending April 30, 2021. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Agency’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
8

--- Page 11 ---
addressed by the audit included benefits paid to retirees and beneficiaries,
contributions required from participating employers, investments, critical
information systems, and payroll. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 8, 2017 to April 30, 2021, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Agency’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in the
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from the Agency’s automated Maryland Pension Administration System for
the purpose of testing pension contributions and benefits, and from the Statewide
Personnel System for the purpose of testing related payroll and leave transactions.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Agency’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
9

--- Page 12 ---
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Agency, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Agency’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Agency that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “means processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgement, we concluded that certain findings in this report
fall under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
10

--- Page 13 ---
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to the Agency and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the Agency to our findings and recommendations is included
as an appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report,
responses to any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State
law. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Agency regarding the results of
our review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 15 ---
State Retirement Agency
Agency Response Form
Investment Fund Managers
Finding 1
The Agency discontinued reviewing and approving investment reconciliations received
from its custodial bank resulting in the failure to identify missing reconciliations and
investigate monthly discrepancies and differences ranging between $315.5 million and $1.1
billion.
We recommend that the Agency comply with its Investment Division Operations Manual,
and
a. ensure that its custodial bank properly completes and submits all required fund
manager reconciliations, including an explanation and resolution of all material
differences identified; and
b. obtain and review the aforementioned missing and incomplete reconciliations and
resolve any differences.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Management will work to implement Audit’s recommendation.
additional comments as
deemed necessary. It is important to note that for a portion of the fiscal compliance audit of
the State Retirement Agency for the period beginning May 2017, and
ending April 2021 (48 months), the accounting and operations group was
understaffed.
The Managing Director of the Accounting and Operations retired on
December 31, 2019, and the Director of Investment Accounting left the
agency in August 2020.
The vacant Managing Director position was filled in March 2021. While
the open Director position was filled internally in August 2020, the
position left open was not filled until December 2021. This turnover,
and subsequent short staffing required staff to prioritize workflows and
tasks.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2022
Please provide details of State Street failed to send valuations for several funds and staff did not
corrective action or notice or did not follow up on the oversight. We believe staffing
explain disagreement. turnover at the System and at State Street was the source of the problem
and the reason for its persistence. The Director of Accounting noticed
the oversight and implemented corrections in March 2021.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 16 ---
State Retirement Agency
Agency Response Form
Management feels that the discrepancies did not prove to be permanent
and did not lead to a misstatement of total fund valuation or
performance.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: April 2022
Please provide details of The Managing Director reviewed the missed reconciliations, and noted
corrective action or and explained any significant variances in accordance with the
explain disagreement. Investment Division Operations Manuel guidelines. The reviewed
reconciliations were emailed to the OLA staff on April 4, 2022.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 17 ---
State Retirement Agency
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Finding 2 related to “cybersecurity”,
as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report
in accordance with State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the
finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with the Agency’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 18 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Lindsay M. Dunn, CPA
Dorian A. Fournier
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors