Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, College Park - Division of Information Technology
Date: 12/04/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d724560674748
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:58:23.410191
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
Division of Information Technology
December 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Division of Information Technology Responsibilities 4
University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) Data Breach 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Information System Security and Control
Finding 1 – UMCP Did Not Ensure that Firewalls Were Used to Properly 8
Secure All Campus Network Segments
* Finding 2 – Firewalls and Intrusion Prevention Systems Were Not 9
Configured to Ensure the Network Was Properly Secured
Finding 3 – Malware Protection for UMCP Computers Needs Improvement 10
Statewide Maryland Automated Record Tracking (SMART)
Finding 4 – UMCP Lacked Assurance that the SMART System and Its 12
Sensitive Data Were Properly Secured
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes items repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Division of Information Technology Responsibilities
The Division of Information Technology (DIT) is responsible for providing
computer and communications resources and services to faculty, staff, and
students at the University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP). Its staff develops
and supports applications (for example, payroll, student accounts receivable,
student grade files) on a variety of computers and operates an extensive computer
network. DIT uses a mainframe and numerous servers for UMCP’s primary
applications.
Within DIT, the Networks and Communication Technologies (NCT) unit
maintains a wide area network (WAN) and local area networks in all campus
buildings. NCT is responsible for managing the network devices, resolving
network problems, and providing external connectivity to UMCP’s network users
and systems. The UMCP WAN comprises over 1,500 network devices including
firewalls, routers, and switches. The UMCP network is connected to the Internet
through two separate providers and is also connected to the Network MD
Statewide Government Intranet and the Maryland Research Educational Network.
In addition, the UMCP WAN has a wireless network that covers the UMCP
campus for use by faculty, staff, and students. According to UMCP records, the
DIT had a budget of approximately $50 million, and had 419 permanent and
contractual positions for fiscal year 2014.
UMCP Data Breach
On February 18, 2014, a data breach occurred at UMCP which resulted in the
unauthorized disclosure of personally identifiable information (PII) in the custody
of UMCP. The breach involved 287,580 records from an identity card database
for faculty, staff, students, and affiliated personnel. The compromised records
included each individual’s name, social security number, date of birth, and UMCP
identification number.
Data Breach Timing and Method
DIT personnel advised us that the attacker responsible for the breach performed a
series of steps that provided increasing levels of improper access into UMCP’s
systems and network, which culminated with unauthorized access to the identity
card database. Collectively, the attack involved compromising multiple computer
resources hosted or maintained by DIT while taking advantage of certain security
weaknesses. UMCP databases, systems, applications, and websites attacked and
utilized in this compromise included: 1) a vulnerable publicly accessible web
server and web application, 2) a back-end file system web administrative user
4

--- Page 7 ---
group with excessive group membership, 3) a management utility’s source code,
4) an authentication server and the its associated back-end directory, 5) the system
hosting DIT employee login credentials, 6) critical application source code
associated with the identity card database, and finally, 7) the identity card
database userid and password, and the identity card database itself.
UMCP Response
DIT immediately notified the University of Maryland Police Department of the
data breach. Within 24 hours of discovering the breach UMCP officials notified
the public by establishing a data breach website which presented a letter on the
matter from the UMCP President. Shortly after the breach, UMCP took the
following measures:
 Notification - UMCP attempted to notify individuals whose sensitive PII data
were stolen using various methods to contact these individuals including:
mailings, emails, phone calls, a website, media stories, and social media
channels.
 Credit Monitoring - UMCP offered a free five-year, opt-in credit monitoring
service to all affected individuals who applied for the service by May 31,
2014.
 Task Force - UMCP created a Task Force on Cybersecurity to identify
policies and procedures for ensuring the future security of UMCP confidential
data. The Task Force was also charged with accounting for all other
confidential data on the UMCP network and for planning and performing a
penetration test over UMCP systems.
 Remediation - UMCP corrected known system vulnerabilities that allowed
the breach to occur.
Related Costs
We were advised by UMCP’s Comptroller’s Office that, of the population
affected by the data breach, 35.1 percent (100,803 individuals) applied for the free
credit monitoring service. Per UMCP’s records, as of June 2, 2014, the cost of
the credit monitoring service for fiscal year 2014 was approximately $818,000
and the estimated cost for fiscal year 2015 was approximately $1.6 million.
Additional costs of $350,000 were incurred during fiscal year 2014 for providing
a call center and for notification mailing services. We were advised by UMCP
personnel that electronic data loss or data breach insurance was not maintained.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Task Force on Cybersecurity
UMCP’s Task Force on Cybersecurity released its findings on June 12, 2014 and
presented a report containing 18 recommendations which were described as being
“necessary to bring the University of Maryland’s IT environment to an acceptable
level of security and to be in compliance with the University System of Maryland
Security Standards.” The recommendations encompassed policies, procedures,
technology, and resources as they relate to the security of confidential data. The
report and the detailed documentation included the following noteworthy issues:
1. Existence of Confidential Information on UMCP systems - The Task Force
surveyed UMCP departments concerning the collection and storage of
confidential information. The survey revealed that there were over 1,500
databases, systems, applications, and websites managed at the unit level that
contain some amount of confidential data. Our review of the survey results
revealed that 399 of these 1,500 objects collected and/or stored higher risk
personal data such as social security numbers, bank account information,
credit card numbers, or grades.
Several Task Force report recommendations were related to confidential data
as follows:
 Data retention policies need to be implemented by the Data Policy
Advisory Committee and data stewards.
 UMCP must minimize the number of systems that contain confidential
data and ensure that all confidential data are known and securely
managed at approved locations.
 UMCP should ensure the isolation of confidential data, limit access to
it, and log access to it.
 UMCP should implement a plan for the future discovery of
confidential data and eliminate unnecessary locations with such data.
 UMCP should use stronger authentication and authorization controls
for accessing confidential data, as appropriate to the risk.
2. Penetration Testing - The Task Force recommended periodic penetration
testing of central systems that use or access sensitive data. Consequently, an
outside vendor was hired to perform penetration testing on UMCP systems.
Separately, the penetration testing vendor’s report cited six risks rated either
high or medium including departmental segmentation/filtering and a lack of
Internet border filtering of traffic using network management protocols.
3. Balance between DIT and department operated IT systems - The Task
Force reviewed the balance between DIT and UMCP department operated IT
systems and considered existing policies and recommended changes or
additions as necessary. The Task Force recommended the creation of an IT
6

--- Page 9 ---
security advisory committee to facilitate collaboration between DIT and
UMCP departments operating their own IT systems. Such collaboration
should include developing and implementing IT security policy and processes,
and developing a mechanism for periodic review and reporting on the security
of UMCP departments which store or provide access to confidential data.
The actions taken by UMCP and its Cybersecurity Task Force, to assess security
risks associated with retention and transmission of confidential data and to
mitigate those risks now and in the future, appear to be appropriate. However,
due to the focus of the Task Force being primarily the security over confidential
data, those actions may not fully address the findings in our report.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 6, 2009. We have determined that
UMCP had satisfactorily addressed two of these four findings. The remaining
two findings are repeated as one finding in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) wide area network (WAN) is
connected to various third-party networks including the Internet. Within the
WAN, connections existed to UMCP departments, student computer labs, and
student dormitories. According to the UMCP website there are over 500 separate
departments that use the UMCP WAN. The Division of Information Technology
(DIT) maintained network firewalls at the locations where certain critical UMCP
network segments connected to the UMCP WAN.
Finding 1
UMCP did not ensure that firewalls were used to properly secure all campus
network segments.
Analysis
UMCP did not ensure that firewalls were used to secure all campus network
segments from the Internet and untrusted portions of its internal network.
 Firewalls were not in use at the points where the UMCP WAN connected to
third-party networks including the Internet. Additionally, our review
determined that only limited network traffic filtering was performed at these
connections to protect the WAN from third-party networks.
 UMCP did not have a campus-wide policy mandating the use of firewalls to
secure departmental local area networks from untrusted parties. Additionally,
we were advised that DIT did not determine if all UMCP departments were
maintaining firewalls. As such, there was no assurance that all UMCP
departmental networks were secured against unauthorized traffic from
untrusted parties including the Internet, student computer labs, and student
dormitories. Furthermore, while DIT did provide an optional (opt-in) firewall
service to all other UMCP departments that would filter traffic at the
department’s network interface with the UMCP WAN, DIT maintained
firewalls for only 15 of the over 500 campus departments as of February 26,
2014, according to UMCP records.
We tested eight departments (separate from DIT) which had not used the DIT
provided opt-in firewall service, and determined that for all eight departments
tested, firewall coverage did not exist to filter network-level traffic to
departmental workstations, including traffic that could originate from
untrusted parties. As a result, the Internet, student computer labs, and
8

--- Page 11 ---
dormitories had unnecessary, unfiltered network-level access to the faculty
and staff workstations in these tested departments which included the
President’s Office, the Comptroller’s Office, and the Bursar’s Office. We
were advised that there were approximately 500 workstations in these eight
departments.
Firewalls should be used to help implement a least privilege security strategy,
giving individuals, including those accessing the network via the Internet, only
those privileges needed to perform assigned tasks. In this regard, the University
System of Maryland (USM) IT Security Standards dated July 2014 state that
institutional networks must be protected by firewalls at identified points of
interface as determined by system sensitivity and data classification.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMCP implement a campus-wide policy which ensures
that the UMCP WAN and all departmental networks are secured against
unauthorized traffic from untrusted parties including the Internet, student
computer labs, and student dormitories.
Finding 2
Firewalls and intrusion prevention systems were not configured to ensure the
UMCP network was properly secured.
Analysis
Firewalls and the intrusion prevention systems were not configured to ensure the
UMCP network was properly secured.
 Firewall rules allowed numerous unnecessary connections to portions of the
UMCP network, placing various devices at risk. For example, all students,
faculty, and staff had unnecessary network-level access to numerous
mainframe addresses over various ports. In addition, we identified 16 firewall
rules that were outdated and should be removed to better protect the network.
The USM IT Security Standards require that firewalls should be configured to
block all services not required, disable unused ports, and hide and prevent
direct accessing of trusted network addresses from untrusted networks.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Security event logs for DIT maintained firewalls, routers, and switches were
not properly reviewed. Although UMCP staff periodically reviewed these
logs, these reviews did not specifically address security-related events (such
as failed logon attempts), were not performed regularly, and were not
documented. The USM IT Security Standards require that entities maintain
comprehensive audit trails and implement regular, documented review
9

--- Page 12 ---
procedures. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 Although UMCP used a network-based intrusion prevention system (IPS) to
detect and prevent malicious traffic, the IPS was not configured to review
traffic flowing from several untrusted network segments (campus computer
labs and student dormitories) to critical administrative network segments.
 UMCP did not use host-based intrusion protection systems (HIPS) on 30
critical servers, in its data center, that processed encrypted traffic. The
absence of HIPS coverage for such traffic created network security risk in that
UMCP’s network-based IPS cannot read encrypted traffic flowing into its
network whereas HIPS can read and analyze such traffic and protect critical
servers from malicious traffic. In this regard, the USM IT Security Standards
require that institutions establish automated and manual processes for
intrusion detection and/or prevention and state that host-based, network-based,
or a combination of both (preferred) may be utilized.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMCP
a. configure its firewalls to adequately secure its network (repeat);
b. regularly review the security events on the event logs for all critical
network devices, investigate any unusual or questionable items, document
these reviews and investigations, and retain the documentation for future
reference (repeat); and
c. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IPS and HIPS coverage should be best applied to
its network and, based on this review and assessment, implement such
coverage as necessary.
Finding 3
Malware protection for UMCP computers needs improvement.
Analysis
Malware protection for UMCP computers needs improvement.
 Although UMCP used an enterprise-wide management tool to provide
malware protection for its servers and workstations, UMCP did not use the
management capabilities of this tool to verify such malware protection
software was installed, up-to-date, and operating properly and that the related
definitions files were kept up-to-date on DIT-managed computers (3,204
servers and workstations are managed by DIT). Accordingly, as per the
10

--- Page 13 ---
management tool’s console only 131 servers were monitored by this tool
although it had the capability to manage both servers and workstations. The
USM IT Security Standards state that, where feasible, software must be
installed to protect the system from malicious programs such as viruses,
trojans, and worms.
 Certain workstations were configured with users having administrative rights.
Administrative rights are the highest permission level that can be granted to
users and allow users to install software and change configuration settings.
Our test of 12 workstations disclosed that 6 employees’ user accounts were
inappropriately defined with administrative rights rather than with user rights.
As a result, if the workstations used by these 6 accounts were infected with
malware, the malware would run with administrative rights and expose these
workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user
accounts operated with only user rights. The USM IT Security Standards
require that institutions use a risk-based approach and implement and
document processes that minimize the provisioning of local administrative
rights so that only those employees who require it are given those rights.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMCP
a. use the management tool to monitor all DIT-managed computers to
ensure the computers have malware protection software that is
operational and up-to-date, and that the related definition files are also
kept up-to-date; and
b. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel
that require such rights.
Statewide Maryland Automated Record Tracking
Background
UMCP’s Institute for Governmental Service and Research (IGSR) is responsible
for operating the Statewide Maryland Automated Record Tracking (SMART)
system which contains a substantial amount of personally identifiable information
(PII) and personal health information (PHI). SMART is a web-based client
tracking system used by state agencies and private treatment providers to monitor
and report on individuals in the Maryland drug court program.
Effective June 30, 2011, IGSR executed an agreement with a private contractor
for “colocating, housing, managing, trouble shooting, and supporting the SMART
production server, network infrastructure and legacy systems interface
infrastructure in a shared commercial site, … in conjunction with IGSR systems
11

--- Page 14 ---
management staff.” We were advised by IGSR management that the primary
contractor subcontracted the colocation and hosting of SMART with a data center
hosting company. We were further advised by IGSR management that the
primary contractor was responsible for implementing and maintaining the general
and network security controls related to the SMART system.
Within SMART, sensitive PII (name and social security number) as well as PHI
(name and medical records, drug test results) exists for individuals tracked by the
system. We were advised by IGSR management, that per SMART records, the
system contained sensitive PII and PHI for approximately 1,250,000 individuals.
Finding 4
UMCP lacked assurance that the SMART system and its sensitive data were
properly secured.
Analysis
UMCP lacked assurance that the SMART system and its sensitive data were
properly secured.
 At the time of our audit work (June 2014), IGSR had not performed any
security reviews of the SMART system control environment. The agreement
between IGSR and the primary contractor allowed UMCP to conduct reviews
of the primary contractor’s operations.
 The aforementioned contract between IGSR and the primary contractor did
not contain any requirements for periodic, independent reviews of the security
controls of the primary contractor and any subcontractors performing material
services for the SMART system.
 The network security controls pertaining to the SMART system, which were
implemented and maintained by the primary contractor, were not reviewed by
any independent parties.
 An independent review had recently been performed of the subcontractor used
to host the SMART system. We determined that the subcontractor had
Service Organization Control 1 (SOC 1) Type 2 reviews performed over its
United States data center hosting services, the most recent of which covered
the period of November 1, 2012 through October 31, 2013. These reviews
only covered the subcontractor’s general controls and, therefore, did not
address other critical controls such as those over networks, applications, or
databases. Furthermore, IGSR management had not obtained copies of the
related reports prior to our inquiries on the subject.
12

--- Page 15 ---
As a result of these conditions, UMCP lacked assurance as to the adequacy of the
general and network security controls over the SMART system and its sensitive
data.
Best practices require that service providers demonstrate compliance with
industry information security requirements, and that customer entities regularly
obtain from service providers related reports (see SOC reports described below)
that evidence such compliance.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organizations. Based on this guidance,
service organizations (like the aforementioned contractor and subcontractor) may
contract for an independent review of controls and the resultant independent
auditor’s report is referred to as a Service Organization Controls (SOC) report.
There are several types of SOC reports, with varying scope and levels of review
and auditor testing. One type of report, referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report,
includes the results of the auditor’s review of controls placed in operation and
tests of operating effectiveness for the period under review and could include an
evaluation of system security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality,
and privacy. Due to the nature and sensitivity of the information contained in the
SMART system, we believe a SOC 2 Type 2 report would be appropriate.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMCP
a. either require, via contract, that the primary contractor and any
subcontractors performing material services for the SMART system
periodically (annually) obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews and reports for the
provided services or, use UMCP audit resources to perform annual
security and control reviews to ensure that adequate controls exist over
the system;
b. obtain and review copies of any reports resulting from the
aforementioned security and control reviews (for example SOC reports)
and determine if the related independent reviews adequately address the
aforementioned security concerns over the SMART system; and
c. ensure that all critical exceptions noted (in either these SOC reports or in
the UMCP audit reports) were adequately addressed by the primary
contractor and its subcontractors.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland
College Park (UMCP), Division of Information Technology (DIT). Fieldwork
associated with our audit of DIT was conducted during the period from February
2013 to March 2014. Additionally, fieldwork associated with our audit of the
network was conducted during the period from December 2013 to September
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DIT’s internal
control over the UMCP data center and network and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for computer systems that
support UMCP. DIT’s fiscal operations are audited separately as part of our audit
of UMCP. The latest report that covered UMCP’s fiscal operations was issued on
July 14, 2011.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included procedures and controls over the mainframe operating system, security
software, and critical databases. Our audit also included an assessment of the
security controls for critical routers, firewalls, switches, and virtual private
network appliances, as well as an assessment of security controls related to
UMCP’s wireless connectivity and the use of anti-malware software to protect
UMCP computers. Additionally, we audited the controls over certain information
maintained by UMCP’s Institute for Governmental Service and Research. We
also determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report
on DIT.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
DIT’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
DIT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
14

--- Page 17 ---
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DIT’s ability to operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply
with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes findings
regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to DIT that did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
The University System of Maryland Office’s response, on behalf of DIT, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the results of our review
of its response.
15

--- Page 19 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK
DIVISION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
UMCP did not ensure that firewalls were used to properly secure all campus
network segments.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMCP implement a campus-wide policy which ensures
that the UMCP WAN and all departmental networks are secured against
unauthorized traffic from untrusted parties including the Internet, student
computer labs, and student dormitories.
University response
We agree with this finding. Firewalls have been used extensively to defend
critical networks inside the university. Using a risk based approach, we will
continue to expand our firewall deployment until all departmental networks and
the UMCP WAN are secured against unauthorized traffic.
Finding 2
Firewalls and intrusion prevention systems were not configured to ensure the
UMCP network was properly secured.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMCP
a. configure its firewalls to adequately secure its network (repeat);
b. regularly review the security events on the event logs for all critical
network devices, investigate any unusual or questionable items, document
these reviews and investigations, and retain the documentation for future
reference (repeat); and
c. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IPS and HIPS coverage should be best applied to
its network and, based on this review and assessment, implement such
coverage as necessary.
University response
UMCP agrees with this finding.
a. The firewall deployments at UMCP have outgrown our ability to manage the
complex configurations manually. A Firewall Management System has been

--- Page 20 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK
DIVISION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
procured and is currently in testing. This system will greatly expand our
ability to identify incorrect or obsolete firewall rules and alert management to
unauthorized modifications to firewall rules.
b. UMCP recognizes that log review procedures need improvement. Over the
past year, an investment has been made in log management technology and
additional staff are now allocated to reviewing logs.
c. UMCP will conduct a network risk assessment and apply security controls
based upon the results.
Finding 3
Malware protection for UMCP computers needs improvement.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMCP
a. use the management tool to monitor all DIT-managed computers to
ensure the computers have malware protection software that is
operational and up-to-date, and that the related definition files are
also kept up-to-date; and
b. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only
personnel that require such rights.
University response
UMCP agrees with this finding.
a. DIT is currently extending the management tool to include desktop and laptop
computers. While these systems have been protected from malware, we will
now be able to monitor the status of these systems.
b. Administrative rights will be limited on user workstations to those that require
such rights.
Finding 4
UMCP lacked assurance that the SMART system and its sensitive data were
properly secured.

--- Page 21 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK
DIVISION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMCP
a. either require, via contract, that the primary contractor and any
subcontractors performing material services for the SMART system
periodically (annually) obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews and reports for the
provided services or, use UMCP audit resources to perform annual
security and control reviews to ensure that adequate controls exist over
the system;
b. obtain and review copies of any reports resulting from the
aforementioned security and control reviews (for example SOC reports)
and determine if the related independent reviews adequately address the
aforementioned security concerns over the SMART system; and
c. ensure that all critical exceptions noted (in either these SOC reports or in
the UMCP audit reports) were adequately addressed by the primary
contractor and its subcontractors.
University response
UMCP agrees with this finding.
IGSR will work with security resources in the Division of Information
Technology to ensure that contractors performing material services for the
SMART system provide adequate documentation of their security controls and
that critical exceptions are adequately addressed.

--- Page 22 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Steven P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information System Senior Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Matthew D. Walbert
Information System Staff Auditors