Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Eastern Shore Region


NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Eastern Shore Region due to the establishment of the DPSCS - South Region.
Date: 07/13/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d7245606745a8
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:26:40.249449
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Eastern Shore Region
July 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Purchasing and Disbursements
Finding 1 – The Region Did Not Always Follow Procurement Regulations 5
and Policies
Inmate Funds
* Finding 2 – Reconciliations of Inmate Account Balances With the 6
State Comptroller’s Records Were Not Always Prepared Timely
Materials and Supplies
Finding 3 – Internal Control and Record Keeping Deficiencies Were Noted 7
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 8
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Eastern Shore Region is a separate budgetary unit within the Division of
Correction of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services and
consists of several facilities for adult male offenders.
Facilities Comprising the Division of Correction’s Eastern Shore Region
Inmate
Security Population as
Facility Location
Level of June 30,
2011
Eastern Correctional Medium
Westover, MD 2,671
Institution Security
Eastern Correctional Minimum
Westover, MD 597
Institution Annex Security
Poplar Hill Pre-Release Unit Pre-Release Quantico, MD 185
Total 3,453
According to the State’s records, the Region’s expenditures totaled approximately
$102 million during fiscal year 2011. In addition, the Region’s fiscal year 2011
appropriation provided for 879 positions, including 656 correctional officers.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated December 4, 2008. We determined that the
Region satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement of Goods
Finding 1
The Region did not always adhere to State Procurement Regulations and
DPSCS policies when procuring certain goods.
Analysis
The Region did not always follow procurement regulations and policies.
Specifically, in some cases, the Region did not obtain competitive bids for certain
goods, exceeded its procurement authority, and did not adequately verify that
purchased goods were actually received. Specifically, our test of 20
disbursements totaling approximately $1.5 million disclosed the following
conditions:
 Of the 20 transactions tested, 6 transactions totaling approximately $125,000
related to purchases for the commissary. Our review disclosed that these
purchases were not competitively bid. According to the Region’s records, total
commissary purchases for fiscal year 2011 totaled approximately $2.2 million.
 Two commodity purchases totaling approximately $38,000 (each exceeding
$10,000) were not made in accordance with the procurement delegation
authority established by the DPSCS Office of the Secretary. In June 2008, the
Region’s delegated authority was established at $10,000 for commodities.
 For one of the aforementioned purchases totaling $19,318, the Region did not
obtain written solicitations and did not post the solicitation on eMaryland
Marketplace as required. In addition, the Region did not verify that the
quantity paid for was actually received.
The DPSCS’ Financial Operations Manual requires that commissary purchases
be acquired through a competitive bid process whenever possible. State
procurement regulations require the use of written solicitations for procurements
between $15,000 and $25,000 and the solicitation be posted on eMaryland
Marketplace.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Region
a. comply with DPSCS’ Financial Operations Manual by obtaining
competitive bids for commissary purchases;
5

--- Page 8 ---
b. comply with the procurement delegation authority established by the
DPSCS Office of the Secretary;
c. comply with the State Procurement Regulations by obtaining written
solicitations and posting these solicitations on eMaryland Marketplace, as
required; and
d. verify that the quantity of goods paid for were actually received.
Inmate Funds
Finding 2
Inmate account balances were not reconciled with the State Comptroller’s
records in a timely manner.
Analysis
The total of the individual inmate accounts as maintained by the Region was not
reconciled with the corresponding records of the State Comptroller in a timely
manner. Specifically, reconciliations for fiscal year 2011 were performed from
53 to 320 days after the end of the month being reconciled. Additionally, in the
June 2011 reconciliation, which was not prepared until November 7, 2011, the
State Comptroller’s balance ($572,000) exceeded the Region’s balance
($498,000) by approximately $74,000 and this difference was not investigated and
resolved. We have noted similar conditions in our five preceding audit reports.
Inmate accounts include funds earned by or received on behalf of inmates. These
funds, which are deposited with the State Treasurer, can be saved or inmates can
direct the Region to pay these funds to third parties.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Region complete the aforementioned reconciliations
in a timely manner, investigate differences noted, and take appropriate
corrective action (repeat).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Materials and Supplies
Finding 3
Procedures and controls over the Region’s commissary materials and
supplies inventories were not adequate.
Analysis
Procedures and controls over the Region’s commissary supplies were not
adequate. Specifically, we noted that differences between the commissary
material and supplies inventory records and the physical inventory counts were
not properly investigated or resolved. The June 2011 physical inventory for
commissary items identified an absolute dollar value variance between the
perpetual inventory records and the physical count of $5,834 and reported an on-
hand book value of $243,735. Additionally, our comparison of materials and
supplies to the related inventory records disclosed no discrepancies as related to
the warehouse and maintenance storerooms, but disclosed numerous
discrepancies as related to the commissary storeroom. In this regard, a
comparison of our physical count of 20 commissary items, costing $14,000, to the
perpetual inventory records disclosed differences totaling $1,947 (shortages of
$1,291 and overages of $656) for 18 items. According to the Region’s records,
expenditures for commissary supplies totaled approximately $2.2 million during
fiscal year 2011.
The Department of General Services (DGS) Inventory Control Manual
established requirements regarding internal control and related recordkeeping to
be followed by State agencies. The Manual requires that, if the record balance
differs from the physical count, the variance be investigated and the record
balance be adjusted to make it equal to the physical count.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Region comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that the Region
a. document investigations of variances between the perpetual inventory
records and the physical inventory counts, and
b. accurately maintain perpetual inventory records.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Eastern Shore Region of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services for the period beginning July 16, 2008 and ending
October 2, 2011. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included inmate and welfare funds, purchases and
disbursements, cash receipts, equipment, materials and supplies, and payroll. Our
audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of
documents and records, and observations of the Region’s operations. We also
tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Region’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also
includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of the
Region, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 13 ---
Mr. Bruce A. Myers -2- 7/9/12
Patricia Vale, Regional Executive Director, South Region
Kathleen Green, Warden, Eastern Correctional Institution
Joan Gordy, Fiscal Services Chief II, South Region
Joseph M. Perry, Inspector General

--- Page 15 ---
because selecting a vendor for commissary purchases typically involves
scheduling, delivery and intensive security challenges as well as cost
considerations, making it very difficult to always obtain bids. Further, it
should be noted that the FOM commissary procurement procedures exceed
the requirements of COMAR Title 21.01.03.01.A.(9), which states that
“Procurement in support of enterprise activities for purposes of direct
resale…” are exempt from those regulations. Therefore, the Region should not
be cited for not obtaining commissary purchase bids. Finally, the Department
issued an RFP on June 15 for privatization of all its commissary operations.
Once the commissary operations are privatized, ECI will no longer be
responsible for commissary purchases;1
Effective immediately, the Region agrees to:
b. comply with the procurement delegation authority established by the DPSCS
Office of the Secretary; and
c. comply with State Procurement Regulations by obtaining written solicitations
and posting these solicitations on eMaryland Marketplace, as required; and
d. verify that the quantity of goods paid for were actually received.
Finding 2:
Inmate account balances were not always reconciled with the State
Comptroller’s records in a timely manner.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that the Region complete the aforementioned reconciliations
in a timely manner, investigate differences noted, and take appropriate
corrective action (repeat).
We agree. The Region will complete the aforementioned reconciliations on a
monthly basis, investigate differences noted, and take appropriate corrective
action.
Finding 3:
Procedures and controls over the Region’s commissary materials and
supplies inventories were not adequate.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that the Region comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that the Region
a. document investigations of variances between the perpetual inventory
records and the physical inventory counts, and,
b. accurately maintain perpetual inventory records.
1Auditor’s Comment: In its response, the Department disagreed with the first recommendation and indicated
that Departmental policy regarding commissary purchases is more stringent than the requirements of COMAR
(State Procurement Regulations) and its policy does not make the competitive bid process mandatory for such
purchases. Our finding, as related to commissary purchases, was based on the Department’s policy and not
COMAR. Furthermore, we noted that the policy requires a competitive bid process for those purchases whenever
possible. Although the response stated certain reasons why the use of a competitive process is difficult, we were
not provided with documentation during the course of the audit to substantiate the Region’s attempts to obtain
bids or the reasons why bidding was not possible. Nevertheless, the response did indicate that the Department
issued a Request for Proposal for the privatization of its commissary operations. If the commissary operations are
privatized, the Region would no longer be responsible for commissary purchases, and the related recommendation
would no longer be applicable.
2

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Ken J. Johanning, CFE
Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors