Title: Department of Transportation - Maryland Port Administration
Date: 10/14/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d724560674556
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:16:01.778472
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Transportation
Maryland Port Administration
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Port Administration (MPA) is part of the Maryland Department of
Transportation. MPA operates State-owned port facilities and promotes the
economic well-being of Maryland’s ports. MPA is responsible for managing the
State’s investment in port facilities; developing trade by promoting maritime
business; and coordinating the delivery of services, such as dredging and
navigational aids, to the maritime community.
According to the State’s records, MPA’s fiscal year 2016 expenditures totaled
approximately $149.5 million. According to MPA’s records, approximately 10
million tons of cargo were shipped through its port facilities during fiscal year
2016, and overall port revenues totaled approximately $50 million, the majority of
which related to terminal activity, including fees for the use of MPA’s piers,
wharfs, and equipment.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 1, 2014. We determined that MPA
satisfactorily addressed both of these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Controls over cash receipts were not sufficient to ensure all collections were
deposited.
Analysis
The Maryland Port Administration (MPA) had not established adequate controls
over cash receipts, which totaled approximately $15.4 million during fiscal year
2016 and consisted primarily of checks received from shipping companies and
other customers for the use of port facilities. Specifically, deposit verifications
performed by MPA were not effective since the employee who initially recorded
collections on the check log did not provide a copy of the log directly to the
employee responsible for verifying that all recorded collections were deposited.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Instead, the check log and the related checks were forwarded first to the employee
who prepared the deposit. As a result, unauthorized changes could be made to the
check log that would not be detected by the employee responsible for verifying
the recorded checks to validated bank deposit documentation.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires an
independent verification of collections to deposit, which should be performed
from the recordation of checks received.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MPA ensure that the initial record of checks received,
or a copy thereof, is given directly to the independent employee responsible
for verifying that all recorded collections were deposited.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – Maryland Port Administration (MPA) for the period beginning
January 13, 2014 and ending February 20, 2017. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MPA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurements and disbursements,
accounts receivable, equipment, payroll, and certain other transactions
specifically associated with port activities, such as lease agreements for the use of
port facilities. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided by
4

--- Page 7 ---
the State Highway Administration (SHA) to MPA. These support services are
included within the scope of our audit of SHA. Our audit also did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of MPA’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including MPA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MPA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and the Maryland Department of
Transportation’s Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and
expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as
from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
(credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MPA’s billing and reporting system for the purpose
of testing billings and accounts receivable. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The Maryland Department of Transportation’s response, on behalf of MPA, to our
finding and recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our
review of its response.
6

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Tony M. Kinsler
Dianne P. Ramirez
Staff Auditors