Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Walter P. Carter Community Mental Health Center

NOTE: OLA no longer conducts audits of Walter P. Carter Community Mental Health Center because the Center was closed.
Date: 04/12/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744f3
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:22:16.509582
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Walter P. Carter Community Mental Health Center
April 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
April 12, 2010
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Walter P. Carter Community Mental Health Center (WPCC),
a unit of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, for the period beginning
August 1, 2006 and ending September 30, 2009, the date that WPCC was closed.
WPCC provided acute psychiatric care for residents of Baltimore City.
Our audit disclosed that the WPCC did not maintain current tenant lease
agreements and did not have adequate collection efforts for the related rent.
There were no plans to collect outstanding accounts receivable that totaled
$247,000 when WPCC closed.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response to this audit, on behalf
of WPCC, is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by the WPCC.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Walter P. Carter Community Mental Health Center (WPCC) is located in
Baltimore City and, until its closure in September 2009, was part of the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH’s) Mental Hygiene
Administration. The facility provided acute psychiatric care for up to 30 days for
residents of Baltimore City. During fiscal year 2009, a decision was made to
consolidate DHMH’s mental hygiene facilities due to a reduction in the number of
residents requiring services and to eliminate the costs to maintain these facilities.
As a result, the Administration initiated procedures to close WPCC and, as of
September 30, 2009, all residents had been transferred from WPCC to alternative
living facilities (such as to other State facilities) commensurate with their needs.
Asset Liquidation
DHMH plans to declare the WPCC building as surplus property, and refer it to the
Department of Planning for disposition. As of December 15, 2009, two lessees
were still located at WPCC with plans to remain until the end of fiscal year 2010.
The liquidation of certain WPCC equipment had not been finalized. Specifically,
according to its detail records, WPCC had 279 capital equipment items totaling
$250,663 as of January 15, 2010. We were advised by WPCC management that
the Central Services Division of DHMH is overseeing the transfer and disposal of
WPCC equipment, and that the disposition of WPCC equipment should be
completed over the next several months.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings included
in our preceding audit report dated January 8, 2007. We determined that WPCC
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
The Walter P. Carter Community Mental Health Center’s (WPCC) accounts
receivable procedures for tenants were inadequate.
Analysis
WPCC’s accounts receivable procedures for its two tenants and five former
tenants were inadequate. Additionally, the related lease agreements and
accounting records were not adequately maintained. Tenants included a crisis
hotline center and several units or clinics of the University of Maryland Medical
System. According to WPCC’s records, during fiscal year 2009, tenant billings
and the related collections totaled $566,743 and $320,233, respectively.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• Tenant lease agreements were not modified to reflect increased rent payments,
which were anticipated in the 2008 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR).
Specifically, the JCR reduced $330,000 of WPCC’s fiscal year 2009
appropriation and recommended that WPCC start charging tenants for certain
maintenance costs. WPCC notified tenants of annual maintenance fees in
October 2008; however, it did not follow up with further billings of those
charges until May 2009 when the tenants were collectively billed $362,000 for
these maintenance fees and any other amounts due. We were advised that the
majority of these billings related to the maintenance charges, even though
WPCC did not modify any of the tenant’s lease agreements to require the
tenants to remit these additional charges. Finally, WPCC did not prepare
aging reports for these accounts receivable, and did not have signed lease
agreements for five of the seven tenants.
• Unpaid accounts were not subject to adequate collection efforts. Specifically,
WPCC had no procedures to refer delinquent accounts to the State’s Central
Collection Unit (CCU), as required by State regulations. For example, as of
October 15, 2009, an unpaid May 2009 bill totaling $36,000 had not been
referred to CCU. A similar condition was noted by the DHMH – Office of
Inspector General, in a June 2009 report. In this regard, we were advised by
appropriate personnel that there was no plan to collect, or forward for
collection, outstanding delinquent accounts receivable that totaled $247,000
on October 1, 2009 when WPCC closed, which largely related to the
aforementioned maintenance payments.
4

--- Page 7 ---
State regulations require agencies to refer delinquent accounts to CCU.
Additionally, the State Comptroller’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires
maintaining adequate accounts receivable records, including control accounts and
aging reports.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHMH
a. consult with the Office of the Attorney General regarding the collectability
of the maintenance billings, given the lack of revised leases; and
b. take immediate collection action for those accounts deemed to be
collectable, including referral of delinquent accounts to CCU, in
accordance with State regulations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Walter P. Carter Community Mental Health Center (WPCC)
of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for the period beginning August
1, 2006 and ending September 30, 2009. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine WPCC’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, purchases and disbursements,
equipment, payroll, and bank accounts. Our audit procedures included inquiries
of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations
of WPCC’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided
in this report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable,
but were not independently verified.
5

--- Page 8 ---
WPCC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the WPCC’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also
includes conditions regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to WPCC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of
WPCC, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
The Walter P. Carter Community Mental Health Center’s (WPCC) accounts receivable
procedures for tenants were inadequate.
Recommendation
We recommend that DHMH
a. Consult with the Office of the Attorney General regarding the collectability of the
maintenance billings, given the lack of revised leases; and
b. Take immediate collection action for those accounts deemed to be collectable,
including referral of delinquent accounts to CCU, in accordance with State
regulations.
Department’s Response:
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation that we consult with our Assistant
Attorney General regarding the collectability of the maintenance billings, given the lack
of revised leases. The Attorney General’s Office is currently reviewing the files and will
provide the Department with its legal options regarding the collectability of the accounts.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation and will take immediate action for
those accounts deemed to be collectable, including referral of delinquent accounts to
CCU, in accordance with State regulations. I anticipate that this process will be
completed no later than May 31, 2010. If it is decided that the WPCC does not have the
legal authority to bill the tenants, notification of such will be made to MHA, DHMH and
to the Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative Audits.

--- Page 11 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Ramin M. Niknava
Staff Auditor