Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Medical Care Programs Administration
Date: 12/06/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744cd
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:17:11.649359
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Medical Care Programs Administration
April 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternative formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities 7
Hospital Billing Rates 8
Federal Audits 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Contract Monitoring
Finding 1 – MCPA Did Not Ensure that Audits of Hospital Bills Were 12
Conducted for Claims Processed After 2007 and Did Not Adequately
Monitor the Vendor Conducting Hospital Utilization Reviews
* Finding 2 – MCPA Did Not Conduct Patient Credit Balance Audits at 13
Long-Term Care Facilities or Ensure Cost Settlement Reviews Were
Completed Timely
Finding 3 – MCPA Did Not Ensure the Vendor Responsible for Enrolling 15
New Applicants in Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) Met Certain
Contractual Performance Requirements
Cost Recoveries and Avoidance
Finding 4 – MCPA Did Not Ensure that Referrals of Potential Third-Party 17
Health Insurance Information for Medicaid Recipients Were Properly and
Timely Investigated
Finding 5 – MCPA Did Not Have Sufficient Procedures to Maximize the 18
Recovery of Medicare Funding for Medicaid Recipients
Recipient Eligibility
* Finding 6 – MCPA Needs to Continue Efforts to Address Longstanding 20
Deficiencies With the Recipient Enrollment Process
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 – DHMH Firewall Rules Allowed Unnecessary and Insecure 22
Connections to Certain Servers
Finding 8 – MCPA Lacked Assurance that the Outsourced eMedicaid 22
System Was Properly Secured
Finding 9 – Monitoring Controls Over Critical Mainframe Production 23
Files Were Not Sufficient
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 25
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA)
April 2014
 MCPA did not ensure that hospital bill audits were performed and there
was minimal monitoring of hospital utilization reviews. Audits of
hospital billings were not conducted for claims submitted after calendar
year 2007. Medicaid payments for hospital services totaled
approximately $1.1 billion during fiscal year 2012 (Finding 1).
MCPA should ensure that audits of hospital claims are conducted in a timely
manner. MCPA should also improve its monitoring of hospital utilization
reviews to ensure that all reviews billed were conducted and were sufficiently
comprehensive.
 Procedures to ensure the propriety of payments to long-term care
facilities were not adequate. MCPA did not conduct patient credit
balance audits during an extended period to determine if amounts are
due to the State and did not conduct cost settlements with the facilities on
a timely basis (Finding 2).
MCPA should establish procedures to ensure that patient credit balance audits
are performed for all long-term care facilities and that cost settlements to
determine amounts due to, or from, the facilities are performed timely.
 MCPA did not adequately monitor the vendor responsible for enrolling
new applicants in MCOs. While the vendor reported full compliance
with the contractual enrollment requirements, our tests indicated that the
vendor overstated the enrollment results. After we brought this matter to
its attention, MCPA conducted an analysis of the vendor billings and
recovered approximately $900,000 as a result of damages assessed for not
reaching the enrollment requirements during a four-year period (Finding
3).
MCPA should verify the performance of its enrollment vendor and take
corrective action, including assessing damages, when the vendor does not
achieve the required level of performance.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 MCPA did not ensure that referrals of potential third-party health
insurance for Medicaid recipients were properly and timely investigated.
(Finding 4).
MCPA should establish initial accountability and control over referrals and
perform supervisory reviews to ensure timely investigations of referrals were
conducted and appropriate conclusions were reached.
 MCPA did not have sufficient procedures to maximize Medicare funding
for eligible Medicaid recipients (Finding 5).
MCPA should establish procedures to ensure that all recipients aged 65 and
over apply for Medicare coverage and that it pays the correct amount for
individuals with both Medicaid and Medicare coverage.
 MCPA needs to continue efforts to address longstanding deficiencies with
the recipient enrollment procedures as well as to improve information
system security (Findings 6 - 9).
MCPA should continue to monitor the eligibility process. In addition, MCPA
should take the recommended actions to address information system security
weaknesses.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) operates under both Title
XIX of the Federal Social Security Act (Medicaid) and State law. Medicaid is a
joint federal and state entitlement program for low-income individuals. The
program is administered by the states, which are required to provide healthcare
coverage to all applicants who meet the program’s eligibility criteria.
According to MCPA records as of June 30, 2012, the Medical Assistance Program
served approximately one million individuals, through more than 49,000 health
care providers. During fiscal year 2012, Medicaid expenditures processed
through the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II) totaled
approximately $7.6 billion (see
table) and are primarily Fiscal Year 2012
processed by MCPA. At least Expenditures Processed via MMIS II
50 percent of these expenditures
Expenditures
Service Type
were recovered from the federal (expressed in thousands)
government. Managed Care Organizations $ 3,110,505
Hospital Services 1 ,178,546
MCPA is responsible for Long Term Care 1,129,064
enrolling the providers (such as Home Health 957,445
physicians), establishing Physicians 435,665
program regulations, setting Pharmacy 368,350
provider payment rates, Dental 151,444
reviewing and paying provider Other 253,311
Total $ 7,584,330
claims, and obtaining federal
Source: MCPA Records (unaudited)
reimbursement for eligible costs.
MCPA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the
Department of Human Resources (DHR) which assigns responsibility to DHR,
via its local departments of social services, for determining applicants’ eligibility
for participation in the Medical Assistance Program. Individuals qualifying for
cash assistance through the Temporary Cash Assistance program or the federal
Supplemental Security Income program automatically qualify for Medicaid
benefits. Those eligible for Medicaid through these programs make up most of
the Medicaid population and are referred to as “categorically needy.” The
remaining individuals are referred to as “medically needy” meaning they cannot
meet the cost of needed medical care, but are generally self-supporting in other
respects.
Most Maryland Medicaid recipients are required to enroll in HealthChoice, the
statewide managed care program that began in 1997. Under HealthChoice, MCPA
7

--- Page 10 ---
makes specified capitation payments to private Managed Care Organizations
(MCOs) that provide services to these Medicaid recipients in Maryland.
Populations excluded from the HealthChoice program include the institutionalized
and individuals who are dually eligible for Medicaid and Medicare. Populations
not covered by an MCO are covered on a fee-for-service basis. Under this system,
health providers (such as physicians, hospitals, and medical equipment suppliers)
are paid a fee for each service or supply provided. Fees are generally billed at
rates established by MCPA or, in the case of hospital stays, at rates established by
the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission.
Hospital Billing Rates
The rates charged by and paid to the 53 Maryland hospitals are regulated by the
Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC), an independent commission
under DHMH. HSCRC is responsible for establishing, reviewing, and approving
hospital billing rates for all payees, including MCPA and private insurers. MCPA
and the private insurers also rely on HSCRC to ensure the amounts billed by the
hospitals are in accordance with the HSCRC approved rates.
Our most recent audit report of the Health Regulatory Commissions (which
includes HSCRC), dated January 7, 2013, disclosed that the HSCRC did not
adequately monitor hospital billings resulting in two hospitals overcharging
MCPA for two procedure codes by at least $3.7 million. Consequently, there was
a lack of assurance that the rates charged by the hospitals and paid by MCPA
were proper.
MCPA management advised us that it does not believe that it is responsible and
does not have the resources to monitor HSCRC. MCPA further advised that it
followed up with HSCRC regarding this issue and was advised that the
deficiencies noted in the aforementioned audit report have been corrected.
Federal Audits
Audits by the federal Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Office
of the Inspector General (OIG) resulted in recommendations for recoveries from
the State. For example, an audit issued in December 2013 disclosed that MCPA
drew down $115.3 million in federal funds for fiscal years 2009 through 2011 that
were not supported by actual expenditures. MCPA requests federal funds on a
weekly basis to pay the federal share of medical and administrative expenditures.
On a quarterly basis, MCPA submits reports of expenditures on the Quarterly
Medicaid Statement of Expenditures for the Medical Assistance Program report
(CMS-64). After each quarter, MCPA performs a reconciliation to compare the
total federal funds withdrawn according to its internal records with the federal
8

--- Page 11 ---
share of expenditures reported on the aforementioned CMS-64 report and
identifies any differences. Any differences between the federal funds withdrawn
and the actual expenditures are supposed to be adjusted for in future withdrawals.
However, the audit disclosed that MCPA did not accurately adjust future
withdrawals based on its quarterly reconciliations. In addition, the audit noted
that MCPA made errors when compiling amounts used in the reconciliations. As
a result, the report recommended that MCPA refund $115 million to the federal
government.
Another DHHS OIG report issued in November 2013 disallowed $3.5 million of
federal reimbursements because DHMH had not complied with federal Medicaid
requirements regarding rebates when billing manufacturers for physician-
administered drugs. The audit report recommended that DHMH refund the $3.5
million.
MCPA generally agreed with both report findings and advised us that the $115
million noted in the first report was refunded, and that the majority of the $3.5
million noted in the second report would also be refunded.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
We reviewed the status of the 14 findings included in our preceding audit report
dated December 6, 2010. We determined that MCPA satisfactorily addressed 12
of these findings. The remaining 2 findings are repeated in this report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Monitoring
Background
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) uses vendors to assist in
verifying amounts billed by hospitals, long-term care providers, and Managed
Care Organizations (MCOs) and to assist in the oversight and monitoring of
various other aspects of the Medicaid process. The contracts for these services
are procured by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Office
of Procurement and Support Services, which our office audits in conjunction with
DHMH’s Office of the Secretary. The monitoring of the related services is
conducted by MCPA staff and is subject to review during our MCPA audit.
The vendors are used before, during, and after the medical services are provided.
Specifically, vendors are used before services are provided to assist in
determining the MCOs’ capitation rates, to assist individuals in selecting and
enrolling in an MCO, to identify possible third-party insurance, and to pre-
approve hospital services. Vendors are used during the period that medical
services are being provided to approve ongoing services (such as hospital
services) or to monitor performance. Vendors are also used after services have
been provided and the related payments were made to help ensure payments were
proper and were for necessary services and to identify and recover any amounts
due from third parties.
MCPA uses a computerized system, the Medicaid Management Information
System (MMIS II), to pay provider claims and to process paid claims for federal
reimbursement. While MMIS II contains numerous automated edits that are
designed to assist in verifying that claims are complete and legitimate, such
automated processes cannot ensure all services paid for were actually rendered
and appropriate. To help ensure the propriety of claims paid, MCPA also
performs post payment audits and reviews using vendors as well as MCPA staff.
For example, vendors are used to conduct audits of hospital claims to identify
overpayments (such as duplicate bills and charges for services not documented in
the medical records) and patient credit balance audits to identify amounts due to
the State for claims paid to hospitals and long-term care facilities by both the
State and third parties (such as insurance companies). In addition, MCPA uses
vendors to review long-term care cost settlements to identify under or
overpayments by reconciling a provider’s reported actual costs to the
reimbursements it received (based on interim rates).
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
MCPA did not ensure that audits of hospital bills were conducted for claims
processed after calendar year 2007 and did not adequately monitor the
vendor conducting hospital utilization reviews.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that vendors conducted audits of hospital claims as
required, and there was also minimal monitoring of hospital utilization reviews.
According to MCPA records, during fiscal year 2012, it paid approximately $1.1
billion for hospital services. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Audits of hospital medical records to verify that the services being billed were
actually provided were not conducted for claims processed after calendar year
2007. MCPA had contracted with a vendor to audit the hospital bills for
which the vendor was paid a percentage of any overpayments found during
the audit (the hospital must pay the vendor’s fee and must also return the
identified overpayment amounts to MCPA). However, the July 2009 contract
for these audits was terminated by MCPA in February 2012 because the
vendor failed to conduct the required number of audits. Prior to the vendor’s
termination, the most recent claims audited by the vendor covered services
paid during calendar years 2004 through 2007. The failure to audit these
claims is significant because State regulations only require the hospitals to
retain documentation of the claims for six years. As a result, certain claim
data may no longer be available for review.
These audits were recognized by the federal Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) as a benchmark best practice and have been an
effective mechanism for identifying overpayments. For example, during
fiscal years 2011 and 2012 (prior to the termination of the contract), the
vendor identified overpayments totaling approximately $10.7 million for
claims paid during calendar years 2005 and 2006. We were advised by
DHMH management personnel that, as of December 31, 2013, a new
procurement was in progress to select a vendor to audit hospital claims, and
that the new vendor will be required to audit claims for dates of service
subsequent to calendar year 2007 to the extent documentation is available.
MCPA did not adequately monitor another vendor that was responsible for
conducting hospital utilization reviews that ensure hospital charges were for
medically-necessary procedures and services. We were advised by MCPA
management that as a result of staffing shortages, there was minimal
monitoring of the vendor since the inception of the contract in calendar year
2010 to ensure the vendor was properly reviewing and pre-approving hospital
12

--- Page 15 ---
services. MCPA monitoring was generally limited to a review of cases for
which the hospital appealed the results of the vendor’s review. During fiscal
year 2013, MCPA paid the vendor $1.8 million for these hospital utilization
reviews (approximately $30 per review).
The vendor was required to perform a medical necessity and appropriateness
review prior to all hospital services being provided (for emergency procedures
approval must be obtained within two business days). The vendor also
performed retrospective reviews for individuals who enrolled in Medicaid
after the service was performed and were eligible for retroactive coverage.
Finally, the vendor performed periodic concurrent reviews during the hospital
stay to monitor the length of stay and related treatments.
The failure to monitor the vendor could result in MCPA paying for hospital
services that were not medically necessary and/or paying the vendor for
reviews that were not performed. In this regard, MCPA terminated the
previous hospital utilization review contract after identifying reviews charged
to MCPA that could not be supported, resulting in overpayments to the
previous vendor of at least $1 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that, in the future, MCPA
a. ensure that audits to verify that billed hospital services were provided are
conducted in a timely manner, and
b. monitor vendors responsible for conducting hospital utilization reviews to
ensure that all reviews invoiced were performed and that the reviews
were sufficiently comprehensive and related conclusions were accurate.
Finding 2
MCPA did not conduct patient credit balance audits at long-term care
facilities for an extended period or ensure that cost settlement reviews were
completed in a timely manner.
Analysis
MCPA did not conduct patient credit balance audits at long-term care (LTC)
facilities for an extended period. In addition, MCPA did not review cost
settlements in a timely manner, and certain invoices from the vendor conducting
the reviews lacked adequate support.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 MCPA did not conduct patient credit balance audits at LTC facilities prior to
October 2011. Credit balance audits are needed to identify funds due to the
State from provider billing errors, duplicate billings, and/or third-party
collections. For example, if MCPA paid a facility for a service and the facility
also collected from an insurance company or from the patient, it would result
in a credit balance on the patient’s account which would be due to the State
since Medicaid is to be the payer of last resort. We were advised by MCPA
management that the credit balance audits were suspended sometime around
fiscal year 2003 (the exact date could not be determined) due to concerns
raised by the LTC providers that the audits were not adequately supported and
were not fair because the audits covered claims going back several years.
MCPA reinstated the audits in fiscal year 2012 but these audits only covered
the prior two and one-half year’s activity (resulting in approximately six years
of activity not being audited).
In addition, MCPA did not recover the costs of the audits begun in fiscal year
2012 from the LTC facilities as required by State regulations. MCPA pays the
vendor a fee of 11.5 percent of the amount recovered as a result of the audits.
These fees totaled $151,000 for the audits performed since 2012. State
regulations require the providers to reimburse MCPA for the cost of audits in
addition to the overpayments disclosed by the audits. As of August 2013, the
vendor has recovered $1.3 million from credit balance audits of approximately
100 (of 225) LTC facilities.
 MCPA did not ensure that cost settlements submitted by the 225 LTC
facilities were reviewed in a timely manner. LTC facilities are paid an interim
rate based on estimated costs and are required to submit an annual cost
settlement at year-end to reconcile the estimated costs to the actual costs.
MCPA contracts with a vendor to review these cost settlements. Under the
contract, the reviews were to be conducted within one year of receipt of the
cost settlement. Our review of MCPA records disclosed that 32 cost
settlement reviews were conducted more than two years after receipt of the
related cost settlements and, as of January 7, 2013, an additional 99 cost
settlement reviews had not been performed at all for periods ranging from 14
to 40 months after receipt of the cost settlements. MCPA management
advised us that the delay was caused by a lapse in the contract.
Similar comments regarding the delay in reviewing cost settlements have been
included in our two preceding audit reports. According to MCPA records,
cost settlements completed in fiscal year 2012 resulted in net recoveries of
$2.9 million to MCPA ($9.2 million due to facilities and $12.1 million due to
the State).
14

--- Page 17 ---
 MCPA did not verify a portion of the billings from the cost settlement vendor
contracted to verify the accuracy of the cost settlements and to perform other
“support services” such as assisting in the rate setting process and handling
appeals. Specifically, our review of the 12 invoices during the period from
October 2011 through September 2012 disclosed that MCPA paid the invoices
without obtaining adequate documentation for “support services” charges
totaling approximately $1 million. In this regard, the support service invoices
were based on hours worked at rates specified for different levels of
personnel. However, the invoices did not provide the nature of the support
services, the employees who performed the work, or any adequate
documentation of the hours worked. As a result, there was a lack of assurance
that the amounts paid were proper.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. credit balance audits are performed for all LTC facilities and that the
costs associated with the audits are recovered from the facilities as
required by State regulations;
b. in the future, cost settlement reviews are completed in a timely manner
(repeat); and
c. charges related to support services are properly supported.
Finding 3
MCPA did not ensure that the vendor responsible for enrolling new
applicants in MCOs met certain contractual performance requirements.
Analysis
MCPA did not adequately monitor the vendor responsible for enrolling new
Medicaid applicants. Specifically, MCPA did not use available MMIS II data to
independently verify the number of individuals reported as enrolled by the vendor
to ensure compliance with the terms of the contract. MCPA paid the vendor
(approximately $9 million during fiscal year 2012) to function as an enrollment
broker assisting and enrolling individuals in MCOs. Payments were contingent
upon the vendor meeting the Voluntary Enrollment Rate (VER), which is the
percentage of individuals the vendor directly enrolled in HealthChoice MCOs.
The contract provided for the broker to enroll at least 80 percent of the new
applicants each month. Individuals not enrolled by the broker were automatically
assigned to an MCO by MCPA. The contract further provided that MCPA may
assess specific damages if the enrollment broker did not meet the minimum
enrollment.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our comparison of the enrollments reported by the broker to the related MMIS II
records for the six-month period from October 2011 through March 2012
disclosed that the broker overstated enrollment results and did not meet the 80
percent enrollment rate in any of the months reviewed. Specifically, during this
period the actual broker enrollment rates ranged from 59 percent to 74 percent but
the broker reported rates from 80 percent to 87 percent on its monthly invoices.
For example, for March 2012 the broker reported that it had enrolled 11,191
individuals (83 percent of the new enrollees) but according to MMIS II data, the
broker only enrolled 8,194 (60 percent of the new enrollees).
In response to our concerns, MCPA conducted an analysis of the broker’s
performance for the period July 2008 through December 2012. The analysis
disclosed that the broker did not meet the
required 80 percent enrollment for any
month (see table for averages for
calendar years 2009 through 2012).
Under the terms of the contract MCPA
could have withheld payments and
terminated the contract due to the
broker's failure to achieve the required
level of performance. MCPA recovered
approximately $900,000 by reducing
payments to the broker in September and
October 2013 as a result of the shortfalls noted in the aforementioned analysis.
The contract provisions for specific damages were limited to the base contract
period and not to any contract extensions.
MCPA’s lack of monitoring of the accuracy of the reported enrollments and the
broker’s failure to meet the performance requirements is significant because
MCPA extended the contract several times beyond what was provided for in the
initial contract. Specifically, the contract covered the three years ending June 30,
2008 with the option to extend the contract through June 2011. MCPA attempted
to procure a new contract in fiscal year 2011 but a new contract was not executed
due to a bid protest. Instead, MCPA decided to extend the existing contract
through fiscal year 2015. The Board of Public Works raised concerns with the
contract extension and MCPA management responded that the broker “has
completely met our [MCPA’s] expectations and fulfilled our [MCPA’s]
requirements.”
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA verify the performance of its enrollment broker
and take corrective action, including assessing damages, when the broker
does not achieve the required level of performance.
Cost Recoveries and Avoidance
Finding 4
MCPA did not ensure that referrals of potential third-party health insurance
information for Medicaid recipients were properly and timely investigated.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that potential third-party health insurance information
received for Medicaid recipients was investigated properly and in a timely
manner. MCPA receives referrals of possible third-party insurance from the
Department of Human Resources (DHR) as well as from a contractor. These
referrals are sent to MCPA employees to investigate whether the other insurance
should cover some, or all, of the claims incurred by the recipients. MCPA did not
conduct supervisory reviews to ensure that the investigations were completed, that
the appropriate conclusions were reached, and that the insurance status was
properly recorded on MMIS II for claims processing. In addition, there was no
initial accountability established over referrals to ensure all referrals received
from the contractor were investigated.
According to MCPA records, which we did not verify, during fiscal year 2013
MCPA received approximately 79,000 insurance referrals from DHR, and 10,000
from its contractor. Our test of 20 referrals received from DHR disclosed that
referrals were not investigated for three recipients, including 2 referrals that were
received in June 2011 but had not been investigated as of July 2012
(approximately 400 days). Another referral was investigated 268 days after
MCPA was notified of the possible insurance. After we brought this to its
attention, MCPA management confirmed that two of the three recipients (for
which no investigation was conducted) had active insurance coverage that may
have covered claims paid by MCPA.
The failure to properly perform timely follow up on health insurance information
could result in improper payments on behalf of recipients with other insurance. It
also violates federal regulations which require the State to follow up on potential
third-party insurance within 60 days.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA
a. ensure that initial accountability and control is established over all
potential third-party insurance referrals,
b. perform supervisory reviews to ensure timely investigations of referrals
were conducted and appropriate conclusions were reached, and
c. review cases referred during the audit period and take appropriate
corrective action.
Finding 5
MCPA did not have sufficient procedures to maximize the recovery of
Medicare funding for Medicaid recipients.
Analysis
MCPA did not have sufficient procedures to maximize Medicare funding for
Medicaid recipients. Medicare is entirely federally funded, and the amount paid
on fee-for-service claims by Medicaid for recipients with both Medicare and
Medicaid coverage is generally less than amounts paid for recipients who only
have Medicaid. Providers must submit claims for Medicare reimbursement
before submitting them to Medicaid, which generally covers the Medicare
coinsurance and deductibles.
 MCPA had not established a process to ensure that recipients age 65 or older
had applied for Medicare as required by State regulations. State regulations
require Medicaid applicants age 65 years or older, or blind or disabled to
furnish proof that they have applied for or are receiving Medicare. During the
initial application process and annual redeterminations, DHR employees are
supposed to ensure that Medicaid applicants have applied for Medicare.
However, prior to August 2012, MCPA made no attempt to identify recipients
who did not have Medicare coverage but could potentially be eligible (such as
those over 65 years of age) to determine if they had applied for Medicare. In
August 2012, MCPA sent notices to recipients age 65 or older with no
Medicare number recorded on MMIS II to advise them that they needed to
apply for Medicare to retain their Medicaid benefits. As a result of these
mailings and follow-up notices, MCPA management advised us that 1,851
new recipients were subsequently enrolled in Medicare as of February 8,
2013.
Since Medicare covers a significant portion of medical costs, the failure to
ensure Medicaid recipients applied for Medicare means that the State
Medicaid program, rather than the federal Medicare program, will bear a
higher portion of the costs. In this regard, during calendar year 2011, MCPA
18

--- Page 21 ---
paid inpatient hospitalization claims totaling $29 million for 1,200 recipients
who were at least 65 years old as of January 1, 2011 but were not enrolled in
Medicare per MMIS II. Our test of 50 of these recipients with the highest
Medicaid claims disclosed that 40 with claims totaling $6.3 million were
potentially eligible for Medicare based on their coverage group and their age.
The remaining 10 recipients with claims totaling $1.8 million were not
eligible for Medicare due to their citizenship status.
 MCPA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that the correct amount was paid
for individuals with both Medicaid and Medicare coverage. During our
preceding audit, we identified instances where MCPA paid providers more
than the amount invoiced because of data entry errors (such as entering the
wrong coinsurance amount in MMIS II) and recommended that MCPA
establish online controls to prevent such overpayments. In response to our
preceding report, MCPA developed a monthly output report of claims which
was used by MCPA supervisors to select cases for review. However, the
report only listed claims for which the amount paid by MCPA exceeded the
amount invoiced by the provider (which was the specific deficiency identified
during our preceding audit). As a result, any data entry error for which the
coinsurance did not exceed the total amount invoiced would not be subject to
any review.
We tested 9 claims totaling $58,580 for which the amount reimbursed by
MCPA ranged from 62 percent to 100 percent of the amount billed, which was
higher than the typical contribution percentage of 10 percent when Medicare
participates in the claim payments. Our review disclosed that MCPA overpaid
7 of these claims by $35,004 and could not provide documentation to support
the propriety of another claim totaling $4,522. For example, for one claim,
the provider submitted a bill for $13,303, for which Medicaid was responsible
for $181. Instead, MCPA paid $12,399 because MCPA staff entered an
erroneous amount into the coinsurance field. These overpayments were not
included on the aforementioned reports because the amount paid was less than
the amount billed.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPA
a. establish procedures to ensure all Medicaid recipients who are eligible for
Medicare apply for Medicare benefits; and
b. establish comprehensive procedures for identifying improperly billed
claims for individuals with both Medicaid and Medicare coverage and
take appropriate follow-up action, including the recovery of any
overpayments.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recipient Eligibility
Finding 6
MCPA needs to continue efforts to address longstanding deficiencies with the
recipient enrollment process to help ensure that corrective action is taken.
Analysis
MCPA needs to continue efforts to address longstanding deficiencies with the
recipient enrollment process to help ensure that corrective action is taken.
DHMH and DHR maintain a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) which
assigns responsibility to DHR for determining applicants’ eligibility for
participation in the Medical Assistance Program.1 Under the MOU, DHMH is
responsible for establishing regulations, guidelines, and procedures to be used by
DHR. Deficiencies with the eligibility process and related monitoring have been
commented upon in our MCPA and various DHR audit reports dating back to
1992. In addition, federal single audit reports dating from fiscal year 2007
through 2012 identified deficiencies with recipient eligibility determinations. Our
preceding audit further noted that the aforementioned conditions occurred, at least
in part, because the MOU between DHMH and DHR did not provide for adequate
MCPA oversight, did not include comprehensive procedures to ensure problems
were corrected, and was generally outdated.
In response to our preceding audit report, MCPA updated its MOU with DHR in
July 2011, and started to develop a more comprehensive process to monitor the
eligibility process. Specifically, after our current audit period, MCPA created a
new unit to monitor DHR activity and developed reports to identify possible
issues with the eligibility process. This initiative and related monitoring noted
that there was still a significant delay in reviewing enrollees that required
investigation (such as for enrollees that applied for coverage in another State).
According to MCPA records as of January 2013, there were 2,113 alerts that
needed to be investigated that were outstanding for an average of 31 days. In
addition, the reports noted that as of January 2013, there were 9,246
redeterminations that were overdue by an average of four months.
As a result of the creation of the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and
the State’s decision to use MHBE to enroll new Medicaid recipients, certain
aspects of the enrollment process were scheduled to be transferred from DHR to
MHBE, including the process for annually redetermining recipient eligibility for
Medicaid benefits.
1 Eligibility for certain MCPA programs, such as the Primary Adult Care Program which
represents about six percent of the caseload, is determined solely by MCPA.
20

--- Page 23 ---
However, MHBE has experienced problems with its health insurance enrollment
system, and MCPA management advised that, as of March 17, 2014, DHR
continued to have an active role in the enrollment process. Also, although the
eligibility redetermination process has been temporarily suspended, we were
advised that, when it resumes, DHR will continue to be responsible for
redeterminations until MHBE can assume this responsibility.
MCPA management also advised that enrollees will always have the ability to
enroll for Medicaid benefits via DHR’s local departments of social services (such
as when enrollees are applying for multiple types of benefits simultaneously).
Given the current situation with MHBE and the continued reliance on DHR,
MCPA still needs to monitor the DHR enrollment process.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MCPA continue to monitor the eligibility process and
work with DHR to ensure that actions are implemented to correct the
aforementioned deficiencies (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
MCPA operates the Electronic Data Interchange Translator Processing System
(EDITPS), an Internet web-based application that allows health care providers to
electronically submit Medicaid claims. After claims data have been received and
subjected to limited edits, the EDITPS application delivers the claims data to the
MMIS II application, which operates on the Annapolis Data Center (ADC), to
complete claims processing and payment. MCPA manages MMIS II’s
application program development and maintenance and uses the ADC’s security
software to help secure MMIS II. In addition, MCPA uses the DHMH firewall to
protect critical EDITPS servers.
MCPA also contracts with a third party to operate the eMedicaid suite of Internet
web-based applications which include the Electronic Verification System and
EClaims System both of which support Medicaid’s health care provider
community. For example, the eMedicaid system is used by providers to verify
recipient eligibility and to submit certain types of claims.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 7
DHMH firewall rules allowed unnecessary and insecure connections to the
EDITPS servers.
Analysis
Firewall rules applicable to EDITPS servers were not properly configured which
allowed unnecessary and insecure connections to the EDITPS servers. For
example, numerous DHMH network servers, such as certain email servers, that
resided in a neutral network zone could unnecessarily access all EDITPS servers
on the internal network via several ports. The Department of Information
Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy specifies that information
systems shall be configured to monitor and control communications at external
boundaries within the system and at key internal boundaries within the system.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MCPA request DHMH to configure its firewall to
achieve a “least privilege” security strategy giving individuals and devices
only those privileges needed to perform assigned tasks.
Finding 8
MCPA lacked assurance that the outsourced eMedicaid system was properly
secured.
Analysis
MCPA lacked assurance that the outsourced eMedicaid system was properly
secured. Effective August 31, 2010, DHMH entered into an MOU with an
independent service provider to host and manage the eMedicaid suite of web
applications.
We noted that the MOU did not require the service provider to obtain and/or
periodically provide MCPA with an independent review and report. In May 2011,
the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants issued guidance
concerning examinations of such service organization’s controls. Based on this
guidance, customers, such as MCPA, may obtain from service organizations an
independent auditor’s report referred to as a Service Organization Controls (SOC)
2 type 2 report. A SOC 2 type 2 report can address critical measures relating to
security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality and privacy over the
hosted environment and system. In addition, although the MOU contained
provisions that the service provider must cooperate with State auditors, MCPA
did not use DHMH auditors to perform any audits of the service provider.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Without either an independent review and related SOC report or a DHMH audit
of the service provider for the outsourced eMedicaid system, MCPA lacked
reasonable assurance as to whether the contractor had established and
implemented adequate security. Best practices require that service providers
demonstrate compliance with industry information security requirements, and that
customer entities regularly obtain from service providers related reports that
evidence such compliance.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MCPA
a. either ensure (via contract if necessary) that the eMedicaid system service
provider periodically obtains a SOC 2 type 2 report for the provided
services or use DHMH audit resources to periodically perform security
and control reviews of the service provider, and
b. obtain and review copies of any SOC or DHMH audit reports to ensure
all security-related provisions were adequately addressed by the service
provider.
Finding 9
Monitoring controls over critical mainframe MMIS II production files were
not sufficient.
Analysis
Monitoring controls over critical mainframe MMIS II production files were not
sufficient. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 We were advised that reports of logged, authorized modifications to critical
MMIS II data and program production files were regularly generated and
reviewed. However, there was no documentation supporting these reviews or
any investigation of questionable items.
 Reports of logged direct changes made to the MMIS II production database
were regularly generated but not reviewed. These reviews should include
examinations of the before and after images of these changes to ensure the
propriety of these changes.
The State of Maryland Department of Information Technology Information
Security Policy requires that procedures be developed to routinely (for example
daily or weekly) review audit records for indications of unusual activities,
suspicious activities or suspected violations, and report findings to appropriate
officials for prompt resolution.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that the MCPA
a. perform timely, documented reviews and investigations of the reports of
logged, authorized modifications to critical MMIS II data and program
files;
b. perform timely, documented reviews and investigations of the reports of
logged direct changes made to the MMIS II production database
including examinations of before and after images of these changes; and
c. retain all such documentation for future reference.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) of the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period beginning July
1, 2009 and ending June 30, 2012. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCPA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included provider eligibility, managed care organizations,
enrollee eligibility, long-term care, hospital services, post payment verification,
kidney disease program, cash receipts, collections, and information system
controls.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MCPA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also extracted data from the
Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II) for the purpose of testing
recipient and provider eligibility and payments to providers and managed care
organizations. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined
that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during
the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA by DHMH’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll processing,
payment of operating expenses) are included within the scope of our audit of
DHMH - Office of the Secretary.
25

--- Page 28 ---
MCPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCPA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
26

--- Page 30 ---
Contract Monitoring
Finding 1
MCPA did not ensure that audits of hospital bills were conducted for claims
processed after calendar year 2007 and did not adequately monitor the
vendor conducting hospital utilization reviews.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that, in the future, MCPA
a. ensure that audits to verify that billed hospital services were provided are
conducted in a timely manner, and
b. monitor vendors responsible for conducting hospital utilization reviews to
ensure that all reviews invoiced were performed and that the reviews
were sufficiently comprehensive and related conclusions were accurate.
Administration’s Response:
1a. The Administration concurs. In February 2012, the Administration
terminated the contract to conduct hospital bill audits. Since that time, the
Administration has made efforts to obtain a contractor for hospital bill audits.
In 2011, federal regulations were promulgated to require each State to obtain a
Medicaid Recovery Audit Contractor (RAC). The RAC is similar to the type
of vendor the Administration previously utilized, however under the new
regulations, other providers, in addition to hospitals, must be audited. In
addition, there are limitations on the amount and type of compensation the
vendor may receive. To this end the State has issued two RFP’s to obtain a
RAC vendor. The first RFP dated May 17, 2013 received no responses. The
second RFP issued on October 2, 2013, received one proposal. The proposal
was severely inadequate and was submitted by the vendor the State terminated
in 2012. The Administration withdrew the RFP. The Administration is now
seeking a waiver from CMS to pay a higher contingency rate in order to
attract potential vendors.
As an interim solution, the DHMH Office of the Inspector General began
conducting limited reviews of hospitals and retained the services of a
consultant to provide training to the OIG clinical staff in conducting these
reviews.
In addition, to prevent the potential for “unavailable” records prior to auditing,
the Administration issued Hospital Program Transmittal 223, dated May 13,
2013 requiring all hospitals to retain all records since January 1, 2007 for
audit purposes.
1b. The Administration concurs. On January 8, 2014, a Nurse Program
Consultant Administrator was hired specifically for the review of cases that
have been approved by the hospital utilization review vendor. The MCPA is
now monitoring all vendor reviews for sufficiency and accuracy, and to ensure
all reviews invoiced were performed.

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 2
MCPA did not conduct patient credit balance audits at long-term care
facilities for an extended period or ensure that cost settlement reviews were
completed in a timely manner.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. credit balance audits are performed for all LTC facilities and that the
costs associated with the audits are recovered from the facilities as
required by State regulations;
b. in the future, cost settlement reviews are completed in a timely manner
(repeat); and
c. charges related to support services are properly supported.
Administration’s Response:
2a. The Administration concurs to ensure that credit balance audits are performed for all
LTC facilities and that the costs associated with the audits are recovered from the
facilities as required by State regulations. The Administration now has in place a contract
to perform the credit balance audits and expects the contract to continue in the future.
Additionally, LTC facilities will be notified that contingency fees will be charged
commencing with the quarter following completion of the first round of credit balance
audits, beginning April 2014.
2b. The Administration concurs. A protest of the contract award did not allow the current
Contractor to complete timely settlements. This was not a deficiency in MCPA
administration, but rather a procurement issue outside MCPA’s control.
An agreement was reached to integrate the old settlements into the new contractor’s
inventory. Regarding the 32 Cost Settlements that were conducted more than 2 years after
receipt of the related cost reports, the FY 2012 budget was increased to include funds for
the current vendor to reduce the backlog (total 167) that resulted from protest of the
contract award. To date, of the 167 backlogged case settlements to be completed, 156
have been completed, leaving a balance of eleven (11). Additionally, there can be
several unanticipated factors that could affect the timeliness of the completion of cost
settlements such as change of ownership, facilities in bankruptcy, providers under
investigation, and those referred to the Central Collection Unit.
2c. The Administration concurs. The Contractor continues to submit supporting
documentation as per the RFP and contract requirements. The MCPA obtained
additional supporting documentation for the 12 invoices during the period of October
2011 through September 2012 to support services charges totaling approximately $1
million. The additional documentation includes the nature of the support services and
names of employees who performed the work which was determined to adequately
support the submitted charges.
The MCPA has established procedures with the vendor to regularly attach to its support
services invoices additional subsidiary documents (i.e. list of employees and related
timesheets). These additional subsidiary documents will be used to verify the accuracy
and appropriateness of the support services invoices received from the vendor.

--- Page 32 ---
Finding 3
MCPA did not ensure that the vendor responsible for enrolling new
applicants in MCOs met certain contractual performance requirements.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA verify the performance of its enrollment broker
and take corrective action, including assessing damages, when the broker
does not achieve the required level of performance.
Administration’s Response:
The Administration concurs with the recommendation.
As previously shared with the auditors, MCPA was advised of an increase in auto
assigned enrollments sent to the Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) beginning
in July 2012. Upon further investigation, it was discovered that the Enrollment
Broker was not accurately counting all of the auto assigned enrollments that were
attached to new enrollments for a given month by not extending the time frame
long enough to capture them all.
Subsequently, MCPA reviewed the enrollments reported by the Enrollment
Broker for a period of July 1, 2008-December 31, 2012. Once MCPA was able to
align the data elements and reconcile the information for the audit period, it was
revealed there was a difference in the reported voluntary enrollment rate (VER)
percentages, sometimes as much as a 20% variance in the calculation. This
discrepancy resulted in the Enrollment Broker miscalculating the VER and
overbilling MCPA in the amount of $909,073.01 for the above referenced audit
period. Additionally, because of the miscalculation, the Enrollment Broker failed
to meet the 80% VER contract performance standard for this period.
As a result of our findings, MCPA implemented a corrective action plan (CAP)
for service level improvement in April 2013 which included refinement of the
report criteria to allow for a more accurate count of enrollments. On a monthly
basis, MCPA compares the Enrollment Broker’s calculated results with MMIS
data to ensure the Enrollment Broker continues to meet the contract requirements.
Additionally, the Enrollment Broker has increased outreach initiatives in an effort
to voluntarily enroll more recipients per month to lessen the overall monthly auto
assignment rate. To date, the Enrollment Broker has successfully met the
requirements of the CAP and continues to achieve the required service levels. If in
the future the Enrollment Broker does not achieve the required service levels, then
MCPA will assess the appropriate amount of liquidated damages pursuant to
contract provisions.
Moreover, the total overpayment amount of $909,073.01 was fully recovered by
MCPA in October 2013.

--- Page 33 ---
Cost Recoveries and Avoidance
Finding 4
MCPA did not ensure that referrals of potential third-party health insurance
information for Medicaid recipients were properly and timely investigated.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA
a. ensure that initial accountability and control is established over all
potential third-party insurance referrals,
b. perform supervisory reviews to ensure timely investigations of referrals
were conducted and appropriate conclusions were reached, and
c. review cases referred during the audit period and take appropriate
corrective action.
Administration’s Response:
4a.The post-payment recovery vendor is now required to provide additional
control documents that enable MCPA to reconcile referrals provided with
referrals processed.
4b. The Administration partially concurs with the recommendation. Procedures
were in place during the last audit period, however, additional steps will be
implemented to strengthen our procedures. DRAFS will increase Quality
Assurance efforts and put in place procedures to ensure that cases are started
within the Federal regulations.
4c. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. MCPA has completed
a review and made corrections.
Finding 5
MCPA did not have sufficient procedures to maximize the recovery of
Medicare funding for Medicaid recipients.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPA
a. establish procedures to ensure all Medicaid recipients who are eligible for
Medicare apply for Medicare benefits; and
b. establish comprehensive procedures for identifying improperly billed
claims for individuals with both Medicaid and Medicare coverage and
take appropriate follow-up action, including the recovery of any
overpayments.

--- Page 34 ---
Administration’s Response:
5a. The MCPA concurs. It has been Maryland Medicaid policy to require
recipients age 65 and over, to provide proof that they have applied for Medicare
Part A and B, in order to continue to be eligible for Medicaid benefits. Under this
policy and the implementing regulation at COMAR 10.09.24.04O, the case
worker is responsible for ensuring that the individual is Medicare eligible or has
applied.
The Department believes it is important to note that 100% enrollment for all
recipients over the age of 65 is highly unlikely for the following reasons:
1. The X02 category (undocumented or ineligible aliens) will never meet
Medicare eligibility requirements.
2. Recipients who have not been in the United States legally for 5 years will
also be restricted from Medicare enrollment.
3. An applicant must present proof from the Social Security Administration
that an application has been filed. Although the applicant is required to
apply for Medicare Part “A”, there is no requirement to purchase this
benefit. Persons who have not earned sufficient quarters of coverage under
Social Security are not eligible for free Part A coverage. Nevertheless, the
applicant must apply for, but may reject this coverage if payment of a
premium is required.
As part of efforts in the Monitoring & Special Projects Division created in April
of 2012 within the Office of Eligibility Services (OES), 8,086 Medicaid recipients
over age 65 without Medicare were identified. In August 2012 an over 65 project
was initiated to assist applicants/recipients apply for Medicare if and when
applicable. A new report is received every quarter and it is noted that many of the
recipients listed are in Long Term Care facilities.
A portion of applicants/recipients had been denied Medicare by Social Security
in error. As a result, we reached out to our Social Security partners to advise
them of our findings and shared our outreach initiative with them. We also
identified individuals who had not applied, and educated applicants/recipients on
the requirement and assisted them with the process. Finally, for recipients who do
not respond to our outreach efforts, we provide DHR notice to proceed with
follow-up which could result in closing the eligibility span of the recipient until
they are able to comply.
OES will continue to have ongoing dialogue with DHR and case workers to
address the need to monitor this population. The regulation and work flow
requirement is addressed in MA training conducted by DHMH. The Monitoring
& Special Projects Division will continue to monitor case
worker/applicant/recipient compliance and continue working with our Social
Security partners to ensure that applicants/recipients are receiving the benefits for
which they may be entitled to.

--- Page 35 ---
MCPA conducted a review on 40 of the 50 cases for the recipients 65 and over
cited with “no Medicare.” It is noted there was a case where the recipient expired
prior to the CY2011 review period, and the MA case was closed. There were
other cases that DHR workers demonstrated efforts to inform recipients of the
requirements for enrolling into Medicare. For cases where the recipient did not
comply with the Medicare requirements, an adverse action was taken and the MA
case was closed. In addition, some of the recipients have Medicare Buy-in
coverage that was active during the CY2011 review period. Findings to support
our analysis are available upon request.
5b. The Administration concurs to develop more comprehensive procedures. The
MCPA has procedures in place for identifying improperly billed claims for
individuals with both Medicaid and Medicare. As stated in your analysis, the
MCPA developed a monthly report which is used by MCPA supervisors to select
cases for review. The examples cited in your finding pertain to claim information
that was keyed incorrectly by MCPA staff. To identify overpayments in the future
for crossover claims, the MCPA is researching additional ways to identify keying
errors. The MCPA will take appropriate follow-up action including the recovery
of any overpayments if required.
Recipient Eligibility
Finding 6
MCPA needs to continue efforts to address longstanding deficiencies with the
recipient enrollment process to help ensure that corrective action is taken.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MCPA continue to monitor the eligibility process and
work with DHR to ensure that actions are implemented to correct the
aforementioned deficiencies (repeat).
Administration’s Response:
While the Administration concurs with the recommendation to continue
monitoring the eligibility process and correct the deficiencies noted in the report,
we note there will always be issues to resolve with the eligibility process. Since
the last audit, significant progress has been made to address the previously cited
issues
For example, MCPA updated the MOU with DHR in response to the most recent
audit report. The monitoring efforts also have been greatly enhanced with the
establishment of a Monitoring & Special Projects Division within the Office of
Eligibility Services (OES) which was fully staffed in June 2012. As a result of
the unit’s efforts, there has been a significant improvement with the eligibility
processes, particularly in a documented 90% decrease in outstanding
redeterminations.

--- Page 36 ---
Additionally, since establishing the Monitoring Unit, it should be noted that there
were no eligibility related findings for the 2013 State Single Audit resolving a
long-standing finding since 2007. Several new systems such as the PIRAMID
(Program Integrity Reporting and Management Information Database), which
replaces monthly reviews of the small retroactive samples with a review
mechanism applied to all eligibility determinations before they are finalized, and
the Enterprise Content Management Solutions (ECMS) system, which helps to
guard against record losses by converting all records into an electronic format to
reduce reliance on paper records have been developed to address eligibility issues.
Effective February 2014, MCPA now has access to ECMS. It is expected that the
implementation of these systems will allow MCPA to monitor case processing
faster and more efficiently.
The Division generates reports which are shared monthly via email and in-person
at bi-monthly DHR/DHMH Joint Collaboration Workgroup Meetings and at
quarterly Corrective Action Panel (CAP) meetings which allows us to continue to
work on opportunities for improvements.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7
DHMH firewall rules allowed unnecessary and insecure connections to the
EDITPS servers.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MCPA request DHMH to configure its firewall to
achieve a “least privilege” security strategy giving individuals and devices
only those privileges needed to perform assigned tasks.
Administration’s Response:
MCPA concurs with the recommendation and has provided the audit
recommendation to the Department's OIT for review as this audit
finding/recommendation is outside the scope of MCPA's control. It is our
understanding from OIT that the recommended corrections are being
implemented in response to OLA's audit of the DHMH Office of the Secretary.
MCPA will work with OIT to ensure that this issue is resolved.
Finding 8
MCPA lacked assurance that the outsourced eMedicaid system was properly
secured.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MCPA
a. either ensure (via contract if necessary) that the eMedicaid system service
provider periodically obtains a SOC 2 type 2 report for the provided
services or use DHMH audit resources to periodically perform security
and control reviews of the service provider, and

--- Page 37 ---
b. obtain and review copies of any SOC or DHMH audit reports to ensure
all security-related provisions were adequately addressed by the service
provider.
Administration’s Response:
8a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. A security and
controls review of eMedicaid, including a penetration test, will be incorporated
into the annual MMIS Risk Assessment review.
8b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. The above-referenced
report will be reviewed to ensure that all security-related issues are adequately
addressed by the service provider.
Finding 9
Monitoring controls over critical mainframe MMIS II production files were
not sufficient.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that the MCPA
a. perform timely, documented reviews and investigations of the reports of
logged, authorized modifications to critical MMIS II data and program
files;
b. perform timely, documented reviews and investigations of the reports of
logged direct changes made to the MMIS II production database
including examinations of before and after images of these changes; and
c. retain all such documentation for future reference.
Administration’s Response:
9a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. The MCPA will
review the critical dataset report timely and document the review via email
notification to the DHMH Security Officers.
9b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. The MCPA will require
all database updates to capture the “before” and “after” images. All database updates will
be centrally logged along with supporting documentation, and before and after images.
A LOG ANALYZER job will be created that will run 7 days a week which will
generate a report that displays logon id(s) that modify production database tables.
The Administration will review and match the LOG ANALYZER report against
the update log and supporting documentation daily. Any discrepancies will be
investigated immediately.
9c. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. The MCPA will retain
all related documentation as noted above for future reference.

--- Page 38 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Lauren R. Crue, CPA
Rick E. Pyles
Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Michael D. Cheese
Jason M. Goldstein
Alexander M. Prodey
B. Summer Raza
Edward A. Rubenstein
Henry H. Startzman, IV
Staff Auditors