Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - North Region


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization which established three regions within the State, including the North Region. The financial activities of the Maryland Correctional Institution - Hagerstown, the Maryland Correctional Training Center, and the Roxbury Correctional Institution (previously audited under the DPSCS - Hagerstown Region), as well as the North Branch Correctional Institution and the Western Correctional Institution (previously audited under the DPSCS - Western Maryland Region) were reorganized under the newly created North Region.
Date: 10/28/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745b4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:28:30.185947
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
North Region
October 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change 5
North Region Audit Scope 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Inmate Funds
Finding 1 – The Region Had Not Timely Reconciled its Inmate Fund 7
Records With Corresponding Comptroller Records
Finding 2 – Critical Controls Were Lacking Over Certain Inmate Fund 8
Transactions and Records
Purchases
Finding 3 – The Region Made Repeated Purchases From a Vendor 9
Without Consolidating and Soliciting Bids or Executing Written
Contracts
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
The North Region of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) consists of the following correctional facilities that house sentenced
inmates, located primarily in western Maryland, and the community supervision
offices for offenders serving terms of probation or parole.
 Maryland Correctional Institution – Hagerstown (MCIH)
 Maryland Correctional Training Center (MCTC)
 Roxbury Correctional Institution (RCI)
 North Branch Correctional Institution (NBCI)
 Western Correctional Institution (WCI)
 Patuxent Institution
Effective July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization that
established three regions within the State (North, Central, and South). The
reorganization created a regional approach to providing inmate-related services,
including incarceration, probation, parole, and reentry into society. This report
represents the results of our first fiscal compliance audit of the North Region.
North Region Audit Scope
Our audit of the North Region included the financial activities of the North
Region correctional facilities with the exception of the Patuxent Institution.
Financial support services are provided to the Patuxent Institution by DPSCS –
South Region, and the Institution is included within the scope of that audit. The
North Region’s Hagerstown Office provides fiscal support to MCIH, MCTC, and
RCI, which were previously audited under the DPSCS – Hagerstown Region.
The North Region’s Cumberland Office provides fiscal support to NBCI and
WCI, which were previously audited under the DPSCS – Western Maryland
Region.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014, the expenditures for the
North Region (excluding Patuxent Institution) totaled $304 million. These
facilities (excluding Patuxent Institution) housed 8,902 inmates as of June 30,
2014.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report of DPSCS – Hagerstown Region dated January 7,
2013. We determined that these four findings were satisfactorily addressed. Our
preceding audit report of DPSCS – Western Maryland Region dated October 18,
2011 contained no findings.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Inmate Funds
Background
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – North
Region maintains inmate funds, which are non-budgeted funds that are initially
deposited with the State Treasurer and recorded in the inmates’ personal accounts
on the Maryland Offenders Banking System (MOBS). MOBS serves as the
official record of each inmate’s account activity, including funds received and
disbursed, as well as the available balances. DPSCS replaced MOBS with the
Maryland Offenders Banking System II (MOBSII) as the record of each inmate’s
account activity, beginning in August 2014.
Disbursements of inmate funds are made using a check or cash withdrawal from a
working fund checking account, and the applicable inmate accounts on MOBS are
charged. Disbursements may be paid directly to inmates in certain circumstances,
such as upon their release, or to third parties as directed by the inmates. Working
funds are initially established by an advance received from the Comptroller of
Maryland and are replenished as needed by the Comptroller.
Finding 1
The Region’s Hagerstown and Cumberland Offices had not timely reconciled
the inmate fund records with the corresponding records maintained by the
Comptroller of Maryland.
Analysis
The Hagerstown and Cumberland Offices had not timely reconciled the aggregate
balances of the inmate personal fund accounts, as recorded on MOBSII, with the
corresponding records maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland. As of May
2015, the most recent reconciliation at both offices was performed for August
2014 activity. DPSCS management advised us in June 2015 that, until very
recently, it had been unable to provide the reports the Region needed to perform
the reconciliations since the Office of the Secretary implemented MOBSII in
August 2014.
According to MOBSII, for the eight-month period ending March 2015, inmate
fund receipts in the Hagerstown and Cumberland Offices totaled approximately
$4.7 million and $2.3 million, respectively. During this period, disbursements for
these Offices totaled approximately $1.4 million and $834,000, respectively.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Region reconcile the aggregate balance of individual
inmate accounts in MOBSII with the corresponding records of the
Comptroller of Maryland on a timely basis.
Finding 2
The Region’s Hagerstown Office lacked certain critical controls over inmate
fund transactions and records.
Analysis
The Region’s Hagerstown Office lacked certain critical controls for ensuring the
propriety of inmate fund transactions and records.
 Transactions recorded in the inmate fund accounts were not independently
reviewed to ensure that the transactions were posted to the proper individual
inmate accounts. Prior to implementing MOBSII in August 2014, supervisory
personnel verified that postings, in the aggregate, were correct; however, this
is not sufficient to ensure the propriety of individual inmate accounts. As of
May 2015, the last such verifications performed were for August 2014
activity.
 User access over inmate account records in MOBSII was not adequately
restricted. We noted two employees with the capability to create transactions
and print checks in MOBSII although such access was not required for these
employees to perform their job duties. One of these employees also had
access to blank checks and was an authorized check signer, and thus could
make disbursements without independent approval. In addition, system
access had not been eliminated for three individuals who were no longer
employed by the Hagerstown Office.
 As of May 7, 2015, the Office’s working fund checking account used to
process inmate fund disbursements had not been reconciled with the
corresponding bank records since the January 2015 reconciliation. In
addition, previous reconciliations completed were not timely. Specifically,
our test of the 11 reconciliations prepared from March 2014 to January 2015
disclosed that 10 of the reconciliations were prepared from 56 to 142 days
after the end of the related months. DPSCS’ Financial Operations Manual
requires this checking account to be reconciled on a monthly basis.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2014, Hagerstown Office
working fund disbursements from the inmate fund totaled approximately $1.8
million.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Region
a. ensure that transactions posted to individual inmate accounts are
independently reviewed for propriety, at least on a test basis;
b. work in conjunction with DPSCS Office of the Secretary to restrict
employee user access capabilities on MOBSII to employees requiring
such access and eliminate the ability to perform incompatible duties; and
c. ensure that monthly bank reconciliations are prepared timely.
Purchases
Finding 3
The Region made repeated purchases of fresh produce from one vendor
without consolidating and appropriately soliciting competitive bids and
executing written contracts.
Analysis
The Region made frequent purchases of fresh produce but did not consolidate and
appropriately solicit competitive bids for these purchases in accordance with State
procurement regulations. Specifically, the Region’s Hagerstown Office (on
behalf of the five facilities located in Hagerstown and Cumberland) repeatedly
purchased produce from one vendor without entering into a written contract.
According to State records, during fiscal years 2012 through 2015 (as of February
12, 2015), the Hagerstown Office made 528 individual payments to this vendor
totaling approximately $2.5 million. Since the purchases were not consolidated,
the Region’s leverage as a high-volume purchaser may not have been maximized.
For purchases exceeding $25,000, Department of General Services’ approval
would have been required.
In addition, our review of two procurements totaling $54,613 from this vendor,
each exceeding $25,000, disclosed that the related bids (two for each
procurement) were obtained by fax, rather than through competitive sealed
bidding, as required by State procurement regulations for purchases exceeding
$25,000.
Hagerstown Office personnel advised us that they believed that competitive
procurement was not feasible for fresh produce because it spoils quickly and
delivery must be timely and frequent. Management further advised us that
fluctuations in market pricing could not be adequately accommodated in a
contract. We discussed these issues with representatives of DGS, which
delegated the procurement of fresh produce to DPSCS, although contracts
9

--- Page 12 ---
exceeding $25,000 would require DGS approval. We were advised that State
procurement regulations must be complied with and that a formal competitive
procurement would be required in this situation. DGS personnel further stated
that concerns regarding delivery times and market pricing could be addressed
through the procurement process and drafting of the bid specifications and related
contract. Finally, DGS personnel advised us that DPSCS could request that DGS
conduct the procurement on its behalf or assist DPSCS in the procurement to
ensure its needs would be met.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Region comply with State procurement regulations
when procuring fresh produce. Specifically, we recommend that the Region
a. work with DPSCS Office of the Secretary and DGS to competitively
procure fresh produce in a manner that will meet the needs of the Region
and ensure that produce is obtained at the best value; and
b. ensure that formal written contracts are executed and DGS approval is
obtained, as needed.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – North Region. Because of a departmental
reorganization (which is explained on page 5 of this report), our audit of the North
Region included the activities of the following DPSCS units for the indicated
periods:
North Region – July 1, 2012 to March 31, 2015
Hagerstown Region – June 4, 2012 to June 30, 2012
Western Maryland Region – June 20, 2011 to June 30, 2012
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, payroll, and inmate
funds. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding
audit report of the DPSCS – Hagerstown Region.
Our audit did not include the financial activities (such as payroll processing,
purchasing, maintaining inmate fund records, maintaining accounting records and
conducting related fiscal functions) of the Patuxent Institution. These financial
activities are provided by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services – South Region and are included within the scope of that audit.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Region’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
11

--- Page 14 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Region’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Region that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of the Region, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
12

--- Page 15 ---
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 18 ---
reconciliations through October 31, 2016 will be completed by December 31, 2016
with future reconciliations completed on a similar timely basis.
Finding 2:
The Region’s Hagerstown Office lacked certain critical controls over inmate
transactions and records.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that the Region:
a. ensure that transactions posted to individual inmate accounts are
independently reviewed for propriety, at least on a test basis;
b. work in conjunction with DPSCS Office of the Secretary to restrict employee
user access capabilities on MOBSII to employees requiring such access and
eliminate the ability to perform incompatible duties; and
c. ensure that monthly bank reconciliations are prepared timely.
We Agree:
The Region will:
a. ensure that transactions posted to individual inmate accounts are independently
reviewed for propriety, at least on a test basis. The anticipated completion date is
December 31, 2015.
b. work in conjunction with DPSCS Office of the Secretary to restrict employee user
access capabilities on MOBSII to employees requiring such access and eliminate
the ability to perform incompatible duties. Completed.
c. ensure that monthly bank reconciliations are prepared timely. The reconciliations
will be completed up-to-date by December 31, 2015 and will be conducted
monthly thereafter.
Finding 3:
The Region made repeated purchases of fresh produce from one vendor without
consolidation and appropriately soliciting competitive bids and executing written
contracts.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that the Region comply with State procurement regulations
when procuring fresh produce. Specifically, we recommend that the Region
a. work with DPSCS Office of the Secretary and DGS to competitively procure
fresh produce in a manner that will meet the needs of the Region and ensure
that produce is obtained at the best value; and
b. ensure that formal written contracts are executed and DGS approval is
obtained, as needed.
We Agree:
The Region will:
a. work with DPSCS Office of the Secretary and DGS to competitively procure
fresh produce in a manner that will meet the needs of the Region and ensure that
produce is obtained at the best value. The anticipated completion date is July 31,
2016.

--- Page 20 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
David O. Mauriello
Senior Auditor
Anthony V. Calcagno
Staff Auditor