Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Laboratories Administration
Date: 07/26/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744af
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:12:58.463789
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Laboratories Administration
March 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Laboratories Administration, a unit of the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene (DHMH), is responsible for providing laboratory testing to assist
physicians and health officials in the prevention, diagnosis, and control of human
diseases. To ensure the quality of laboratory services, the Administration
develops standards and regulations for medical laboratories, tissue banks, and
physician office laboratories. It also provides laboratory data for environmental
safety and enforcement of environmental protection laws. According to the
State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, the Administration’s central laboratory in
Baltimore City and its two regional laboratories conducted approximately 9.1
million laboratory tests, and the Administration’s expenditures totaled
approximately $42.8 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 26, 2012. We determined that the
Administration satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining
finding is repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Laboratory Services Billings
Finding 1
Controls were not established to ensure the propriety of laboratory services
billings, and numerous individuals had unnecessary access to the accounts
receivable system.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not established to ensure the propriety of laboratory
services billings, and numerous individuals had unnecessary access to the
accounts receivable system. The Administration used a laboratories information
management system (STARLIMS) to bill for these laboratory services and
account for the related billing activity, which included newborn screening
services, and rabies, well water, and various disease testing. Laboratory fees were
set annually for each specific service and were approved by the Secretary of the
3

--- Page 6 ---
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. These approved fees were recorded
in STARLIMS and were automatically included in the bills depending on the
laboratory services ordered. Orders for laboratory services were entered into
STARLIMS by clerical staff and the related bills for most services were
automatically generated after the laboratory staff entered the test results.
Adequate controls were not in place to ensure laboratory services fees were
properly billed and account activity was properly supported. The employee
responsible for performing a daily verification of adjustments to accounts
receivable records was not independent nor was the verification process
comprehensive, as it did not include a review of edits made to billings. This
verification is essential because the employee who was responsible for printing
and mailing the bills, also processed cash receipts and recorded the related
payments and non-cash credits to accounts. Furthermore, the annual recording of
approved laboratory fees was not subject to an independent review for propriety.
In addition, user access to STARLIMS was not periodically reviewed and we
noted numerous individuals were granted unnecessary access to the laboratory
services accounts receivable system. Specifically, 14 users – including external
vendors, laboratory staff, and information technology employees – were assigned
access, as of June 2015, that was not required for their normal job duties. All
users granted this access had unrestricted capabilities to generate and edit bills
and record account activity.
According to its records, the Administration billed approximately $7.5 million in
laboratory fees during fiscal year 2015. As of April 30, 2015, the Administration
had approximately $1.1 million in outstanding accounts receivable.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Administration
a. establish procedures that require an independent, supervisory review and
approval of all critical changes made to laboratory services activity,
which includes a review of edits to bills and adjustments to accounts
receivable records;
b. require an independent, supervisory review and approval of the annual
recording of approved laboratory services fees;
c. periodically review system access and restrict such access to employees
who need it for their job duties; and
d. immediately remove the unnecessary access granted to the
aforementioned 14 individuals.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Controlled Dangerous Substance Permits
Finding 2
Controls over issuance of controlled dangerous substance permits and
related collections were inadequate.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not established over controlled dangerous substance
(CDS) permits and related collections. The Administration’s Division of Drug
Control collects a fixed fee for the registration of practitioners and establishments
that manufacture, distribute, dispense, or otherwise handle CDS in the State. The
Division used the same laboratories information management system
(STARLIMS) mentioned previously to account for the registration applications
received and to print the related permits once the applications were processed.
Practitioners within establishments operated by the State are exempt from the
payment of registration or renewal registration fees. According to Administration
records, the Division of Drug Control issued 20,464 permits during fiscal year
2015, including 148 fee-exempt permits, and collected approximately $2.4 million
in registration fees.
 CDS collections were not immediately recorded and deposited timely. Check
payments, which were submitted with the applications, were not recorded
until the applications were processed. Our test of 15 CDS applications
received between May 2014 and June 2015 disclosed that the related check
payments for all 15 applications were recorded in STARLIMS between 3 and
37 business days after the applications and fees were received. Furthermore,
these 15 checks totaling $1,800 were remotely deposited between 4 and 38
business days after receipt. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires that collections be immediately recorded upon
receipt and promptly deposited by the following business day.
 The Administration did not safeguard checks after they had been deposited
through the remote deposit system and did not destroy them as required. As
of July 1, 2015, the Administration had 21,870 checks on hand, totaling
approximately $2.6 million that had been deposited 33 days to 2 years earlier.
While the checks had been restrictively endorsed and marked as scanned,
these checks containing sensitive personal information were placed in folders
in a storage room accessible by all fourteen Division of Drug Control
employees. The Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote
Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies requires that scanned and
transmitted checks be stored in a secure location and destroyed within 30
days.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 CDS permits, including fee-exempt permits, were not subject to an
independent supervisory review to ensure permits were properly issued. The
two individuals responsible for comparing the printed permits with the
practitioner information included on the applications were not independent of
the application processing and permit issuance functions. For example, one
individual could initiate, edit, and complete permit transactions, including
processing the payment and printing the permits from STARLIMS. In
addition, the review did not ensure that permits designated as fee-exempt were
appropriate. Consequently, this individual could issue fee-exempt permits to
non-exempt permit holders and misappropriate the related fee collections
without detection. A similar comment regarding lack of independent
supervisory review of CDS transactions was included in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Administration establish adequate controls over
controlled dangerous substance (CDS) collections. Specifically, we
recommend that the Administration
a. record checks immediately upon receipt and deposit collections timely;
b. safeguard checks that have been remotely deposited, in accordance with
the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services by
Maryland State Agencies; and
c. establish procedures to ensure that issued CDS permits, including fee-
exempt permits, are reviewed for propriety by an independent supervisor
(repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Laboratories Administration
of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period
beginning October 24, 2011 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the
6

--- Page 9 ---
Administration’s financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to
evaluate its compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, accounts receivable, payroll, and
disbursements. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Administration
by the Department’s Office of the Secretary and related units. These support
services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the
Secretary. Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over
compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of the Administration’s compliance with those laws
and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
the Administration.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Administration’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions
were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers
risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical
audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of
the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from
which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Administration’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
7

--- Page 10 ---
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Administration’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to the Administration that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of the Administration, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
Controls were not established to ensure the propriety of laboratory services billings, and
numerous individuals had unnecessary access to the accounts receivable system.
Auditor’s Recommendation:
We recommend that the Administration
a. establish procedures that require an independent, supervisory review and approval of
all critical changes made to laboratory services activity, which includes a review of edits
to bills and adjustments to accounts receivable records;
b. require an independent, supervisory review and approval of the annual recording of
approved laboratory services fees;
c. periodically review system access and restrict such access to employees who need it for
their job duties; and
d. immediately remove the unnecessary access granted to the aforementioned 14
individuals.
Administration’s Response:
a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. The Administration will establish
procedures that require an independent, supervisory review and approval of all critical
changes made to laboratory services activity, which includes a review of edits to bills and
adjustments to accounts receivable records. The Administration has already changed the
capability of authorized users who could change the testing prices in the database.
Additional changes to procedures will be forthcoming. Anticipated completion date: October
1, 2016.
b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. Changes to procedures will be
forthcoming. Anticipated completion date: October 1, 2016.
c. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. The Administration’s Office of
Information Management Services will periodically review, at least on a semi-annual basis,
the system access capabilities over critical transactions and restrict such access to employees
who need it for their job duties.
d. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. However, the Administration
disagrees with removing the Administration’s three Information Technology (IT) staff and
one STARLIMS vendor employee who need it for critical job duties and functions, which
include updates and reprograming should the database breakdown. Changes to procedures
will be forthcoming. Anticipated completion date: October 1, 2016.

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
Controls over issuance of controlled dangerous substance permits and related collections
were inadequate.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Administration establish adequate controls over controlled
dangerous substance (CDS) collections. Specifically, we recommend that the
Administration
a. record checks immediately upon receipt and deposit collections timely;
b. safeguard checks that have been remotely deposited, in accordance with the State Treasurer’s
Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies; and
c. establish procedures to ensure that issued CDS permits, including fee-exempt permits, are
reviewed for propriety by an independent supervisor (repeat).
Administration’s Response:
a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. Our procedures now require checks to
be deposited within two business days of receipt. Formal documentation of check deposits is
reflected in the CDS database, which includes both check receipt and check deposit dates.
b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. Effective August 3, 2015, all checks
that have been remotely deposited are safeguarded in accordance with the State Treasurer’s
Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies.
c. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. The Administration revised its
procedures effective March 1, 2016.
The Administration previously attempted to correct this finding by developing procedures
and a report to monitor transactions for accuracy and potential risk. However, the report as
designed did not accomplish those objectives. As a result, the Administration re-evaluated
its review process and a new review procedure is currently in place to confirm the accuracy
of the permits issued.

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Jeneba R. Jalloh, CPA
Senior Auditor
Amanda M. Jones
Staff Auditor