Title: Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority
Date: 08/27/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742bc
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:43:48.364688
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority
October 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority functions under the
provisions of the Financial Institutions Article, Sections 13-1001 through 13-1031
of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and is constituted as a public instrumentality
of the State of Maryland. The Authority was created to transform the Chesapeake
and Ohio Canal and adjacent areas in the city of Cumberland, Maryland into a
showpiece of historic preservation that will enhance recreational, commercial,
civic, transportation, educational, and ecological values. The affairs of the
Authority are managed by its nine members. The administrative affairs and
activities of the Authority are directed and supervised by an executive director
who is appointed by the Authority, subject to the approval of the Governor.
According to the State’s records, the Authority’s operating expenditures totaled
approximately $681,000 during fiscal year 2016.
Financial Statement Audits
As specified in the Financial Institutions Article, Section 13-1010 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, the Authority engaged an independent certified
public accounting firm to perform annual audits of its financial statements. In
related audit reports for fiscal years ended June 30, 2013, 2014, and 2015 the firm
stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the governmental activities and each major fund of the
Authority, and the respective changes in financial position for the aforementioned
years in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 19, 2013. We determined that the
Authority satisfactorily addressed these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Authority’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less
significant finding was communicated to the Authority that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Authority. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Canal Place Preservation and
Development Authority for the period beginning April 9, 2013 and ending July
11, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Authority’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, and cash receipts.
We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit
report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Authority’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
4

--- Page 7 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background
or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Authority’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor