Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Potomac Center
Date: 01/07/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067455c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:16:47.715958
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Potomac Center
January 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Payroll
Finding 1 – Controls Over Critical Payroll Adjustments Were Not Sufficient 5
Finding 2 – A Management Employee Improperly Received Accident Leave 6
Payments For an Extended Period
Procurement
Finding 3 – Center Did Not Comply With State Procurement Regulations 7
When Procuring and Awarding Certain Contracts
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Potomac Center is a State residential facility for adult individuals with
intellectual disabilities. It is located in Hagerstown, Maryland and serves
individuals from the entire State. The Center provides services intended to
maximize the physical, intellectual, emotional, and social development of
individuals who have borderline to profound intellectual disabilities. It also
provides habilitative services to expedite the return of individuals to a less
restrictive environment. Furthermore, the Center operates a Transitions Program
to serve individuals who have both intellectual disabilities and mental illness and
to provide a therapeutic habilitation model before discharge to the community.
The Center, which is a budgetary unit within the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene’s Developmental Disabilities Administration, has a licensed
capacity of 63 residents. During fiscal year 2013, the Center had an actual
average daily population of 50 residents. According to the State’s records, the
Center’s fiscal year 2013 expenditures totaled approximately $11.3 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated July 7, 2010. We determined that the Center
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Payroll
Finding 1
Controls over critical adjustments to the Potomac Center’s payroll were not
sufficient.
Analysis
The Center’s procedures for verifying the propriety of payroll adjustments were
not sufficient. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that critical adjustments,
such as payments to former employees for accumulated leave, were proper.
Specifically, the employee responsible for approving automated time reports
submitted to the Comptroller of Maryland’s Central Payroll Bureau for processing
did not review supporting documentation for payroll adjustments included on the
reports. Rather, this employee reviewed summary spreadsheets of the
adjustments that were prepared by the employees who initiated these transactions.
Our test of 10 payroll adjustments totaling $71,000, disclosed that in 2 cases the
Center had improperly calculated payments to former employees for accumulated
leave resulting in overpayments totaling $8,000. For example, one of the
employees was overpaid due to a miscalculation in the employee’s leave balance
at the time of resignation, which should have been detected if the supporting
documentation had been reviewed.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2013, the Center’s payroll
expenditures totaled approximately $8.4 million and adjustments to payroll
totaled approximately $830,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center
a. ensure that critical payroll adjustments are verified to supporting
documentation, and
b. take appropriate action to recover the aforementioned overpayments.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 2
A management employee improperly received accident leave payments for
an extended period.
Analysis
We identified a Center management employee who received improper accident
leave payments totaling approximately $13,500 over an extended period. In July
2011, the management employee was injured while on the job, and a claim was
processed by the third-party administrator for the State of Maryland’s self-insured
workers’ compensation program, which approved the use of 36 days of accident
leave. After using the 36 days of authorized leave, the employee continued to
receive approximately 20 hours of accident leave each pay period from November
2011 through July 2013, as recorded on the related timesheets. Although the
employee’s timesheets contained an approving signature, generally the persons
approving the timesheets either had left employment or could not be identified by
the current timekeepers responsible for posting payroll adjustments.
Consequently, the reason why the timesheets were approved without the extended
use of accident leave being questioned could not be determined.
Upon our bringing this matter to the Department’s attention, the matter was
referred to the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Office of the
Inspector General (OIG) for further review. In August 2013, based on the results
of the OIG’s investigation, the employee was terminated and the matter was
referred to the Office of the Attorney General - Criminal Division. A referral to
the Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or
that criminal charges will be filed.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Center
a. monitor the use of accident leave to ensure that only authorized leave is
taken, and
b. ensure timesheet are thoroughly reviewed and approved by only
authorized supervisory personnel.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Procurement
Finding 3
The Center did not comply with State Procurement Regulations when
procuring and awarding certain contracts.
Analysis
The Center did not always comply with State Procurement Regulations when
procuring and awarding contracts. Our test of eight contracts totaling
approximately $1.4 million disclosed the following conditions:
 The Center artificially split the procurement of services totaling $49,910 into
two smaller contracts of $24,955 each to avoid the required approvals for
procurements valued at $25,000 or more. These contracts covered the period
from March 2011 through March 2012. We were advised by a Center
management employee that this was done in order to keep the contracts within
the Center’s authorized procurement delegation limits.
 The Center did not award a three-year service contract to the lowest bidder.
After the aforementioned contracts expired in March 2012, the Center
competitively bid the contract and awarded a three-year contract totaling
$179,400 to the same vendor to provide these services. However, the vendor
with the lowest bid ($116,220) was not selected to perform the work because
it was not certified as a small business. The Center had designated this
procurement as a small business reserve procurement; however, this
designation was not disclosed in the related invitation for bids (IFB), as
required.
 The Center had not published awards for four contracts totaling $1.3 million
on eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
State Procurement Regulations prohibit procurements from being intentionally
split to circumvent procurement requirements. Additionally, State Procurement
Regulations state that a bid may not be evaluated for any requirement or criterion
not disclosed in the IFB. The Regulations further state that when designating a
procurement as a small business reserve procurement, the solicitation must
include a notice that only certified small business vendors are eligible for award
of the contract. State Procurement Regulations also require that contract awards
greater than $25,000 be published on eMaryland Marketplace within 30 days of
the award.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Center comply with State Procurement Regulations
by
a. not artificially splitting procurements to avoid required approvals;
b. including the required notice in the IFB for small business reserve
procurements, when applicable;
c. ensuring that contract award decisions are made in a manner consistent
with the IFB requirements; and
d. publishing contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Potomac Center, a unit of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene’s Developmental Disabilities Administration, for the period
beginning March 22, 2010 and ending June 9, 2013. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements related to
operating expenditures, payroll, patient funds, working fund, corporate purchasing
cards, and equipment inventories.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Center’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
9

--- Page 12 ---
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Center’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This report also
includes a finding regarding a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Center that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, on behalf of
the Center, to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results
of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Joseph E. McWilliams
Senior Auditor
Donald J. Rodis, III
Staff Auditor