Title: Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center
Date: 02/26/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744c1
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:15:14.368919
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center
February 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Interagency Agreement
Finding 1 – The Center Procured Certain Services Through an 5
Interagency Agreement Rather Than Through a Competitive
Procurement Process
Information Systems Security and Controls
Finding 2 – Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information Was Not 7
Adequately Protected
Finding 3 – The Center’s Servers Were Not Adequately Secured 8
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Effective July 1, 2010, Chapter 190, Laws of Maryland 2010 established the
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center as an independent unit of State
government under the direction of a 12-member governing board. In fiscal years
2011 through 2013, no appropriations were included in the State’s budget for the
Center, and activity relating to the Center was conducted on its behalf by the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). Beginning in fiscal year
2014, the Center received its own appropriation.
The Center is responsible for overseeing and maintaining the Maryland
Longitudinal Data System, a statewide data system that contains individual-level
student and workforce data from all levels of education and the State’s workforce.
The Center is tasked with managing and analyzing these data to help determine
how students are performing and the extent to which students are prepared for
higher education and the workforce. The Center conducts research to improve the
State’s education system and to guide decision-making by State and local
governments, educational agencies, institutions, teachers, and other educational
professionals.
The Center obtains and analyzes data through collaboration with five State
entities: MSDE, the Maryland Higher Education Commission, the Department of
Labor, Licensing and Regulation, and the University of Maryland’s School of
Social Work and College of Education. As of April 15, 2015, the Center had
collected data for calendar years 2008 through 2013, and was continuing to
collect data for subsequent periods. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2014 the Center had seven authorized positions and expenditures
totaling approximately $1.7 million.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Interagency Agreement
Finding 1
The Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center procured certain services
through an existing interagency agreement rather than through a
competitive procurement process.
Analysis
The Center used an existing interagency agreement with the University of
Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) to procure certain services rather than using a
competitive procurement process. The Center’s interagency agreement with
UMB was for research services and covered the period beginning July 1, 2013
and ending June 30, 2016. However, the Center directed UMB to procure
different services from third-party vendors although the oversight of the vendors
would remain under the control of the Center.
Specifically, through the interagency agreement, the Center directed UMB to
contract with three companies, at a cost of approximately $475,000, for certain
information technology services and database training. In particular, the Center
directed UMB to contract with two companies for two specific individuals to
provide information technology services at an aggregate cost of $350,000 for the
period from June 2014 through June 2016. We were advised that these
individuals were selected since they had previously worked in developing the
Maryland Longitudinal Data System. The Center also directed UMB to contract
with a third specific company for database training at a cost of $125,000 for the
period from May 2014 through June 2016.
Furthermore, UMB did not exercise any contractual responsibilities other than
procuring the three contracts and processing related payments to the companies.
Specifically, the daily supervision and monitoring of the individuals and
companies, including assigning tasks and ensuring that defined responsibilities
were fulfilled, was performed by the Center.
Additionally, the interagency agreement with UMB included a facilities and
administrative fee that ranged from 10 to 15 percent added onto the UMB billings
even though, as previously noted, UMB’s responsibilities were very limited and
the Center performed the supervisory and monitoring responsibilities over these
individuals and companies.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Since these services were obtained under an interagency agreement between State
agencies, the Center avoided using a competitive procurement process, and
obtaining control agency approval for the procurements as required by State
procurement regulations. Accordingly, assurance was lacking that these services
were obtained at the most advantageous cost to the State. We confirmed with
staff at the Board of Public Works that the use of an interagency agreement to
procure these contractual services was not appropriate.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center discontinue the practice of using interagency
agreements as a mechanism to avoid a competitive procurement process to
obtain contractual services.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The Center collects data from sources including the Maryland State Department
of Education (MSDE), the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
(DLLR) and the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC). This data
includes MSDE enrollment data for students attending Maryland public schools
from pre-K to grade 12, earnings data for individuals employed by any entity
required to submit earnings data to DLLR and MHEC enrollment data for
students attending Maryland public colleges and universities. Data from DLLR
and MHEC includes sensitive personally identifiable information such as full
names, related social security numbers, and dates of birth. The Center processes
the collected data and stores the data in two databases.
During our audit fieldwork, the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services (DPSCS) provided support services to the Center by hosting the Center’s
servers. DPSCS also maintained the physical and network infrastructure which
supported the hosted Center computer devices. However, the Center is ultimately
responsible for all controls over the hosted devices and related data. We were
advised that effective June 10, 2015 all critical Center servers and data have been
transferred from DPSCS to MSDE. In addition, the Center’s Data Security and
Safeguarding Plan dated December 13, 2013 specifies that the Center shall
provide data security and perform regular audits for compliance with privacy and
security standards.
Center staff advised us that as of April 15, 2015 the Center had collected six years
of data (calendar years 2008 through 2013) from MSDE, DLLR and MHEC and
had completed processing most of the data it had obtained during calendar year
2014. The Center is continuing to collect data for subsequent periods of time.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 2
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) obtained from MHEC and
DLLR was not properly protected.
Analysis
Sensitive PII obtained from MHEC and DLLR was not properly protected.
 We identified two clear text files containing sensitive PII that were improperly
stored on the Center’s server used to host two databases. Encrypted versions
of these two files had been received from DLLR, decrypted, and processed by
the Center. However, after processing, these decrypted files were stored on
the Center’s server rather than being immediately deleted in accordance with
the Center’s procedures. According to the Center’s records, these two files
contained 882,598 unique records and, as of April 15, 2015, had been
improperly retained on this server for 42 and 2 weeks.
 Social security numbers (SSNs) included with data received from MHEC
were retained in one of the aforementioned databases and were not encrypted.
Although the database software was capable of encrypting data that contained
PII, this feature was not enabled for the aforementioned SSNs. Per our
request, Center staff determined that, as of April 2015, this database contained
2,237,976 records with unique individual names and SSNs in clear text.
 The Center did not employ any substantial mitigating controls (such as the use
of data loss prevention software) to protect this unencrypted sensitive PII.
This sensitive PII, which is commonly sought by criminals for use in identity
theft, should be protected by appropriate information system security controls.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy specifies that agencies must
protect confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial
mitigating controls.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Center
a. in accordance with its procedures, delete all decrypted files containing
sensitive PII, immediately after processing; and
b. enable encryption for all databases tables containing sensitive PII.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 3
The Center’s servers, hosted by DPSCS, were not adequately secured.
Analysis
The Center’s servers, hosted by DPSCS, were not adequately secured.
 The Center had not updated any of its 14 servers’ operating systems for any
updates released by the operating system’s vendor. We determined that, as of
our testing dates, the operating system vendor had issued 202 updates to the
version of the operating system used on these servers and these updates
addressed 229 known vulnerabilities associated with this version of the
operating system. The Information Security Policy states that network devices
should be patched and updated for all security-related updates/patches.
 Anti-malware software had not been installed on any of the Center’s servers.
The Information Security Policy states that agencies must protect against
malicious code by implementing anti-malware solutions that, to the extent
possible, include a capability for automatic updates.
 Three of four servers tested had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, the Center had not
updated its servers for these patches.
 The firewall used by DPSCS to protect the Center’s servers allowed the entire
MSDE’s network unnecessary network level access to these servers over
numerous ports. The Information Security Policy states that information
systems shall be configured to monitor and control communications at the
external boundaries of these systems and at key internal boundaries within
these systems.
As a result of these conditions, these servers were susceptible to unnecessary
access and compromise and potential disclosure of critical and sensitive data.
Although the Center’s servers are no longer hosted by DPSCS, the Center still
needs to ensure the servers are adequately secured regardless of who maintains
the equipment.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that, as required by the Information Security Policy, the
Center
a. continually update all of its servers with the latest operating system
security patches issued by the operating system vendors;
b. install anti-malware software on all of its servers and continually
maintain this software at current version levels with up-to-date anti-
malware signatures;
c. keep its servers up-to-date for all critical security-related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software; and
d. ensure network-level access to its servers is limited to only those
individuals/devices requiring such access over required ports.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Longitudinal Data
System Center for the period beginning July 1, 2013 and ending December 31,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the procurement of interagency agreements with
institutions of higher education and related disbursements, and information
technology systems.
Our audit did not include support services provided to the Center by the Maryland
State Department of Education (MSDE). These support services (including
payroll processing, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MSDE.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Center’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
10

--- Page 13 ---
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Center’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to the Center that did not warrant inclusion
in this report.
The Center’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Center regarding the
results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
February 24, 2016
Thomas J. Barnickel III, Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Rm 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel,
Enclosed are the Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center’s responses to the Legislative
Auditor’s current audit of the MLDSC for the period beginning July 1, 2013 and ending
December 31, 2014.
An electronic version was forwarded by email. If you have any questions or need additional
information please feel contact me at 410-706-2085 or Ms. Tejal Cherry, MLDS Center Chief
Information Officer at 410-767-7089.
Sincerely,
Ross Goldstein
Executive Director

--- Page 15 ---
MLDS Center Response
February 24, 2016
Page 2 of 4
Finding 1
The Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center procured certain services through an existing
interagency agreement rather than through a competitive procurement.
Recommendation
We recommend that the Center discontinue the practice of using interagency agreements as a mechanism
to avoid a competitive procurement process to obtain contractual services.
Agency Response
The Center concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The Center will discontinue the practice of
using an interagency agreement to procure vendor services.
In audit reports of other agencies, the auditor has noted similar findings regarding the improper use of
interagency agreements to hire contractors in prior audits. While the Center does not dispute the finding
or proposed recommendation, it is worth noting that the situation in this instance is different. First, the
purpose of the interagency agreement between UMB and the Center was to establish a Research Branch
for the Center that would utilize UMB’s faculty and expertise to deliver high quality research and analysis
to help inform Maryland policy makers. In fact, procuring vendor services was not even contemplated at
the time of initiating the interagency agreement. When the need for vendor services arose, it was the
understanding of both parties that UMB could procure the needed services since the services were directly
related to the underlying purpose of the interagency agreement. Second, while the Center directly
supervises and monitors the contractors, UMB researchers meet regularly with the contractors and work
in conjunction with the contractors to develop the functionality of the system to fit the researchers’ needs.
It is a collaborative process.
One of the two vendor contracts ended on December 31, 2015. Additional funds were added to that
contract prior to its conclusion to support work through the end of the year. The other vendor contract
was entered into in June of 2015, prior to the receipt of the auditor’s discussion notes. That contract will
end on June 30, 2016.

--- Page 16 ---
MLDS Center Response
February 24, 2016
Page 3 of 4
Finding 2
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) obtained from MHEC and DLLR was not properly
protected.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Center:
a. in accordance with its procedures, delete all decrypted files containing sensitive PII,
immediately after processing; and
b. enable encryption for all databases tables containing sensitive PII.
Agency Response
The Center concurs with the recommendations and notes that the recommended actions have been fully
implemented as of February 2015, when the hosting location was changed from the Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) data center to the MSDE data center.
The audit was conducted on the Center’s system as hosted by DPSCS. At the time of the audit, the
Center was in the process of migrating from the DPSCS facility in order to ensure greater access and
control over Center equipment and procedures. When the new MLDS Center IT capability was relocated
to reside within the MSDE Data Center, a new automated process was put in place to handle all data files
for processing. This automated process checks every hour for new files. When a file is discovered, it is
unencrypted, read into the Staging Database and placed into encrypted tables using database encryption.
Once the data loading process is complete, the file is deleted from the file folder, in which it was
originally placed and the data provider is notified. This entire process is usually completed within two to
three minutes.
A subsequent step in this automated process deconstructs the PII data into separate tables within the
database, where the SSN column data is encrypted for storage and replaced with a tokenized
representation of the SSN. This de-identifiable value is then associated with data for that person and
written into the database, which contains no PII data.
Finally, the MLDS Center was not granted administrative level access to data center servers at DPSCS so
that it could know that the unencrypted file folders existed. Immediately upon learning of this, the MLDS
Center established a secure server within the MSDE Data Center and applied appropriate encryption to
the files stored within the new server. The old server, located within the DPSCS data center has been
deactivated and all files that resided in that server were destroyed.

--- Page 17 ---
MLDS Center Response
February 24, 2016
Page 4 of 4
Finding 3
The Center’s servers, hosted by DPSCS, were not adequately stored.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that, as required by the Information Security Policy, the Center:
a. continually update all of its servers with the latest operating system security patches issued
by the operating system vendors;
b. install anti-malware software on all of its servers and continually maintain this software at
current version levels with up-to-date anti-malware signatures;
c. keep its servers up-to-date for all critical security-related updates to potentially vulnerable
installed software; and
d. ensure network-level access to its servers is limited to only those individuals/devices
requiring such access over required ports.
The Center concurs with the recommendations and notes that the recommended actions have been fully
implemented as of June 2015, when the hosting location was fully transitioned from the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) data center to the MSDE data center.
The MLDS Center did not have adequate authority over its system at the DPSCS data center. Once the
system resources were relocated to the MSDE data center, the physical servers were rebuilt with the latest
version of the operating system, where updates are reviewed monthly and applied as approved through a
formal change management process. Only upgrades that would cause disruption to the complex and
integrated MLDS Center environment are not implemented. All application and database servers are now
virtual servers using virtual storage, and placed behind the MSDE Data Center DMZ and firewalls.
Additionally, PII data has been deconstructed; restricted to the appropriate database; secured behind its
own firewall; and PII data is encrypted. Anti-Virus software has been installed on all MLDS Center
servers and workstations, with the MSDE Data Center providing updated versions of the software. Least
privileged access has been established behind the MSDE Data Center firewalls. Over the coming months,
the entire firewall will be substantially upgraded by replacing the current firewall with the managed
firewall protection through the Department of Information Technology.

--- Page 18 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
James J. Podhorniak, CFE
Staff Auditor
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditor