Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Developmental Disabilities Administration
Date: 11/18/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743b4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:24:05.135228
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Developmental Disabilities Administration
November 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII,CPA
ExecutiveDirector LegislativeAuditor
November 18, 2016
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Department ofHealth and
Mental Hygiene Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) for the
—
period beginning February 29, 2012 and ending April 12, 2015. DDA plans,
develops policies and regulations, and funds a Statewide system ofservices for
individuals with developmental disabilities (referred to as consumers) and their
families.
Our audit disclosed that DDA directed providers to collect certain copayments
from consumers, referred to as contribution to care (CTC), for services that should
have been paid for with State and federal funds. In fiscal year 2014, DDA
determined that it was incorrectly directing providers to collect CTC from
virtually all Medicaid-eligible consumers residing in residential habitation
facilities. Based on DDA’s estimates, the CTC incorrectly collected from
consumers priorto changing its practice could have approximated $4.2 million
annually. DDA management advised us these improper collections had been
occurring for many years. According to its legal counsel, DDA is not legally
obligated to returnthe amounts improperly paid by consumers. Also, DDA
believes that the administrative and financial costs to calculate the amounts
improperly collected outweigh the potential benefits to the affected consumers.
DDA’s decision not to pursue a remedy for this situation has not been
communicated to the General Assembly for its consideration.
DDA did not adequately monitor the contractual resource/service coordinators
who were responsible for planning, coordinating, and monitoring all services
delivered to approximately 25,000 DDA consumers. Specifically, DDA did not
determine whetherthe coordinators were ensuring that the consumers were
receiving required medical, habilitative, or rehabilitative services from providers,
as stipulated in their individual plans, and that Medicaid eligibility reassessments
301 West Preston Street• Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964’ Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
were conducted timely. DDA also did not adequately review the propriety of
resource/service coordinators’ invoices prior to payment. fiscal year 2015
expenditures totaled $39 million to the 18 contractors providing resource/service
coordinators.
DDA also did not negotiate the hourly rates for vendor employees hired beginning
in 2013 under two contracts with an overall cost totaling $8.1 million. The
vendor employees were hired to address systemic deficiencies with DDA’s
financial operating procedures and to provide financial restructuring advisory
support. The contract rates for four vendor employees ranged from $195 to $416
per hour. furthermore, DDA lacked an effective means to monitor payments and
control costs because the contracts did not contain the anticipated effort (hours) to
complete the related deliverables. Moreover, the full contract values were paid
even though some deliverables were not received; DDA did not attempt to modify
the contract to reduce its payments for those deliverables.
federal fund reimbursement requests were not always submitted timely, resulting
in lost interest income to the State ofapproximately $210,000. Additionally,
DDA did not conduct audits ofCommunity Supported Living Arrangement
providers to identify and recover overpayments. DDA also did not verify critical
adjustments that were processed in the Provider Consumer Information System,
resulting in errors, such as overpayments to providers, going undetected. finally,
DDA inappropriately stored certain sensitive personally identifiable information
without adequate safeguards.
In our preceding audit report, dated October 2, 2013, we reported that DDA’s
accountability and compliance level was unsatisfactory in accordance with the
rating system that we established in conformity with State law. Based on the
results ofour current audit, we have concluded that DDA has made some
improvement in its fiscal and compliance operations and, accordingly, DDA’s
accountability and compliance level is no longerunsatisfactory.
The Department’s response to this audit, on behalfofDDA, is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
during the course ofthis audit by DDA.
Respectfully submitted,
72
)
Thomas Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Developmentally Disabled Services Delivery Process 5
Federal Liability 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Contribution to Care
Finding 1 – DDA incorrectly directed providers to collect an estimated 8
$4.2 million annually from consumers for services that should have
been paid for with State and federal funds. DDA believes that its
administrative and financial costs to remedy this situation outweigh
the potential benefits to the affected consumers.
Consumers’ Services
* Finding 2 – DDA did not adequately monitor the resource/service 11
coordinators’ efforts to determine whether they were ensuring that
consumers received the required services from providers and that
Medicaid eligibility reassessments were conducted timely.
Finding 3 – DDA did not compare hours billed by the resource/service 13
coordinators with hours worked as recorded in its PCIS2 to ensure
payments were proper.
Financial Restructuring Contracts
Finding 4 – DDA did not negotiate the contract rates for either contract, 15
and DDA procured the second contract as an emergency
procurement even though certain services ultimately provided
under the contract did not appear to be emergencies as defined by
regulation.
Finding 5 – DDA lacked an effective means to monitor payments for 16
contract deliverables and similar deliverables were noted in both
contracts and certain contract modifications.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 6 – DDA did not effectively monitor the contracts and the 17
related payments. Certain deliverables were not received, vendor
invoices were not effectively reviewed, and DDA authorized the
contractor to perform work outside the scope of the contracts.
Federal Funds
* Finding 7 – Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely, 19
resulting in lost interest income totaling approximately $210,000.
Community Supported Living Arrangements
* Finding 8 – DDA did not conduct audits of Community Supported 20
Living Arrangement providers to identify and recover overpayments.
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)
Finding 9 – DDA did not verify critical adjustments that were processed 21
in PCIS2, resulting in errors such as overpayments going undetected,
and did not adequately restrict access to the system.
Finding 10 – The PCIS2 database contained 58,022 unique social 22
security numbers with associated names, dates of birth, and
addresses without adequate safeguards.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 24
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is an agency within the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH). The mission of DDA is to
provide leadership to assure the full participation of individuals with
developmental disabilities and their families in all aspects of community life, and
to promote their access to quality support and services necessary to foster
personal growth, independence, and productivity. DDA also administers the
Court Involved Service Delivery System which is responsible for serving
individuals committed to DHMH by the courts.
For persons with developmental disabilities and their families, DDA plans,
develops policies and regulations, and funds a Statewide system of services.
DDA coordinates its work with
other government, voluntary and
private health, education, and
welfare agencies. Through a
combination of private licensed
Medicaid providers, not-for-profit
licensed Medicaid providers, local
health departments, and Fiscal
Management Agencies, DDA
funds services to persons with
developmental disabilities. These services include an array of options from
residential to employment services.
DDA consists of a headquarters unit, four regional offices which administer
community-based services, two forensic residential centers under the Court
Involved Service Delivery System (the System), and two residential centers – the
Holly Center and the Potomac Center. Separate audits are conducted of the Holly
Center and the Potomac Center. This audit included the headquarters unit, the
four regional offices, and the System.
Developmentally Disabled Services Delivery Process
Consumer Eligibility and Provider Services
To obtain DDA services, a consumer submits an application to a DDA regional
office and, upon DDA’s approval, the consumer is assigned a category based on
priority; the consumer is then generally placed on a waiting list. Once a person
has been found eligible for DDA services and placed on a waiting list, he or she
5

--- Page 8 ---
does not apply for full DDA services until funding has been identified through
DDA’s defined placement categories. If the consumer is eligible for assistance,
federal funding is available to cover a portion of the service costs. The consumer
meets with a DDA contractor, referred to as a resource/service coordinator, who is
responsible for planning, coordinating, and monitoring all services delivered to
the consumer. As part of this responsibility, the resource/service coordinator
assists with developing an annual individual plan that describes the particular
care, including specific services, that the consumer is to receive from a provider.
When funding becomes available, the resource/service coordinator notifies the
consumer and facilitates finding an appropriate service provider.
Provider Payments
DDA has a prospective payment system whereby providers are paid prior to
services being rendered based on estimates of the services to be provided. The
majority of DDA’s expenditures are processed through DDA’s Provider
Consumer Information System II. At year-end, the providers submit records of
actual services provided, from which a reconciliation to payments previously
made is performed by DHMH’s Division of Cost Accounting and
Reimbursements. In addition, residential consumers are responsible for paying
the provider for a portion of their services which is referred to as “contribution to
care.” According to DHMH’s records, DDA provider and resource/service
coordinator payments for fiscal year 2015 totaled $876 million and $39 million,
respectively.
Federal Liability
DDA has a federal liability of approximately $34.1 million for which State
general funds may be needed. In June 2015, DDA was notified by the federal
Department of Health and Human Services – Office of Inspector General (DHHS
OIG) that DDA did not implement its Community Pathways waiver program in
accordance with federal requirements. Specifically, between July 1, 2010 and
June 30, 2013, DDA claimed and received federal reimbursement for $34.1
million in provider payments for add-on services for consumers who did not meet
the waiver program’s level-of-need requirement. DDA did not consider the
consumer’s level of need when approving the add-on services.
DHHS OIG recommended that DDA refund the overbilled amount to the federal
government. DDA did not concur with the recommendation and, in September
2015, DHMH, on behalf of DDA, issued a letter to the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) contesting the findings and recommendations. As of
September 30, 2016, CMS had not responded to DHMH.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Although DDA is disputing the disallowed claims, during the fiscal year 2016
closeout process, DHMH reported the federal liability to the Comptroller of
Maryland - General Accounting Division. As of September 2016, DDA had not
identified funding sources for the liability.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 13 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated October 2, 2013. We determined that DDA
satisfactorily addressed 10 of these findings. The remaining 3 findings are
repeated in this report.
In our preceding audit report, we reported that DDA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. Based on the results of our current
audit, we have concluded that DDA has improved its fiscal and compliance
operations to the point that DDA’s accountability and compliance level is no
longer unsatisfactory.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contribution to Care
Finding 1
Prior to fiscal year 2015, the Developmental Disabilities Administration
(DDA) incorrectly directed providers to collect an estimated $4.2 million
annually from certain consumers for their cost of care. DDA believes that its
administrative and financial costs to remedy this situation outweigh the
potential benefits to the affected consumers.
Analysis
Prior to fiscal year 2015, DDA incorrectly directed providers to collect certain
copayments from consumers, referred to as contribution to care (CTC), for
services that should have been paid for with State and federal funds. CTC is the
monthly amount that certain consumers in residential care are required to pay
providers, based on the consumer’s ability to pay, and it reduces DDA’s payments
to providers. Based on DDA’s estimates, the improper CTC collected from
consumers could approximate $4.2 million annually. DDA management advised
us these improper collections had been occurring for many years and that it did
not recall a time when this was not the practice.
According to legal counsel for the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene,
DDA has no legal obligation to return money to consumers who were incorrectly
charged for their cost of care. DDA advised us that, while not impossible to
accomplish, its administrative and financial costs to calculate the amounts
improperly collected outweigh the potential benefits to the affected consumers.
In fiscal year 2014, DDA determined that it was incorrectly directing providers to
collect CTC from virtually all Medicaid-eligible consumers residing in residential
habitation facilities, rather than just from “Optionally Categorically Needy”
consumers.1 Specifically, CTC was collected from individuals who resided in a
residential habitation facility that were eligible for Medicaid because they
received SSI, referred to as “Categorically Eligible.” Categorically Eligible
consumers have a lower income level than the Optionally Categorically Needy
consumers.
1 According to federal and State regulations, DDA is authorized to collect CTC from consumers
who are only eligible for Medicaid because they reside in an institutional setting. These
consumers are referred to as “Optionally Categorically Needy.” These regulations do not allow
CTC to be collected from any other Medicaid-eligible consumers such as consumers who receive
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) from the Social Security Administration. These consumers
are referred to as, “Categorically Eligible.”
8

--- Page 11 ---
DDA directed providers to stop collecting the CTC from these consumers,
effective July 2014. According to DDA’s recently completed analysis, during
calendar year 2013 DDA improperly directed providers to collect approximately
$4.2 million from 2,536 categorically eligible waiver participants. We determined
that DDA’s analysis methodology and estimates were reasonable.
While acknowledging the task would not be impossible, DDA does not believe
that it would be an appropriate effort to pursue a remedy to this situation for the
following reasons.
 The lack of sufficient data regarding individual CTC collections
 The significant effort involved in reviewing calculations and ascertaining
what was actually collected from the affected consumers
 The historical issue of providers having insufficient administrative
resources
 Legal constraints
 The potentially negative impact on the individuals and their services
For example, DDA advised that, while it maintains records of the CTC that
providers were supposed to collect, it does not know the amounts actually
collected each month by the providers for each of the affected consumers. Based
on its experience with provider recordkeeping, DDA asserts that obtaining this
information from some providers may not be possible. We question whether it is
necessary to determine the amounts actually collected based on provider records.
Considering the longevity of the problem, the impracticality (if not impossibility)
of determining the full extent of the overpayments, and the State’s culpability, we
believe that a reasonable approach would be to assume that all amounts required
to be paid by the affected consumers, as recorded in DDA’s records over a given
period, were actually collected and are therefore subject to being returned.
DDA also stated that legal restrictions under federal regulations would make it
significantly difficult to return funds to consumers. For example, the return of
funds could make some consumers ineligible for Medicaid because financial
limitations could be exceeded. DDA believes the simplest solution would be to
ask for a waiver from the federal government, a process it claims could take a
year or more, without knowing the ultimate outcome. Nevertheless, we believe
that the State has an obligation to pursue this matter with the federal government.
We were advised that DDA’s decision has not been communicated to the General
Assembly. Given DDA’s position, we believe that this matter should be
presented to the General Assembly for its consideration.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DDA
a. determine the extent of the improperly collected CTC, as practical; and
b. present this issue and basis for its decision to the General Assembly for its
consideration.
Consumers’ Services
Background
As of June 30, 2015, DDA had contracts with 18 contractors to provide
resource/service coordinators for which fiscal year 2015 expenditures totaled
approximately $39 million. The resource/service coordinators are responsible for
planning, coordinating, and monitoring all services delivered to 25,315 consumers
with service expenditures totaling approximately $876 million in fiscal year 2015.
Specifically, the resource/service coordinators are responsible for assisting DDA
and the consumers in the following areas:
 Individual Service Plan (ISP) - The ISP describes the particular care that the
consumer is to receive from a provider as required by State regulations. The
resource/service coordinators develop each consumer’s ISP and monitor the
related implementation of the plan by the providers.
 Medicaid Eligibility - Consumers must submit an application to receive a
waiver from the federal government that allows Medicaid to pay for services
delivered in the community. The resource/service coordinators assist the
consumers with the waiver application (completing the forms and gathering
the required supporting documents) and, once enrolled, monitor and follow up
on these consumers and assist with annual Medicaid eligibility reassessments
(getting financial information from consumers to enable the reassessments).
The resource/service coordinators document the results of their monitoring
efforts, including hours worked, in DDA’s Provider Consumer Information
System II (PCIS2) and report the hours worked to DDA on their monthly
invoices. DDA’s payments to the resource/service coordinators are based on the
hours reported by the resource/service coordinators and the rates established in
State regulations.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
DDA did not adequately monitor the resource/service coordinators’ efforts to
determine whether they were ensuring that consumers received the required
services from providers and that Medicaid eligibility reassessments were
conducted timely.
Analysis
DDA did not adequately monitor the efforts of the resource/service coordinators
to assess whether the coordinators were fulfilling their contractual responsibilities.
The failure of the coordinators to adequately perform their duties adversely
impacts service delivery to consumers and the recovery of federal funds. Similar
conditions were noted in our two preceding audit reports.
Consumer Service Delivery
DDA did not adequately monitor the performance of the resource/service
coordinators to ensure consumers received the required medical, habilitative, or
rehabilitative services from providers, as stipulated in their ISPs. The
resource/service coordinators were required to submit quarterly reports which
summarize their efforts (such as the number of consumers they assisted). DDA
did not obtain or use these reports and did not review the resource/service
coordinator case notes in PCIS2 to determine whether the required services were
provided.
Although DDA employees performed site visits at provider facilities to determine
whether the consumers were provided the required services, the visits were not
directed at the efforts of the resource/service coordinators to ensure the delivery
of all required services, and DDA did not follow up with the providers to ensure
any noted problems (such as medication that was not properly provided) were
corrected. According to its records, DDA performed site visits related to 912 of
the approximately 11,266 consumers in the Central Region in fiscal year 2015.
DDA did not maintain summary records of these visits, and did not track the
issues noted, even though we were advised that it was a common occurrence for
issues to be noted. In addition, DDA did not determine whether the
resource/service coordinators had identified similar issues and taken action.
Our tests of the monitoring performed by certain resource/service coordinators
disclosed that documentation was lacking to substantiate the effective monitoring
of services being provided to consumers under their supervision. Also, ISPs were
not always current or prepared in accordance with State regulations.
We selected one service included in the ISPs for 14 consumers monitored by two
resource/service coordinators during fiscal years 2013 through 2015 and reviewed
11

--- Page 14 ---
their case notes for a year to assess whether the services were monitored. Our
review disclosed that, for 9 consumers, the case notes did not contain evidence
that the resource/service coordinators had verified the delivery of the required
services. For example, the ISPs for 4 consumers stated that the consumers were
supposed to receive certain services, such as Supported Employment services
(consumers are provided support necessary to work in competitive employment in
the community); however, the case notes did not reflect that these services were
delivered during the period reviewed. In addition, for 10 of the 14 consumers,
either their prior year ISP had not been updated for the current year or the ISP did
not contain certain information as required by State regulations. For example, we
noted certain ISPs did not state the required staffing ratios for the facilities in
which the consumers resided or did not identify the consumer’s goals.
Medicaid Eligibility Reassessments
DDA did not ensure that the resource/service coordinators assisted with the
annual eligibility reassessments. DDA sent monthly automated reports to the
resource/service coordinators informing them of the consumers that were about to
lose or had lost Medicaid eligibility, but DDA did not ensure the coordinators
followed up on these consumers to obtain the financial information needed for the
reassessments. According to DDA records as of November 2015, 338 consumers
had lost Medicaid eligibility because the reassessments had not been performed.
Our test of 20 of these consumers disclosed that no action was taken by DDA for
17 consumers to ensure that the resource/service coordinators had attempted to
obtain the financial information needed for the reassessments, which were
overdue for periods ranging from 9 to 19 months. Since these consumers were
not Medicaid eligible during the period after Medicaid eligibility lapsed, services
provided to the consumers costing $493,000 were entirely State funded. The
future collectability of the federal reimbursement for these services will depend
on several factors, such as the consumers’ eligibility based on their current
income.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DDA
a. verify, at least on a test basis, that the resource/service coordinators are
effectively monitoring to ensure services are provided as required in the
ISPs and that adequate documentation is maintained (repeat);
b. follow up with providers to ensure corrective actions were taken for
issues noted during site visits;
c. ensure that ISPs are completed in accordance with State regulations;
d. ensure that annual eligibility reassessments of consumers are performed,
as required by federal regulations (repeat); and
12

--- Page 15 ---
e. determine if eligibility can be restored to the consumers who lost
Medicaid eligibility because reassessments were not timely performed,
including the aforementioned 17 consumers, and if federal
reimbursement can be obtained for services provided (repeat).
Finding 3
DDA did not compare hours billed by the resource/service coordinators with
hours worked as recorded in its PCIS2 to ensure payments were proper.
Analysis
DDA did not adequately review the propriety of resource/service coordinators’
invoices prior to payment. On a monthly basis, the resource/service coordinators
billed DDA for the number of hours spent providing consumers’ services, based
on established rates. However, DDA did not compare the hours billed with the
information within PCIS2 where the resource/service coordinators recorded their
hours worked and which was pre-populated with the associated rates. DDA
management advised us that it only referred to the detailed support on PCIS2 to
check for certain outliers, such as when invoices had excessive hours being billed
for a particular day.
Our review of 15 invoices received from two resource/service coordinator
contractors in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 totaling $18.7 million disclosed that 12
invoices totaling $17.5 million were approved and paid even though hours worked
as recorded in PCIS2 disclosed differences—resulting in both overpayments
($275,000) and underpayments ($263,000)—aggregating approximately
$538,000.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DDA compare the hours billed by the resource/service
coordinators with the hours worked as recorded in PCIS2 to ensure
payments are only made for hours worked, and investigate any differences
identified, including those noted above.
Financial Restructuring Contracts
Background
During our audit period, DDA entered into two contracts with a vendor to assist in
the financial restructuring of DDA operations. The first contract was procured as
a single-source award (that is, only one vendor submitted a bid) and the second
contract was procured as an emergency award (with no competing vendors).
13

--- Page 16 ---
These contracts operated concurrently and payments to the vendor under these
two contracts totaled $8.1 million, as detailed in the table on the following page.
Under the first contract, awarded in January 2013 for $1.3 million, the vendor was
to address systemic deficiencies with DDA’s financial operating procedures.
According to the technical proposal submitted by the vendor, five vendor
employees were to be assigned to the contract. The initial contract covered the
period from January through December 2013 with the option for two one-year
extensions. DDA exercised both contract extensions and processed three contract
modifications for a total contract cost of $4 million. The first contract ended in
February 2016.
The second contract for approximately $1.1 million was awarded in June 2013 to
the same vendor to provide financial restructuring advisory support, and to make
recommendations about DDA’s financial reporting structure and day-to-day
functions. According to the technical proposal submitted by the vendor, seven
vendor employees were to be assigned to the contract, including at least two
employees that were also assigned to the first contract. The initial contract
covered the period from June through December 2013 with the option for two six-
month extensions. DDA exercised both contract extensions and processed a $1
million contract modification for the vendor to provide services such as, certain
training to DDA personnel for a total contract cost of $4.1 million. The second
contract ended in June 2015.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Subsequent to our audit, DDA entered into a sole source contract with this vendor
to provide some of the same services that were provided under the first contract.
This new contract was for $2.7 million and covered the period from March 1,
2016 to February 28, 2018, and was not subject to our review.
Finding 4
DDA did not negotiate the contract rates for either contract, and DDA
procured the second contract as an emergency procurement even though
certain services ultimately provided under the contract did not appear to be
emergencies as defined by regulation.
Analysis
DDA did not negotiate the contract rates for either contract. In addition, DDA
procured the second contract as an emergency procurement even though certain
services provided did not appear to be emergencies as defined by regulation.
 DDA did not negotiate the contract rates proposed by the vendor for either
contract. Our review of the contracts disclosed that the first contract provided
for DDA to pay $250 per hour for the services of a project manager, at an
annual cost of $485,000, and to pay $195 per hour for the services of a
financial analyst at an annual cost of $378,300. The second contract provided
for DDA to pay $416 per hour for a programmatic leader, at an annual cost of
$665,496, and to pay $347 per hour for a finance director, at an annual cost of
$648,860. Further, the contracts did not describe the duties associated with
the positions and, therefore it was not possible to determine whether costs
were appropriate. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that the
contract awards and the hourly rates were reasonable and provided the best
value to the State.
State regulations provide that when only one responsive bid is received, the
contract should be awarded under the regulations for a sole source award
which require a negotiation of the proposed rates. DDA management advised
us that it did not negotiate the vendor’s pricing (including for the individuals
sighted as examples above) because it did not have a basis for which to
evaluate the proposals. We believe that further description of the duties
required under the contract would have enhanced DDA’s ability to determine
the reasonableness of the related costs, such as through comparison with other
State contracts or through other inquiries.
 DDA procured the second contract as an emergency procurement even though
the actual services performed by the vendor did not appear to constitute an
15

--- Page 18 ---
emergency under State regulations. DDA’s emergency justification stated that
there was an “urgent need for the development of effective policies and
procedures to ensure both timely delivery of services to individuals and
program integrity,” and a “related shift to fee-for-service targeted case
management services,” and that there were “longstanding challenges facing
the agency.”
However, DDA used the vendor to perform services such as ongoing reviews
of DDA’s budget and cost performance and various management processes.
In addition, as discussed in Findings 5 and 6, the scope of the second contract
was similar to the scope of the first contract, and DDA used this second
contract for work outside the contract scope. According to State regulations,
emergency procurements include services necessary to avoid or to mitigate
serious damage to public health, safety, and welfare.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DDA
a. negotiate vendor proposed rates when only one responsive bid is received,
and
b. ensure that emergency procurements are only used for emergency
situations as defined by regulation.
Finding 5
DDA lacked an effective means to monitor payments for contract
deliverables, and similar deliverables were included in both contracts and in
certain contract modifications.
Analysis
DDA lacked an effective means to ensure payments were commensurate with the
completion of contract deliverables. The contracts contained numerous
deliverables to be accomplished and various tasks to be performed. For example,
one contract required the contractor to perform tasks, such as “reviewing and
documenting budget monitoring processes” and “developing recommendations
for improved business and financial processes.” However, the contracts provided
for payment based on the number of hours worked, but did not establish the
vendor’s anticipated effort to complete the related deliverables and perform the
tasks. As a result, DDA had no effective means to control contract costs by
limiting payments to the agreed upon hours for successfully completed
deliverables and performed tasks.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Additionally, we noted similar deliverables in the two contracts and in certain
contract modifications. For example, both contracts required the vendor to
develop processes for rate-setting recommendations. DDA management could
not explain why these services were included in the second contract when the
services were already included in the scope of the first contract which was still in
effect. These similarities raise questions about whether the duplicate
requirements represented tasks for which additional contract funding was needed
or could potentially result in a situation in which DDA pays twice for the same
deliverable.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DDA
a. include the anticipated effort to complete deliverables in its contracts to
enable effective monitoring and to ensure the compensation for each
successfully completed deliverable is limited to the agreed-upon hours;
and
b. compare the overall contract payments with the deliverables received,
investigate any potentially duplicate payments and, in consultation with
the Office of the Attorney General, pursue recovery of any such
payments.
Finding 6
DDA did not effectively monitor the contracts and the related payments.
Certain deliverables were not received, vendor invoices were not effectively
reviewed, and DDA authorized the contractor to perform work outside the
scope of the contracts.
Analysis
DDA did not effectively monitor the contracts and the related payments. Certain
deliverables were not received, vendor invoices were not effectively reviewed,
and DDA authorized the vendor to perform work outside the scope of the
contracts.
 DDA did not monitor the contracts to ensure deliverables were received and
tasks were completed. Our tests of four deliverables that were specifically
described in the contracts disclosed that three of the deliverables were not
received even though the vendor has been paid the entire $8.1 million
provided for in the contracts. For example, one deliverable required the
vendor to document the planned computer system requirements for a new
DDA financial system. The deliverable was due to be completed by August
30, 2013 and the date was extended twice in subsequent contract
17

--- Page 20 ---
modifications until March 24, 2015. However, as of June 2016, the
deliverable was not received, and DDA management advised us that it will not
be provided by this vendor since it is now included in another contract.
Although (as noted in Finding 5) the contracts did not specify the vendor’s
anticipated effort to complete each deliverables, DDA did not attempt to
modify the contract to exclude a portion of the contract costs for the
deliverables that were not received or were no longer applicable.
 DDA did not always obtain or review vendor status reports required by the
contracts to support the amounts invoiced. The status reports identified the
vendor’s goals and accomplishments during the invoice period. While the
contracts did not specify the vendor’s anticipated effort to complete each task
(as noted in Finding 5), the status reports could be used by DDA as a tool to
evaluate the reasonableness of the hours charged for each task or deliverable.
Prior to January 2015, the vendor did not submit the required status reports
with each invoice. When the vendor began submitting the status reports, the
reports did not include hours for each task for comparison to the hours
charged on the invoices, and we were advised by DDA management that the
status reports were not used to determine the propriety of the invoices.
DDA also did not document that the vendor only used employees approved by
DDA as required by the contract. Our review of invoices dated from May
2014 through June 2015 disclosed that DDA paid $314,000 for three
employees but lacked documentation that the employees had been approved to
work.
 DDA verbally authorized the vendor to perform work outside the scope of the
contracts. The stated tasks and deliverables for both contracts were for
consultant or advisory services. However, DDA authorized the vendor to
perform routine fiscal services, such as approving invoices and preparing
journal entries, without executing a contract modification. We confirmed with
counsel to the Board of Public Works that these services were outside the
scope of the contracts. Additionally, we determined that the hourly rates of
two vendor employees who performed these routine fiscal services were
approximately $200 more per hour than the hourly rate of a DDA employee
who performed similar services.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DDA
a. establish a formal process to ensure deliverables are received and to
negotiate changes and modify related contracts to reduce costs when
deliverables are determined to be no longer necessary;
18

--- Page 21 ---
b. in consultation with the Attorney General, determine the feasibility of
recovering contract costs for deliverables that were not received on the
aforementioned contracts;
c. obtain the required status reports with sufficient detail to assist in
reviewing invoices and compliance with contract terms;
d. ensure payments are not made for unapproved vendor employees; and
e. seek contract modifications for services authorized beyond the scope of
the related contracts.
Federal Funds
Finding 7
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely, resulting in lost
interest income totaling approximately $210,000.
Analysis
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not always submitted timely, resulting
in lost interest income to the State of approximately $210,000 related to
expenditures incurred during the period from July 2011 through June 2015. In
accordance with DDA’s procedures, reimbursement requests should be made
within two months of the service date.
Our test of 36 federal fund reimbursement requests, totaling approximately $1.1
billion, disclosed that portions of each request tested totaling $92 million were
submitted from 1 to 21 months after the claims could have been submitted for
reimbursement in accordance with DDA procedures. For example, in January
2015, DDA’s reimbursement request contained $32.1 million in claims that were
for services dating back to July 2013. The recovery of these funds was up to 16
months late, resulting in the loss of interest income totaling $25,700. In this
regard, State general funds, which would have been otherwise available for
investment, were used to finance federal fund expenditures. DDA management
explained that the submissions were not timely for a number of reasons; for
example, certain claims were initially submitted with incorrect information by the
providers and required correction and resubmission for payment.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DDA ensure that future requests for federal fund
reimbursement are submitted timely (repeat).
19

--- Page 22 ---
Community Supported Living Arrangements
Finding 8
DDA did not conduct audits of Community Supported Living Arrangement
providers to identify and recover overpayments.
Analysis
DDA did not conduct audits of Community Supported Living Arrangement
(CSLA) providers to identify and recover overpayments. CSLA is a rate-based
program which provides services to consumers who live in their own homes, such
as assistance with activities of daily living. DDA historically contracted with a
vendor to audit the providers; however, the most recent contract with the vendor
was terminated in January 2014, and DDA did not procure a replacement or
directly conduct any audits. During fiscal year 2015, DDA paid CSLA providers
approximately $90 million for these services.
Providers enter the number of service hours provided to DDA clients directly into
PCIS2, which is the basis for DDA’s payments. The provider audits compared
the number of hours for which the providers were paid, according to PCIS2, with
the number of hours that services were rendered, according to provider records, to
determine if there were overpayments.
During our preceding audit, we noted that DDA contracted with a vendor to
perform audits but had not adequately pursued the overpayments identified in the
audits. Specifically, we reviewed all CSLA audits performed that identified
overpayments for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 claims; the audits noted that there
were 74 overpayments which we estimated totaled at least $390,000.
During our current audit, DDA management advised us that it could not recover
the aforementioned overpayments due to concerns with the quality of the
auditor’s work. However, DDA had not discussed the possibility of taking legal
action against the auditors with its legal counsel. DDA management further
advised that a subsequent contract was terminated shortly after it was procured
due to “changes in the understanding of the expected scope of work.” DDA is in
the process of developing a request for proposal (RFP) for the audit services but,
as of June 2016, no RFP had been issued.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DDA
a. consult with legal counsel to determine whether to take legal action
against the auditor,
b. ensure audits are conducted to verify the propriety of amounts paid to
CSLA providers, and
20

--- Page 23 ---
c. recover any overpayments identified through CSLA audits (repeat).
Provider Consumer Information System II (PCIS2)
Background
DDA operates PCIS2 which provides a mechanism to pay providers by allowing
providers to access and enter program information into a centralized database
using an Internet connection. For example, providers use PCIS2 to enter
consumer attendance information which, in conjunction with approved payment
rates programmed into PCIS2, is used to calculate payments due the providers.
DDA employees also access PCIS2 via local area networks to perform critical
provider and consumer activities, such as modifying consumer services, and
processing the majority of DDA’s expenditures. According to DDA’s records, as
of June 15, 2015 there were 1,778 system users of which 1,610 were providers.
Fiscal year 2015 expenditures processed through PCIS2 totaled approximately
$915 million.
Finding 9
DDA did not verify critical adjustments that were processed in PCIS2,
resulting in errors such as overpayments going undetected, and did not
adequately restrict access to the system.
Analysis
DDA did not verify critical adjustments that were processed in PCIS2, resulting in
errors going undetected, and did not adequately restrict access to the system.
 DDA had not established online or manual controls over critical adjustments
to provider accounts. The adjustments were manually processed by DDA
employees without any independent review and, therefore, errors would not be
detected. Adjustments were made for a number of reasons. For example,
year-end reconciliations between the amounts prepaid to providers and the
cost of actual provider services rendered often resulted in adjustments for
amounts owed or due. Our test of four payment adjustments totaling
$568,000 made in fiscal year 2016 identified two adjustments that were
incorrectly processed by DDA employees totaling $505,000. Most likely as a
result of data entry errors, these incorrect adjustments resulted in one vendor
being overpaid $330,000 and a $175,000 receivable due from another vendor
being erroneously eliminated. After we notified DDA management, DDA
advised us that it took steps to correct these adjustments and recovered funds
as appropriate.
21

--- Page 24 ---
 DDA did not periodically review user access to ensure PCIS2 access was
limited to appropriate users. Our test of access capabilities for 10 DDA users
disclosed that 9 had access not required for their job duties. For example, one
employee was granted unnecessary access to modify payments. The State of
Maryland’s Information Security Policy states that agencies must support the
“least possible privilege” security strategy in which users are only granted the
access needed to perform assigned tasks.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DDA
a. establish independent review procedures to ensure the propriety, at least
on a test basis, of critical adjustments processed in PCIS2;
b. take immediate action to ensure that any improper adjustments identified
are corrected and funds are recovered;
c. perform a documented periodic review of user access capabilities to
ensure that users are assigned only those capabilities needed to perform
job duties; and
d. eliminate unnecessary access, including those noted above.
Finding 10
The PCIS2 database contained 58,022 unique social security numbers with
associated names, dates of birth, and addresses without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
DDA inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) in
clear text. Specifically, as of August 28, 2015, we determined that the PCIS2
database contained 58,022 unique social security numbers for consumers along
with names, dates of birth, and addresses in clear text. In addition, we determined
that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating controls.
This PII, which is commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft, should
be protected by appropriate information system security controls. The State of
Maryland Information Security Policy states that agencies should protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DDA
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
22

--- Page 25 ---
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for the
period beginning February 29, 2012 and ending April 12, 2015. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DDA’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal funds, provider fee payment systems,
procurements, and disbursements for consumer services. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DDA by the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. These support services (such as
payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the Department’s Office
of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of DDA’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including DDA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DDA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
24

--- Page 27 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We also extracted data from the Medicaid
Management Information System (MMIS II) and from DDA’s Provider
Consumer Information System II (PCIS2) for the purpose of selecting test items
and assessing user access. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DDA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DDA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
In our preceding audit report, we reported that DDA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we
established in conformity with State law. Our current audit disclosed DDA has
improved its fiscal and compliance operations and, accordingly, DDA’s
accountability and compliance level is no longer unsatisfactory. Our rating
conclusion has been made solely pursuant to the aforementioned law and rating
25

--- Page 28 ---
guidelines approved by the Joint Audit Committee. The rating process is not a
practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
The Department’s response, on behalf of DDA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
26

--- Page 29 ---
APPENDIX
STATE Of MARYLAND
I
4akhy
p— fl
Hea’thy Maryland Department ofHealth and Mental Hygiene
LarryHogan, Governor BoydK. Rutherford, Lt. Governor Van T. Mitchell, Secretary
November 17, 2016
Mr. Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office ofLegislative Audits
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Bam:’’
Thank you for your letter regarding the draft audit report for the Department ofHealth
and Mental Hygiene Developmental Disabilities Administration for the period beginning
—
february 29, 2012 through April 12, 2015. Enclosed you will find the Department’s response
and plan ofcorrection that addresses each audit recommendation.
I will work with the appropriate administration directors, program directors and deputy
secretary to promptly address the audit exceptions. In addition, the Office ofthe Inspector
General’s Division ofInternal Audits will followup on the recommendations to ensure
compliance.
Ifyou have any questions or require additional information, please do not hesitate to
contact me at (410) 767-4639 or Megan Davey Limarzi, Inspector General, at (410) 767-5862.
Sincerely,
secretary
cc: Bernard Simons, Deputy Secretary, Developmental Disabilities, DHMH
Valerie A. Roddy, Deputy Director fiscal & Operations, DHMH
—
Megan Davey Limarzi, Inspector General, DHMH
Elizabeth Morgan, Assistant Inspector General, DHMH
Shawn Cain, ChiefofStaff, DHMH
Tollfree 1-877-4MD-DHMH TTYIMarylandRelay Service 1-800-735-2258
—
Web Site: www.dhmh.maryland.gov

--- Page 30 ---
DHMH Developmental Disabilities Administration
Audit Response
Contribution to Care
Finding 1
Prior to fiscal year 2015, the Developmental Disabilities Administration
(DDA) incorrectly directed providers to collect an estimated $4.2 million
annually from certain consumers for their cost of care. DDA believes that its
administrative and financial costs to remedy this situation outweigh the
potential benefits to the affected consumers.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DDA
a. determine the extent of the improperly collected CTC, as practical; and
b. present this issue and basis for its decision to the General Assembly for its
consideration.
Administration’s Response
a. The DDA does not concur with the recommendation. In Fiscal Year 2014, the
DDA learned that recipients of DDA residential services who are categorically
eligible for the Community Pathway Waiver Program are not subject to the
Medicaid requirement of contributing to their cost of care (CTC). In January
2014, the DDA instructed providers of residential services to stop collecting
the contribution to the cost of care from these individuals.
The process of determining the amount of CTC collected from categorically
eligible individuals is more complicated than it may seem. The challenges to
accurately determinate the amount of CTC collected are:
 The DDA database has a record of how much was supposed to be
collected by residential service providers but not the actual amount
collected;
 Medicaid would have to verify that the 2,536 participants are exempt from
the CTC requirement for each month of eligibility prior to January 2014;
 A person’s income varies month to month and is unique;
 Residential service providers would have to go through the records of the
2,536 participants for each month to confirm how much, if any, CTC was
collected;
1

--- Page 31 ---
Furthermore, the issue of the impact on the participants’ Medicaid eligibility
and whether the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid would approve a plan to
minimize any adverse impact remains unknown. For CY 2013, the value of
services provided to the 2,536 individuals was $206 million. Any adverse
impact on the individuals and their services could be significant.
Auditor’s Comment: We believe that determining the extent of the CTC
that was improperly collected would be helpful to the General Assembly
during its consideration of this situation. Ultimately, the response of the
General Assembly will guide any further actions to be taken.
b. The DDA concurs with the recommendation and agrees to present this issue
and the basis for its decision to the General Assembly for its consideration.
2

--- Page 32 ---
Consumers’ Services
Finding 2
DDA did not adequately monitor the resource/service coordinators’ efforts to
determine whether they were ensuring that consumers received the required
services from providers and that Medicaid eligibility reassessments were
conducted timely.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DDA
a. verify, at least on a test basis, that the resource/service coordinators are
effectively monitoring to ensure services are provided as required in the
ISPs and that adequate documentation is maintained (repeat);
b. follow up with providers to ensure corrective actions were taken for
issues noted during site visits:
c. ensure that ISPs are completed in accordance with State regulations;
d. ensure that annual eligibility reassessments of consumers are performed,
as required by federal regulations (repeat); and
e. determine if eligibility can be restored to the consumers who lost
Medicaid eligibility because reassessments were not timely performed,
including the aforementioned 17 consumers, and if federal
reimbursement can be obtained for services provided (repeat).
Administration’s Response
a. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA implemented several
strategies to monitor the performance of resource/service coordinators since the
last OLA audit; however, the DDA recognizes that improvements are needed.
The DDA has incorporated functionality in the LTSS design that will enable
the DDA to monitor the CCS’ activity relative to ensuring that a person is
receiving the services contained in their Individual Plan (IP). In the interim,
however, staff in the regional offices will conduct random sampled quarterly
reviews of IP's, CCS case notes, and billing of CCS providers to ensure the CCS
are monitoring services to individuals to ensure the services are in alignment
with their IP’s.
b. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA regional office staff
will follow up with the provider when the corrective action is not complete.
c. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA will pull quarterly
reports from PCIS2 and distribute them to the regional offices to identify
which CCS entity did not complete IP’s on time in the previous quarter. For
3

--- Page 33 ---
those that are not in compliance, the CCS entity will be required to follow up
with the regional office staff with a corrective action plan.
d. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. After the last OLA Audit, DDA
implemented additional communications regarding annual eligibility
redeterminations and a 10% audit of individuals who lost eligibility. The
audit strategy has improved the efforts of Coordinators of Community
Services (CCS) to ensure individuals maintain waiver eligibility; however, the
DDA is exploring proactive approaches to minimize the number of people
who lose waiver eligibility.
e. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA has reviewed the 17
consumers who lost eligibility. Thirteen of the 17 have been re-enrolled in the
waiver and 4 reapplied, but were denied as ineligible. Federal reimbursement
has been obtained for those re-enrolled to the extent possible.
4

--- Page 34 ---
Finding 3
DDA did not compare hours billed by the resource/service coordinators with
hours worked as recorded in its PCIS2 to ensure payments were proper.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DDA compare the hours billed by the resource/service
coordinators with the hours worked as recorded in PCIS2 to ensure
payments are only made for hours worked, and investigate any differences
identified, including those noted above.
Administration’s Response
The DDA concurs with the recommendation. Invoices submitted by
resource/service coordination agencies are based on activities recorded in PCIS2.
The invoices are reviewed by DDA based on a documented protocol. DDA will
add a step to the protocol to ensure that invoices in the future are compared to the
hours worked that are recorded in PCIS2.
The differences noted in the analysis were addressed through the monthly
reconciliation process. The result was DDA recouped an overpayment from one
provider and owed $300 to another provider, which was paid.
5

--- Page 35 ---
Financial Restructuring Contracts
Finding 4
DDA did not negotiate the contract rates for either contract, and DDA
procured the second contract as an emergency procurement even though
certain services ultimately provided under the contract did not appear to be
emergencies as defined by regulation.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DDA
a. negotiate vendor proposed rates when only one responsive bid is received,
and
b. ensure that emergency procurements are only used for emergency
situations as defined by regulation.
Administration’s Response
a. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA will negotiate the
proposed rates when only one responsive bid is received. DDA now
documents the justification for rates proposed by successful vendors as part of
the contract approval process.
b. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The emergency contract was
initiated and processed by the previous administration. In the future, the DDA
will ensure that any emergency procurements meet the criteria defined by
regulations.
6

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 5
DDA lacked an effective means to monitor payments for contract
deliverables, and similar deliverables were included in both contracts and in
certain contract modifications.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DDA
a. include the anticipated effort to complete deliverables in its contracts to
enable effective monitoring and to ensure the compensation for each
successfully completed deliverable is limited to the agreed-upon hours;
and
b. compare the overall contract payments with the deliverables received,
investigate any potentially duplicate payments and, in consultation with
the Office of the Attorney General, pursue recovery of any such
payments.
Administration’s Response
a. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA will include the
anticipated effort to complete deliverables in its contracts to enable effective
monitoring and to ensure the compensation for each successfully completed
deliverable is limited to the agreed-upon hours, when a fixed price contract is
appropriate and in the best interest of the State. The Request for Proposal that
led to the contract did not require the vendor to include the anticipated level of
effort associated with specific deliverables or task.
b. The DDA does not concur with the recommendation. The DDA has agreed
that the deliverables were broad and that the DDA lacked an effective means
to monitor payments for contract deliverables; therefore, it would be difficult
to identify specific work performed under each contract to determine any
duplicate payments as suggested in the recommendation.
Auditor’s Comment: While it may be difficult to determine if duplicate
payments were made under these contracts, this does not preclude DDA
from attempting to obtain necessary documentation from the vendor and
verifying that funds paid were proper, especially considering the apparent
overlap of the deliverables under simultaneous contracts.
7

--- Page 37 ---
Finding 6
DDA did not effectively monitor the contracts and the related payments.
Certain deliverables were not received, vendor invoices were not effectively
reviewed, and DDA authorized the contractor to perform work outside the
scope of the contracts.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DDA
a. establish a formal process to ensure deliverables are received and to
negotiate changes and modify related contracts to reduce costs when
deliverables are determined to be no longer necessary;
b. in consultation with the Attorney General, determine the feasibility of
recovering contract costs for deliverables that were not received on the
aforementioned contracts;
c. obtain the required status reports with sufficient detail to assist in
reviewing invoices and compliance with contract terms;
d. ensure payments are not made for unapproved vendor employees; and
e. seek contract modifications for services authorized beyond the scope of
the related contracts.
Administration’s Response
a. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA did not have a formal
process by which to monitor the contract. Deliverables were not formally
accepted but were recognized as complete when interim processes were
implemented and/or when new or revised documents were released for use.
The DDA implemented a documented process by which to accept deliverables
in March 2016.
b. The DDA does not concur with the recommendation. The DDA has agreed
that the contracts had broad deliverables and that the contracts did not include
a level of effort for each deliverable which would make this recommendation
difficult to implement.
Auditor’s Comment: Given the broad deliverables and the lack of the
level of effort required for each deliverable, it may be difficult to identify
and quantify contract costs that were inappropriately paid. However, we
continue to believe that DDA should, in consultation with the Attorney
General, identify deliverables not received and pursue recovery of
amounts inappropriately paid.
c. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. New procedures were
implemented in March 2016 by the DDA to verify proper payments. Invoices
8

--- Page 38 ---
associated with recent contracts include a breakdown of hours spent working
on specific deliverables and weekly status reports outline work performed.
d. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. Contracts approved since
January 2016 require a vendor to submit a written request to the Contract
Monitor to substitute key personnel. Key personnel changes have to be
approved prior to the vendor billing for the new personnel.
e. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA agrees that the
vendor was asked to perform tasks that were outside the scope of work. In the
future, the DDA will ensure that only tasks included in the scope of work are
performed by a vendor and will pursue a contract modification for services
beyond the scope of the related contract.
9

--- Page 39 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 7
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely, resulting in lost
interest income totaling approximately $210,000.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DDA ensure that future requests for federal fund
reimbursement are submitted timely (repeat).
Administration’s Response
The DDA concurs with the recommendation, however, this issue will continue
until the DDA is able to transition from a legislatively mandated prospective
payment system for community based providers to a reimbursement model.
Pursuant to legislation passed in 2014, the DDA will be able to make the change
once an independent, cost-driven rate setting study is complete. The study is
currently underway and the final report with recommendation is due January
2017.
In the interim, the DDA will continue its efforts to submit claims timely which
have dramatically reduced lost interest. In FY 2002, the OLA cited the potential
loss of $4 million. The November 2009 audit cited the potential loss amount to
$421,000. The amount was further reduced in October 2013 to $262,000 and has
now been identified as only $210,000 or less than 0.025% of all federal revenue
collected during the audit period.
10

--- Page 40 ---
Community Supported Living Arrangements
Finding 8
DDA did not conduct audits of Community Supported Living Arrangement
providers to identify and recover overpayments.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DDA
a. consult with legal counsel to determine whether to take legal action
against the auditor,
b. ensure audits are conducted to verify the propriety of amounts paid to
CSLA providers, and
c. recover any overpayments identified through CSLA audits (repeat).
Administration’s Response
a. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA is working with the
Office of the Attorney General to determine whether to take action against the
auditor engaged to perform the CSLA audits.
b. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. During the audit period the
DDA was unable to procure a vendor for this service. As of August 31, 2015,
CSLA was discontinued as a funded service and was replaced by Personal
Supports. The DDA is in the process of developing a Request for Proposals
which will include utilization review of all services funded by the DDA.
c. The DDA does not concur with the recommendation. In 2013, when the
DDA began exploring overpayment recoveries of the audits, the previous
vendor was unable to produce adequate documentation to support the
calculation of overpayments. In a further attempt to implement the recovery of
overpayments, the DDA contacted the regional offices to obtain available
documentation to support the overpayments. Through this process, DDA
found that the vendor had not been conducting exit conferences to share
information or discussion notes, so there was no opportunity for providers to
view any audit findings or provide additional supporting documentation
related to the audits.
The data provided by the previous vendor and the regional offices was not
adequate to determine if any overpayment had occurred and to justify a
recovery if challenged by a provider. As such, DDA was unable to proceed
with the recovery process for the previous audits and shifted its efforts to
ensuring that gaps identified in the previous process would not persist in
11

--- Page 41 ---
future audits conducted by a new vendor. Thus, overpayments identified as
the result of any future audits will be recovered accordingly.
Auditor’s Comment: Our recommendation to recover any overpayments
identified through CSLA audits was prospective in nature; we did not
intend that DDA attempt to recover past potential overpayments. The
Department has agreed to recover overpayments resulting from future
audits.
12

--- Page 42 ---
Provider Consumer Information System (PCIS2)
Finding 9
DDA did not verify critical adjustments that were processed in PCIS2,
resulting in errors such as overpayments going undetected, and did not
adequately restrict access to the system.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DDA
a. establish independent review procedures to ensure the propriety, at least
on a test basis, of critical adjustments processed in PCIS2;
b. take immediate action to ensure that any improper adjustments identified
are corrected and funds are recovered;
c. perform a documented periodic review of user access capabilities to
ensure that users are assigned only those capabilities needed to perform
job duties; and
d. eliminate unnecessary access, including those noted above.
Administration’s Response
a. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA is in the process of
transitioning its prospective payment process to a reimbursement payment
system and transitioning from PCIS2 to the Medicaid LTSS system. These
long-term efforts will address many of the DDA’s longstanding weaknesses.
One such weakness is the manual processing of payment adjustments.
In the interim, a process was implemented with the January 2016 quarterly
payment where the Division of Cost Accounting and Reconciliation (DCAR)
reviews the adjustments entered into PCIS2 prior to the DDA processing the
quarterly payment in order to identify and correct errors before payment is
made by DDA. Additionally, since all adjustments are entered in the current
year, they are included in the DCAR reconciliation that will double check all
payments to providers against the provided service.
b. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. The DDA has investigated and
taken appropriate action to correct the adjustments noted.
c., d. The DDA concurs with the recommendations. The DDA will revise its
procedures to include a periodic review of user access capabilities to ensure
staff only have access necessary to perform their job duties. The DDA is
currently reviewing the level of access of the 9 staff identified in the
analysis to ensure they have the least possible access privilege and will
make the necessary adjustments to comply with the State’s Information
Security Policy.
13

--- Page 43 ---
Finding 10
The PCIS2 database contained 58,022 unique social security numbers with
associated names, dates of birth, and addresses without adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DDA
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected.
Administration’s Response
a. The DDA concurs with the recommendation. In October 2015, the DDA
completed an inventory of its system and identified all sensitive PII.
b., c., d. The DDA concurs with the recommendations. A review of sensitive PII
currently collected in PCIS2 reveals the information is required in order
for the administration to administer services. The DDA has found the
information collected could be further protected beyond the Department’s
firewall with encryption or other mitigating controls. Therefore, the DDA
immediately began taking measures to implement encryption
technologies offered under the current license owned by the
Administration. DDA tested the encryption algorithms on a test server
and deployed in production the weekend of October 31, 2015.
14

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Terry S. Gibson, CFE
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Jaime A. DeWitt, CPA
Wesley M. Elder, CPA
Jessica A. Foux, CPA, CFE
James J. Podhorniak, CFE
Staff Auditors
Robert H. Dean
Information Systems Staff Auditor