Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Patuxent Institution and Women's Facilities


NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Patuxent Institution and Women's Facilities due to the establishment of the DPSCS - Central Region Finance Office.
Date: 04/09/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745b6
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:28:44.614712
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Patuxent Institution
and
Women’s Facilities
April 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 9, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Patuxent Institution and the Women’s Facilities (hereinafter
referred to collectively as the Institutions) of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services for the period beginning November 1, 2005 and ending
September 30, 2008. The Institutions comprise maximum and minimum security
correctional institutions located in Jessup, Maryland and in Baltimore City.
Our audit disclosed that controls over the processing of cash receipts were not
sufficient because initial accountability was not established upon receipt and
verifications were not performed to ensure that all collections were deposited.
We also noted that Institutions had not established proper internal controls over
corporate purchasing cards and payroll. Finally, the Institutions had satisfactorily
resolved the eight findings contained in our preceding audit report dated March
15, 2006.
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Office of the
Secretary’s response, on behalf of the Institutions, to this audit is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
during the course of this audit by the Institutions.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Cash Receipts
Finding 1 – Controls Over Cash Receipts Were Not Sufficient 6
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 2 – Adequate Controls Were Not Established Over Corporate 6
Purchasing Cards
Payroll
Finding 3 – Controls Were Not Adequate Over the Processing of 7
Payroll and a Duplicate Payment Was Made to a Former Employee
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Patuxent Institution and the Women’s Facilities (the Maryland Correctional
Institution for Women and the Pre-Release Unit for Women) are separate
budgetary units within the Division of Correction of the Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services, and consist of the following facilities for adult
offenders.
Correctional Facilities Covered in This Audit
Inmate
Security Population as of
Facility Location
Level September 30,
2008
Maximum
Patuxent Institution Jessup, MD 841
Security
Maryland Correctional Maximum
Jessup, MD 819
Institution for Women Security
Pre-Release Unit for Minimum
Baltimore City 133
Women Security
Total 1,793
Source: Institution and Women’s Facilities’ inmate records
According to the State’s records, the Patuxent Institution’s expenditures totaled
approximately $47 million during fiscal year 2008. In addition, the Institution’s
fiscal year 2008 appropriation provided for 524 positions, including 405
correctional officers. Furthermore, the Institution provides payroll and certain
financial support services, including cash receipts and disbursement processing, to
the Women’s Facilities.
According to the State’s records, the total Women’s Facilities expenditures were
approximately $35.2 million during fiscal year 2008. In addition, the Facilities’
fiscal year 2008 appropriation provided for 393 positions, including 296
correctional officers.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 15, 2006. We determined that the
Institutions had satisfactorily resolved those findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Controls over cash receipts were not sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over the Institutions’ cash receipts, which totaled approximately $1.8
million in fiscal year 2008, were not sufficient. Specifically, cash receipts were
not always restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon receipt. Instead,
cash receipts were often forwarded to and handled by at least one additional
individual before these functions were performed. Furthermore, deposit
verification procedures had not been established to ensure that all collections were
subsequently deposited. Under these conditions, errors or other discrepancies
could occur without timely detection.
Recommendation 1
We recommend
a. that all cash receipts be restrictively endorsed and recorded upon receipt;
and
b. that the initial record of all cash receipts be verified to validated bank
deposit documentation by an employee independent of the collection and
deposit functions, and that this verification be documented.
We advised the Institutions on accomplishing the necessary separation of
duties using existing personnel.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 2
Adequate controls were not established over corporate purchasing cards.
Analysis
The Institutions lacked adequate controls over its corporate purchasing cards.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• The employee who ordered new cards for the Institutions from the vendor
bank (through the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services -
Office of the Secretary) also received the cards from the Department.
Consequently, purchasing cards could be issued to unauthorized employees
and discrepancies could occur without timely detection.
6

--- Page 9 ---
• Our test of 64 purchasing card transactions totaling approximately $81,000
disclosed that, for 61 of the transactions, the Institutions’ finance office
personnel did not document the reviews performed of the related cardholder
activity logs and supporting documentation, as required. For example, the
signature of the fiscal officer or designee was missing in many instances.
The Comptroller of the Treasury’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy
and Procedures Manual requires that the employee who requests purchasing
cards should not be the employee who receives and distribute the cards. The
Manual also requires that approved cardholder activity logs, along with
documentation for every purchase, be reviewed by the fiscal officer or designee.
According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2008, the
Institutions’ purchasing card expenditures totaled approximately $1.1 million.
There were 36 cards issued.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Institutions comply with the requirements of the
Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual by
ensuring
a. that the employee who requests purchasing cards from the Department
not also receive the cards, and
b. that the reviews of the cardholder activity logs by the fiscal officer or
designee are documented.
We advised the Institutions on accomplishing the necessary separation of
duties using existing personnel.
Payroll
Finding 3
Employee time records were not always signed and a duplicate payment was
made to a former employee.
Analysis
We noted the following conditions related to the Institutions’ payroll, which
totaled approximately $57 million during fiscal year 2008:
• Employee time records were frequently not signed by the applicable
employee. Our review of 41 time records prepared for the pay period ending
May 20, 2008 disclosed that 17 were not signed by the applicable employee,
as required by State regulations. Although supervisory personnel signed the
7

--- Page 10 ---
records, it is important that employees also sign the records to provide
accountability for recorded time and leave data.
• Our test of 14 payroll adjustments totaling approximately $102,400 disclosed
that the Institutions made a duplicate payment to a retired employee for
unused leave. Specifically, the Institutions’ records for the pay period ending
December 4, 2007 disclosed a payment of $15,855 for an individual who
retired effective November 30, 2007. A duplicate payment was processed for
this individual for the pay period ending January 1, 2008. In this instance, the
Institutions did not follow the existing procedures for unused leave payments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend
a. that all time records be signed by the applicable employee,
b. that the existing procedures be reinforced to ensure that future duplicate
payments are not made, and
c. that the Institutions recover any overpaid amounts regarding the
aforementioned retired employee.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Patuxent Institution and Women’s Facilities of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (referred to as the
Institutions) for the period beginning November 1, 2005 and ending September
30, 2008. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Institutions’
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Institutions’ operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Patuxent Institution provides payroll and certain financial support services to
the Women’s Facilities. Since these support services represent a significant part
of our audit effort with respect to the activities of the Women’s Facilities, a
combined audit report is being issued.
The Institutions’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Institutions’ ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Institutions that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Office of the
Secretary’s response, on behalf of the Institutions, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 16 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Howard A. Marzolf, III
Staff Auditor