Title: Maryland State Department of Education
Date: 02/20/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743d0
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:37:25.026903
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Department of Education
June 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Federal Funds
Finding 1 – Statewide Indirect Cost Recoveries Totaling $12.3 Million 6
Were Not Reverted to the General Fund as Required by State Law
Finding 2 – MSDE Did Not Recover Federal Expenditures in a Timely 6
Manner, Resulting in Lost Interest Income of $140,000
Interagency Agreements
Finding 3 – MSDE Improperly Used Interagency Agreements with a State 7
University to Staff Its Chief Information Officer Position, and the
Agreements Lacked Details to Facilitate Effective Monitoring
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 4 – State Regulations for Procuring Services Were Not Always 10
Adhered to and the Procedures for Monitoring Contractor Performance
Were Not Sufficient
Cash Receipts
* Finding 5 – Certain Collections Were Not Promptly Endorsed and Recorded, 12
and Prenumbered Receipt Forms Were Not Accounted for
Child Care Programs
* Finding 6 – MSDE Did Not Ensure Criminal Background Checks Were 14
Obtained for All Child Care Facility Employees and the Results of Such
Checks Indicating Necessary Follow-up Were Not Always Pursued
Finding 7 – User Access to the Child Care Administration Tracking System 15
Was Not Adequately Restricted to Only Those Individuals Requiring
Access to Perform Their Jobs and to Prevent the Recording of Improper
Transactions
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems and Controls
Finding 8 – Contractors Had Unnecessary Network Level Access to 17
Numerous Critical MSDE Servers and Workstations Unrelated to the
Projects They Were Assigned
Finding 9 – MSDE Did Not Properly Safeguard Sensitive Personally 17
Identifiable Information and Malware Protection Over MSDE
Workstations Could Be Inappropriately Disabled
* Finding 10 – Disaster Recovery Plans for Two Locations Were Not 18
Comprehensive and Backups of Certain Critical Databases Were Not
Stored Offsite
Reporting of Employee Misconduct
Finding 11 – MSDE Did Not Make Timely Disclosure to the Appropriate 19
Legal Authorities of Certain Questionable Payroll and Personnel
Activity Related to Five Employees
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), as the staff agency of the
State Board of Education, supports the development and operation of educational
and library programs throughout the State. MSDE is responsible for setting
Statewide goals for school performance, monitoring school achievement,
distributing financial aid, and providing technical assistance to local school and
library systems. MSDE also operates educational programs in the State’s juvenile
services facilities and provides services to people with disabilities. Finally,
MSDE oversees child care programs and family support centers in the State.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, MSDE’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $7.4 billion, which included $7.1 billion in
grant-related expenditures that are primarily awarded to local education agencies.
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center
Effective July 1, 2010, Chapter 190, Laws of Maryland 2010 established the
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center as an independent unit of State
government under the direction of a 12-member governing board. The Center is
responsible for overseeing and maintaining the Maryland Longitudinal Data
System, a statewide data system that contains individual-level student and
workforce data from all levels of education and the State’s workforce. In fiscal
years 2011 through 2013, no appropriations were included in the State’s budget
for the Center, and activity relating to the Center was conducted on its behalf by
MSDE. Beginning in fiscal year 2014, the Center received its own appropriation;
however, it continues to rely on MSDE for various financial support services,
such as payroll and purchasing. These support services were included in the
scope of this audit.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 20, 2013. We determined that
MSDE satisfactorily addressed five of these eight findings. The remaining three
findings are repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Federal Funds
Finding 1
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) did not revert
statewide indirect cost recoveries totaling $12.3 million to the State’s General
Fund as required.
Analysis
MSDE did not revert statewide indirect cost recoveries for fiscal years 2012
through 2014, totaling approximately $12.3 million, to the State’s General Fund
as required. Although MSDE included statewide indirect costs in its calculation
of the indirect cost recovery rate to be applied to federal grants, MSDE did not
revert any of the subsequent federal reimbursements of these costs to the State’s
General Fund. MSDE’s total indirect cost recoveries for fiscal years 2012
through 2014 were approximately $39.3 million.
State law provides that funds recovered from federal sources for statewide
indirect costs must be reverted to the General Fund and it prohibits granting any
waiver or exemption to this requirement. Statewide indirect costs include the
costs of central overhead services provided by other State agencies (for example,
Comptroller of Maryland) to support MSDE federal grant activities. Although
MSDE recovered and appropriately retained approximately $27 million of its own
indirect costs during the aforementioned period, MSDE advised us that these
amounts were insufficient for its needs and that it retained the statewide indirect
costs recovered to help fund its central service functions, such as human resources
and information technology.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSDE revert the aforementioned and future statewide
indirect cost recoveries to the State’s General Fund, as required.
Finding 2
MSDE did not recover expenditures associated with a federal grant in a
timely manner, resulting in lost interest income of $140,000.
Analysis
MSDE did not recover, in a timely manner, $10.4 million in federal funds for
expenditures associated with a federal grant under the Library Services
Technology Act, resulting in lost interest income totaling $140,000. This
6

--- Page 9 ---
condition occurred because MSDE failed to initially submit to the federal grantor
agency adequate documentation for certain expenditures claimed and did not
correct this deficiency for several years.
An audit conducted by the federal grantor agency during fiscal year 2010
concluded that there was a lack of adequate support for grant-related expenditures
claimed and recovered by MSDE in fiscal years 2008 and 2009. Consequently,
the agency withheld all future payments under that grant until MSDE developed a
corrective action plan and submitted detailed support for the past expenditures.
MSDE did not submit the corrective action plan until December 2013. The plan
was approved by the granting agency in February 2014 and, during the period
from March 2014 through June 2015, MSDE submitted requests for
reimbursement dating back to fiscal year 2010, which totaled $10.4 million.
Because of the resulting delay in recovering these funds, the State lost interest
income of approximately $140,000. This issue was commented upon in our
Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for fiscal years 2012 and
2013.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSDE ensure that federal funds are recovered in a
timely manner.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 3
MSDE improperly used interagency agreements with a State university to
staff its Chief Information Officer position. The related agreements lacked
details to facilitate effective monitoring by MSDE.
Analysis
MSDE improperly used interagency agreements with Towson University to staff
its Chief Information Officer (CIO) position. In addition, the related agreements
lacked sufficient details to facilitate effective MSDE monitoring of deliverables.
MSDE entered into three consecutive interagency agreements with the
University’s Division of Economic and Community Outreach (DECO) to provide
a CIO, with one individual serving as MSDE’s CIO for the first two agreements
and a second individual serving in this capacity for the third agreement. The three
agreements covered the period from November 2011 through June 2015 and the
costs incurred by MSDE for the agreements totaled approximately $771,000,
which, based on MSDE’s representations, included DECO’s administrative fees
of $164,000.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Schedule of Interagency Agreements and Associated Costs
November 2011 through June 2015
Billing Period Administrative Costs
Agreement Total
Percent of
Number Costs*
From To Value
Total Cost
1 11/14/11 06/30/13 $314,793 $47,219 15%
2 07/01/13 11/29/13 82,591 12,389 15%
3 01/06/14 06/30/15 373,282 104,519 28%
Total $770,666 $164,127 21%
* Total costs include the administrative costs.
Source: State accounting records and DECO invoices submitted to MSDE
Questionable Use of Interagency Agreements
Generally, the use of an interagency agreement permits one State agency to obtain
services directly from another, alleviating the need for a competitive third party
vendor procurement process. MSDE’s use of interagency agreements with DECO
to procure the CIO was not consistent with State law or DECO’s mission. State
law provides that State employees should perform all State functions in
preference to contracting with the private sector. MSDE had an existing budgeted
position for a CIO but did not believe the salary was sufficient to obtain highly
qualified applicants. As a result, MSDE used the interagency agreement to
procure the services of a CIO at enhanced salaries. For example, the fiscal year
2014 payments under the agreements exceeded the budgeted salary and fringe
benefit costs for the CIO position by approximately $58,000.1 While DECO is a
State entity, the individual who provided the CIO services in the most recent
agreement was not a University employee; rather, the individual was hired
contractually specifically for MSDE.
Furthermore, the use of the agreement to obtain the CIO was not consistent with
DECO’s mission, which is to leverage the highly qualified research and project
talent of the University to solve critical issues facing Maryland’s workforce and
economy. As noted above, the individual was not a University employee.
DECO’s involvement was generally limited to hiring the employees, paying the
salary of the individual provided and invoicing MSDE for those costs, which
included its administrative fees. MSDE controlled the selection of the individual
hired under the third agreement, and was solely responsible for the daily
1 This difference was based on an OLA estimate of the budgeted salary and fringe benefits using
MSDE’s fiscal year 2014 allowance for the position.
8

--- Page 11 ---
supervision and monitoring of the individual obtained under all the agreements,
including ensuring responsibilities were performed. Information regarding the
selection process for the first two agreements was not available since current
MSDE personnel were not involved and the related documentation was not
retained.
We confirmed with staff at the Board of Public Works that the use of interagency
agreements to procure personnel was not appropriate. MSDE management
personnel advised us that they were unaware that this was an improper use of the
agreements.
Lack of Certain Details in the Agreements
The agreements lacked sufficient details to enable effective monitoring of
deliverables. Each agreement was established at a not-to-exceed fixed cost, and
payments to DECO were to be based on invoices received, although the basis for
payment was not specified.
The scope of the work was generally to direct MSDE’s information technology
functions; the four stated deliverables were broad in nature (analysis of MSDE’s
Office of Information Technology functionality, recommendations for refinement
and improvement, technical supervision and management, and leadership and
communication) and remained unchanged from agreement to agreement. One of
these deliverables (technical supervision) did require monthly status reports from
DECO; however, MSDE could not provide copies of these status reports.
Determination of Agreement Costs Not Supported
MSDE could not explain or provide documentation as to how the costs
(reimbursement of salary costs and administrative fees) for these agreements were
developed, nor could it provide any independent analysis to determine whether
the administrative fees charged by DECO were reasonable. Although not
specified in any of the agreements or the related invoices, we were advised by
MSDE management that the costs billed to MSDE included DECO’s
administrative fees, which were 15 percent for the first two agreements and 28
percent for the third agreement. MSDE could not explain or justify this
significant increase in administrative fees in the third agreement. In contrast, in
our February 2015 special report on interagency agreements between the
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) and DECO, we noted that DECO
advised it charged MTA an administrative fee of 10 percent for the agreements
spanning fiscal years 2010 to 2013.
MSDE advised us that it discontinued this arrangement after June 30, 2015 and
that it intended to recruit for the CIO as a full-time regular State employee
position.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSDE
a. discontinue its practice of using interagency agreements to hire
individuals in lieu of using budgeted positions;
b. ensure that agreements contain sufficient details to enable effective
monitoring, including assurance that all deliverables are received; and
c. ensure that amounts paid under future interagency agreements are
reasonable and supported.
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 4
State regulations for procuring services were not always adhered to and the
procedures for monitoring contractor performance were not always
sufficient.
Analysis
MSDE did not always adhere to State regulations when undertaking procurements
and its monitoring procedures over contractor performance were not always
sufficient. During fiscal years 2012 through 2014, MSDE issued 3,521 purchase
orders for goods and services with related payments (excluding corporate
purchasing card transactions) totaling $277 million. We tested nine service
contracts procured by MSDE during the period from July 2011 through May 2014
totaling $20.3 million and noted the following conditions:
Bid Evaluation Documentation Did Not Always Support the Awards
For three contracts totaling approximately $18.1 million, MSDE did not maintain
adequate documentation of the procurement and contractor selection processes.
Specifically, for two contracts, totaling approximately $17.2 million related to the
maintenance and support of two MSDE websites and one reporting system, either
the required financial proposals or technical proposals of the losing bidders were
not on file. For the third contract, totaling approximately $900,000 for
development of online professional courses, there was a lack of documentation of
the technical evaluations prepared by the selection committee members. State
regulations require that procurement files include all bids or offers received.
Furthermore, for one of these contracts totaling $4.8 million, the evaluation
committee members disagreed on certain aspects of the technical qualifications of
four bidders who were ultimately disqualified. There was no formal explanation
provided as to how these differences were resolved in the selection process and
the consolidated evaluation for this contract was not signed by the members of the
10

--- Page 13 ---
evaluation committee. This contract was eventually awarded as a single source
award to the incumbent vendor even though, based on our review of the technical
proposal, this vendor did not meet required education qualifications for 4 of the
11 positions required by the request for proposals (RFP).
Effective Contract and Invoice Monitoring Was Not Established For One Contract
One of the nine contracts, valued at $1.2 million, did not include specific
deliverables to enable effective monitoring of performance and verification of the
related invoices. According to the contract, the IT vendor was to bill MSDE
based on satisfactory completion of “each deliverable” as specified in the RFP;
however, neither the RFP nor the contract included specific deliverables.
Although the RFP provided a general description of the services needed (subject
matter expert on certain IT systems), MSDE did not issue any task orders to direct
the vendor’s work.
MSDE did not ensure that the hours billed were accurate. Invoices submitted by
the vendor were accompanied by timesheets and logs describing the work
performed and the related hours and charges. We were advised that the invoices
were reconciled to both the timesheets and the logs; however, there was a lack of
documentation to support this assertion. Furthermore, our review of six invoices
totaling $222,500 disclosed discrepancies between the invoices and these
documents that were not identified or resolved by MSDE. For example, the
vendor charged approximately $10,000 for hours that were not worked according
to the supporting documents.
Bid Solicitation Period and Award Notifications Were Not in Accordance with
State Regulations
MSDE did not always allow the minimum 20-day bid solicitation time (the period
between the date of publication of the invitation for bid and the due date for the
related bids), as required by State regulations. Our tests disclosed four contracts,
totaling approximately $1.1 million, for which the bid solicitation time ranged
from 5 to 9 days. A shortened solicitation time may result in a reduced number of
bids being received. For one of the four contracts, MSDE received one bid and,
for each of the other three, MSDE received either two or three bids.
In addition, for two contracts tested totaling $2 million, MSDE did not publish the
awards on eMaryland Marketplace as required by State regulations. State
regulations require that contract awards greater than $25,000 be published on
eMaryland Marketplace within 30 days of the contract award.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSDE
a. maintain adequate procurement documentation, including all bidder
proposals and support for all critical considerations and decisions made
by evaluation committees;
b. ensure that all contracts provide sufficient details as to deliverables to
enable effective monitoring of performance;
c. ensure that invoices are appropriately verified to supporting
documentation and tasks performed;
d. review all invoices submitted by the aforementioned IT vendor and take
appropriate action, such as recovering overpayments made, including
those we identified; and
e. ensure compliance with State Procurement Regulations.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
MSDE did not adequately control funds received in its business office.
Certain checks were not promptly endorsed and recorded, and prenumbered
receipt forms were not accounted for.
Analysis
MSDE did not adequately control funds received in its business office, which
totaled approximately $47.4 million during fiscal year 2014.
• Checks related to grant reimbursements (grant funds returned from local
education agencies), which totaled approximately $13.5 million during fiscal
year 2014, were not recorded and restrictively endorsed immediately upon
receipt. Rather, the collections were handled by at least two employees prior
to being recorded on prenumbered receipt forms and endorsed.
• MSDE did not maintain complete and accurate records of prenumbered
receipt forms. In addition, voided forms were not reviewed for propriety and
there was no process to periodically account for the forms as to issued,
voided, or on hand. Numerous MSDE units, including the business office,
used these forms to record collections received. The MSDE units then
submitted the forms and the related collections to MSDE’s business office for
processing and deposit. As a result, completed receipt forms and
corresponding checks could be misappropriated without detection.
• MSDE did not require large payments to be submitted electronically to
enhance control and accountability over the funds. For example, according to
12

--- Page 15 ---
MSDE’s records, local education agencies submitted 128 checks totaling
approximately $33.9 million to MSDE headquarters during fiscal year 2014 as
reimbursement for the costs of certain employee retirement benefits. Our
review disclosed that there were 92 checks submitted, each valued at more
than $50,000, including 10 checks that were each between $1.4 million and
$2.7 million. Controls could be enhanced by requiring large payments to be
submitted electronically.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to immediately record collections and
account for prenumbered receipt forms were noted in our preceding audit report.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires
immediate recording and restrictive endorsement of collections, as well as proper
accounting for prenumbered receipt forms.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSDE
a. ensure that collections are restrictively endorsed and recorded
immediately upon receipt (repeat);
b. maintain complete and accurate records of all prenumbered receipt
forms and account for the forms as to issued, voided, or on hand (repeat);
and
c. pursue requiring large collections to be remitted electronically to enhance
accountability and control over the funds.
Child Care Programs
Background
MSDE is responsible for child care programs in the State, including licensing
facilities, monitoring facility compliance with regulations (for example, ensuring
that health and safety standards are met), and taking enforcement actions against
child care facilities. MSDE oversees child care facilities through its 13 regional
child care offices across the State. According to MSDE records, as of June 2014,
the State’s licensed child care facilities consisted of 7,086 family child care
homes and 2,703 child care centers. These facilities were licensed to serve
approximately 219,000 children.
MSDE also oversees the State’s Child Care Subsidy Program, which provides
financial assistance to eligible families to meet their child care needs. The
Program is administered by the 24 local departments of social services.
According to MSDE’s records, during fiscal year 2014, Child Care Subsidy
expenditures totaled approximately $81.5 million ($37.8 million in general funds
and $43.7 million in federal funds).
13

--- Page 16 ---
The Child Care Administration Tracking System (CCATS) is used by MSDE to
record, approve, and monitor facility licenses, individuals associated with those
facilities (including employees), and subsidy-related eligibility, vouchers, and
payments.
Finding 6
MSDE did not have an adequate process to ensure that criminal background
checks were obtained for all child care employees and that the results of
background checks and any subsequent alerts were adequately pursued.
Analysis
MSDE did not adequately ensure that criminal background checks were obtained
for all individuals employed at child care facilities and that the results of the
initial background checks and any subsequent alerts were adequately pursued.
According to State law, all individuals must apply for a criminal background
check on or before the first day of employment at a licensed child care facility.
MSDE headquarters and its regional child care offices are notified via the
Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS) of the results of the initial
background checks. MSDE also monitors these individuals through annual field
visits to each licensed child care facility and through CJIS, receiving alerts if they
have any subsequent criminal activity in Maryland. According to MSDE’s
records, approximately 3,600 alerts were received during fiscal year 2014.
• MSDE did not have adequate procedures to ensure the initial criminal
background check process was comprehensive. MSDE’s procedures did not
require its child care specialists to determine during annual field visits to child
care facilities whether all employees working at the facilities were recorded in
CCATS.2 For example, child care specialists were not required to compare
the names of employees listed in the payroll records of child care centers with
those recorded in CCATS. Only individuals recorded in CCATS were subject
to MSDE’s criminal background check verification procedures.
Furthermore, MSDE did not ensure that an initial criminal background check
had been received and reviewed for each individual recorded in CCATS. Our
test of nine individuals recorded in CCATS disclosed that there was no record
that the initial criminal background check had been obtained for two
individuals who were hired 6 and 30 months prior to our test. For a third
individual tested, MSDE’s files indicated that the criminal background check
2 Facilities report new employees to MSDE, and the employees are required to apply for and
obtain criminal background checks themselves. The results are reported by CJIS to the facilities
and the regional MSDE offices, with MSDE recording the dates the background checks were
received.
14

--- Page 17 ---
was received and reviewed, but there was no CJIS documentation on file to
substantiate those actions.
• MSDE did not ensure that staff at its regional child care offices fully
investigated each criminal background check alert and took proper follow-up
action, such as by verifying that the individual was no longer associated with
the facility. Our review of 25 alerts received at five regional child care offices
during the period from June 2013 through July 2014 disclosed that follow-up
actions were not taken or were not properly documented for 6 alerts.
Specifically, for 5 alerts, MSDE relied on assertions from the child care
centers that the individuals were no longer employed and did not review
payroll records to verify these assertions. Another alert tested indicated that
the individual was employed by a local school system and not a child care
facility; however, MSDE made no attempt to contact the school system to
ensure the employee was not working with children.
Certain of these conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MSDE
a. enhance procedures, as part of its annual inspections, to ensure that all
individuals associated with child care facilities are properly recorded in
CCATS (repeat);
b. ensure that criminal background check results are obtained and reviewed
for all individuals working at child care facilities, including those noted
above, and that such reviews are documented; and
c. ensure that criminal background check alerts are thoroughly reviewed
and pursued, including those noted above, and that such reviews and
related follow-up actions are documented (repeat).
Finding 7
MSDE did not restrict user access to the Child Care Subsidy Program
features on CCATS to those individuals requiring access to perform their
jobs and to prevent the recording of improper transactions.
Analysis
MSDE did not ensure that user access capabilities related to the Child Care
Subsidy Program assigned to individuals on CCATS were adequately restricted to
prevent improper transactions. Our review of critical system access assigned to
681 users disclosed numerous users who were assigned unnecessary or
inappropriate system access. MSDE did not periodically generate reports for its
review that identified all users and their accesses.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our review of a user access report that we requested and obtained from the
CCATS vendor disclosed 90 individuals who had been assigned system access to
process critical transactions, such as child care subsidy applications, but who no
longer required this access. These individuals included 68 people who were no
longer employed by MSDE, the vendor, or the local department of social services
through which access was originally granted.
In addition, we noted 558 employees with user roles in CCATS (predefined
access for particular functions) that provided them with incompatible capabilities.
These employees had the capability to create a subsidy application in the system,
determine eligibility, issue a payment voucher, and establish and authorize the
child care facility to receive payment without independent approval.
According to the State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy, system access
should be limited to the appropriate authorized individuals and should be properly
controlled.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MSDE
a. periodically generate and review reports of users’ assigned access
capabilities,
b. restrict user access capabilities for critical functions to those employees
who require such capabilities for their job duties and ensure proper
segregation of duties and independent review and approval of critical
transactions, and
c. immediately remove the unnecessary user access capabilities assigned to
the aforementioned individuals.
Information Systems and Controls
Background
MSDE information technology (IT) operations are decentralized over several sites
including the MSDE headquarters. Each site’s IT operations function as a
separate entity, with its own applications, network components, and detailed
disaster recovery plan. However, most of the network administration is
performed by the Office of Information Technology (OIT), which is located at
MSDE headquarters. OIT operates and maintains a wide area network spread
throughout the various MSDE offices, which provides connectivity and Internet
access to connected sites. OIT also maintains the MSDE website, and key
applications such as the Educator Information System (EIS), which maintains
educator accreditation and certification information. The Child Care
Administration Tracking System is hosted by a third-party service provider. In
16

--- Page 19 ---
conducting our audit, we selected the MSDE headquarters for our general
controls, security, and network reviews, and focused our review on certain
systems including the EIS.
Finding 8
Contractors had unnecessary network level access to numerous critical
MSDE servers and workstations unrelated to the projects they were
assigned.
Analysis
Contractors had unnecessary network level access to the MSDE network. MSDE
was developing and enhancing several systems with extensive use of third-party
contractors. Our analysis, performed during December 2014, determined that
there were 183 individuals working for contractors who were assigned active
MSDE network user accounts. These contractors worked both on-site at the
MSDE headquarters location and remotely via a virtual private network
connection to the MSDE network. We were advised by MSDE personnel that
these contractors should only have access to the specific servers involved with
their projects and certain support servers. The access these contractors had been
granted allowed them broader access to numerous other critical MSDE servers
and workstations, which places these devices at unnecessary risk of compromise.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MSDE restrict each contractor’s network level access to
only those servers and workstations that each contractor needs to access.
Finding 9
MSDE did not properly safeguard sensitive personally identifiable
information and malware protection over MSDE workstations could be
inappropriately disabled.
Analysis
Controls over sensitive information and malware protection were not sufficient.
• MSDE inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information
(PII) in clear text. Specifically, we identified 1,333,740 unique student social
security numbers in clear text with related names and 189,981 unique teacher
social security numbers in clear text with related names in two separate
databases. In addition we were advised that this sensitive PII was not
protected by other substantial mitigating controls, such as the use of data loss
prevention software. Furthermore, MSDE had not developed a complete
inventory of its sensitive PII, where it was located, if it was encrypted, and if
17

--- Page 20 ---
there was a valid business reason to retain this information. This PII is
commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft. Accordingly,
appropriate information system security controls need to exist to ensure that
this information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed. The State of
Maryland’s Information Security Policy states that agencies should protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial
mitigating controls.
• The management console used to distribute and configure anti-malware
software for over 1,000 MSDE computers was set to allow workstation users
to disable two critical anti-malware modules that protected these workstations
from viruses, spyware, and unknown threats. Accordingly, all workstation
users could disable these features of the anti-malware software installed on
their workstation and render it unable to protect against network and file based
threats.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MSDE
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain sensitive PII and delete all
unnecessary PII,
c. for all retained PII use approved methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected, and
d. properly configure its anti-malware management console so that users
cannot disable their locally installed anti-malware software.
Finding 10
Disaster recovery plans for two locations were not comprehensive and
backups of certain critical databases were not stored offsite.
Analysis
Disaster recovery plans for two locations were not comprehensive and backups of
certain critical databases were not stored offsite.
• MSDE did not have adequate IT plans for recovering from disaster scenarios
(for example, a fire). Our review of MSDE’s disaster recovery plans found
deficiencies at two critical locations, including the Division of Rehabilitation
Services, which operates a case management application that is used to make
disbursements associated with the rehabilitation of people with disabilities,
which for fiscal year 2014 totaled in excess of $17 million. For example,
MSDE’s disaster recovery plan for the Division did not adequately address
certain requirements of the State of Maryland’s IT Disaster Recovery
18

--- Page 21 ---
Guidelines, including the restoration of network connectivity, specific
alternate site processing, and provisions for testing. Without complete
disaster recovery plans, a disaster could cause significant delays, for an
undetermined period, in restoring operations beyond the expected delays that
would exist in a planned recovery scenario. A similar condition was
commented upon in our two prior audit reports.
• Daily backups of two critical databases, which housed teacher certification
information, were not stored offsite. These backups were stored within the
same data center as the server hosting the critical production databases.
Consequently, if the facility housing the original databases and backup data
were destroyed by a disaster, all critical information could be lost. According
to the State of Maryland’s IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines, backup media
should be created and stored off-site in a secure, environmentally controlled
location.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MSDE comply with the IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines
by
a. developing and implementing comprehensive information systems
disaster recovery plans (repeat); and
b. storing all backups of critical data at an off-site secure, environmentally
controlled location.
Reporting of Employee Misconduct
Finding 11
MSDE did not make timely disclosure to the appropriate legal authorities of
certain questionable payroll and personnel activity related to five employees.
Analysis
MSDE did not notify the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel of certain possible
criminal or unethical conduct by five employees, as required. Further, although
MSDE’s chief legal counsel was advised of the situation, the Office of the
Attorney General (OAG) – Criminal Division was not notified as required.
Consequently, there is no assurance that MSDE took appropriate follow-up action
when questionable activity on the part of several employees was brought to its
attention.
During the audit period, MSDE received five allegations of questionable payroll
and personnel issues involving five employees. MSDE performed a limited
19

--- Page 22 ---
review for each of these allegations, such as comparing a selection of time records
to independent sources and, in each case, substantiated certain improper activity,
including misrepresentation of hours worked and falsified documents. Based on
those initial results confirming the allegations, MSDE chose not to expand its
review to determine the full scope of the improper activity, believing that it had
conducted a reasonable investigation and was limited by the State’s 30-day time
frame to impose disciplinary action stipulated in State law. However, without
consulting the Criminal Division there is no assurance that the investigative
actions were sufficient or that the resultant disciplinary actions appropriate.
For example, for one allegation of falsified time records, MSDE reviewed the
time records for one month for the employee noted in the allegation and compared
them to the sign-in logs at the employee’s facility. The review identified several
instances where the employee indicated working on days in which there was no
record of the employee signing in to the facility. Based on MSDE’s calculations,
this employee was overpaid $3,592 for the month reviewed. However, MSDE did
not expand testing to determine the extent of the falsified timesheets, allowed the
employee (who had worked for MSDE since 1996) to resign in lieu of
termination, and deducted the aforementioned $3,592 from the employee’s final
leave payment. For the remaining four cases reviewed, a similar reporting
deficiency was noted and MSDE either recovered any improper payment
identified (one employee was required to repay $699) or required the individuals
to forfeit leave. Ultimately, two of the employees subsequently resigned, one was
terminated, and one received written counseling.
The Governor’s Executive Order, Standards of Conduct for Executive Branch
Employees, requires that all departments and agencies of the State immediately
report any instance of possible criminal or unethical conduct by an employee or
contractor of the State to the Governor’s Chief Counsel and to the agency’s chief
legal counsel or the Criminal Division. Further, internal OAG policy requires the
agency’s legal counsel to report all such instances to the Criminal Division.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MSDE
a. notify the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division and the
Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel of the aforementioned questionable
activity and, in the future, notify the appropriate entities in accordance
with the aforementioned Executive Order and OAG policy; and
b. adhere to guidance from those offices when conducting investigations and
imposing disciplinary action.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Department
of Education (MSDE) for the period beginning July 1, 2011 and ending June 30,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Department’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the child care program, federal funds, grants,
procurements and disbursements, budgetary closeout transactions, cash receipts,
payroll, and information systems security and control. Our audit also included
various support services (including payroll processing, purchasing, maintenance
of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by MSDE to the
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center, which is audited separately. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MSDE’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MSDE.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MSDE’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
21

--- Page 24 ---
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We also extracted data from the Child Care System for the purpose of testing user
access. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MSDE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSDE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSDE that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MSDE’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MSDE regarding the
results of our review of its response.
22

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 1
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) did not revert
statewide indirect cost recoveries totaling $12.3 million to the State’s General
Fund as required.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSDE revert the aforementioned and future statewide
indirect cost recoveries to the State’s General Fund, as required.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and partially agrees with the Recommendation.
The Agency acknowledges that it had not calculated the specific amount of
federal indirect cost recoveries related to the Statewide Cost Allocation Plan and
that these were not previously reverted to the State. MSDE had not believed itself
to be out of compliance since specific appropriation had not previously been
provided for this purpose and because overall revenue to the State was not
impacted.
Beginning in FY 2016, MSDE has specific budgetary appropriation to accomplish
this transaction and will revert statewide indirect cost recoveries to the State's
General Fund annually henceforth. However, MSDE does not have access to prior
year recoveries. Therefore, it is not possible for MSDE to revert the prior year
statewide indirect cost recoveries.

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 2
MSDE did not recover expenditures associated with a federal grant in a
timely manner, resulting in lost interest income of $140,000.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MSDE ensure that federal funds are recovered in a
timely manner.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and Recommendation.
To ensure that Library Services Technology Act (LSTA) drawdowns are
performed on a timely basis in the future, the Division of Library Development
Services has developed an ‘IMLS Drawdown Schedule’ covering the quarterly
periods for recovery of expenditures incurred from the present through December
31, 2017. Similarly, the School and Community Nutrition Programs Office and
the Accounting Branch have developed schedules which will help to ensure that
drawdowns are performed on a timely basis.

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 3
MSDE improperly used interagency agreements with a State university to
staff its Chief Information Officer position. The related agreements lacked
details to facilitate effective monitoring by MSDE.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MSDE
a. discontinue its practice of using interagency agreements to hire
individuals in lieu of using budgeted positions;
b. ensure that agreements contain sufficient details to enable effective
monitoring, including assurance that all deliverables are received; and
c. ensure that amounts paid under future interagency agreements are
reasonable and supported.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and Recommendations.
Regarding Recommendation a., in the future, MSDE will limit the use of
interagency agreements for appropriate purposes. MSDE recently hired a Chief
Information Officer in a regular PIN position.
Regarding Recommendation b., MSDE agrees that agreements should contain
sufficient details to enable effective monitoring, including assurance that all
deliverables are received. In this regard, see MSDE’s corrective action response
for Recommendation b. of Finding 4.
Regarding Recommendation c., MSDE will ensure that future payments under
interagency agreements are reasonable and supported. In this regard, see MSDE’s
corrective action response for Recommendation c. of Finding 4.

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 4
State regulations for procuring services were not always adhered to and the
procedures for monitoring contractor performance were not always
sufficient.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MSDE
a. maintain adequate procurement documentation, including all bidder
proposals and support for all critical considerations and decisions made
by evaluation committees;
b. ensure that all contracts provide sufficient details as to deliverables to
enable effective monitoring of performance;
c. ensure that invoices are appropriately verified to supporting
documentation and tasks performed;
d. review all invoices submitted by the aforementioned IT vendor and take
appropriate action, such as recovering overpayments made, including
those we identified; and
e. ensure compliance with State Procurement Regulations.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and Recommendations.
Regarding Recommendation a., on October 26, 2015, a procurement meeting was
held to reinforce COMAR Title 21 regulations including COMAR 21.05.01.07
detailing the Procurement Record.
In future Request for Proposals (RFP’s), the procurement officer will work with
the project sponsor to ensure that the criteria for award are reasonable, justifiable
and promotes competition. Correspondence between the procurement officer,
project sponsor, and approving agency will be retained to document how the
required criteria were determined. The procurement officer will thoroughly
review the memorandum from the technical evaluation committee to verify that
the recommendation of award is reflective of the entire committee. If any offeror
is deemed non susceptible of award from the evaluation committee, that the
criteria is reviewed and confirmed. If there are discrepancies with the
recommendation for award, the procurement officer will list the concerns to the
committee for clarification and corrections. Also, when the procurement officer
reviews the evaluation committee’s recommendation for award, the procurement
officer will thoroughly confirm that all the requirements of the solicitation have
been met. The evaluation documents of each committee member will be retained

--- Page 30 ---
in the official procurement file. Documentation for the above mentioned activities
will be printed and retained in the official procurement file.
Regarding Recommendation b., during the Request for Proposals (RFP) process,
the procurement officer, project sponsor, and approving agency work together to
draft a concise scope of work (deliverables). Also, within the RFP, it will clearly
explain how payment is based. The financial form should link directly with the
scope of work. The RFP, vendor’s technical and financial proposals are
incorporated and considered a part of the contract.
Regarding Recommendation c., in the future invoices will be appropriately
verified to supporting documentation and tasks performed. In this regard, MSDE
developed a Consultant Work Log which records specific information regarding
the work performed by Consultants. The use of this Log particularly when
reviewing invoices for payment will be reemphasized for use throughout the
Agency during an Executive Team Meeting to be held on September 12, 2016.
Regarding Recommendation d., by September 30, 2016, MSDE will review all
invoices submitted by the aforementioned vendor for the period July 1, 2011
through June 30, 2014 and take appropriate action which will include the potential
recovery of overpayments, including those identified.
Regarding Recommendation e., to address the last cited non-compliance issue
regarding state procurement regulations, on October 26, 2015, a procurement
meeting was held to reinforce COMAR Title 21 regulations. It included
discussion of the minimum bidding time of 20 days when soliciting bids for
services or commodities that are expected to exceed $25,000. In addition, if an
approving agency has a minimum bidding time that is stricter than the COMAR
regulations, that must be followed as well. The meeting also discussed the
requirement of publishing awards over $25,000 on eMaryland Marketplace within
30 days of award. The internal procurement log was revised to include a section
to note the eMaryland Marketplace publish date.
The corrective responses provided for this Finding provides assurance that the
Agency is complying with state procurement regulations.

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 5
MSDE did not adequately control funds received in its business office.
Certain checks were not promptly endorsed and recorded, and prenumbered
receipt forms were not accounted for.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MSDE
a. ensure that collections are restrictively endorsed and recorded
immediately upon receipt (repeat);
b. maintain complete and accurate records of all prenumbered receipt
forms and account for the forms as to issued, voided, or on hand (repeat);
and
c. pursue requiring large collections to be remitted electronically to enhance
accountability and control over the funds.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and Recommendations a. and b. MSDE
respectfully disagrees with Recommendation c.
Regarding Recommendation a., MSDE agrees that collections should be
restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon receipt. In this regard, as a
result of a prior OLA audit, the Accounting Branch developed ‘Procedures for
filling out Receipt of Deposit (RD) Forms’. These procedures require employees
to stamp the back of checks ‘For Deposit Only’ as soon as envelopes containing
them are opened. The noted non- compliance is an exception to RD processing
procedures. Accounting Branch supervision has reviewed these procedures with
employees who perform these responsibilities to ensure that they understand and
will comply with these procedures. Subsequently, Accounting Branch
supervision will review the RD procedures on at least a semi-annual basis with
Accounting Branch employees who perform these functions and will document
the reviews.
Regarding Recommendation b., MSDE agrees that pre-numbered RD receipt
forms need to be accounted for as to whether they are issued, voided or on hand.
A complete inventory of issued, voided and on-hand RD forms was completed as
of November 30, 2015. The next inventory is scheduled to be completed by
November 30, 2016. MSDE has already taken steps to develop an electronic
solution for generating and tracking receipt of deposit forms which will maintain
complete and accurate records of prenumbered deposit forms.

--- Page 32 ---
Regarding Recommendation c., for several logistical reasons, MSDE does not
agree that large collections should be remitted electronically. A key issue is that
detail regarding how to apply the payment to multiple funds or programs is not
included with electronic payments. Consequently, additional manual work would
need to be performed on the payor and payee sides in providing/obtaining the
necessary detail to properly account for the payment. Checks are accompanied by
detailed allocations on the sub-grant level, which is required by the federal
government and processing collections electronically may cause us to fail our
federal audits. Also, additional manual work would be required when subgrants
are reconciled between the Annual Financial Reporting (AFR) and Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) systems. Finally, there may be a
financial impact in using electronic payments since there is usually a fee that is
imposed on both parties for these payments.
Auditor’s Comment: MSDE’s response indicated that it disagrees with
our recommendation to receive large dollar payments electronically
because of the lack of supporting documentation for the electronic
payments and the need for subsequent manual processing. However, the
method used to receive the funds would not preclude the receipt of the
existing documentation, and manual processing would be consistent with
the accounting required for checks. Furthermore, these large collections
relate primarily to local education agencies. It is not unreasonable to
expect these agencies, who receive State funds electronically, to return
those excess funds in the same manner.

--- Page 33 ---
Finding 6
MSDE did not have an adequate process to ensure that criminal background
checks were obtained for all child care employees and that the results of
background checks and any subsequent alerts were adequately pursued.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MSDE
a. enhance procedures, as part of its annual inspections, to ensure that all
individuals associated with child care facilities are properly recorded in
CCATS (repeat);
b. ensure that criminal background check results are obtained and reviewed
for all individuals working at child care facilities, including those noted
above, and that such reviews are documented; and
c. ensure that criminal background check alerts are thoroughly reviewed
and pursued, including those noted above, and that such reviews and
related follow-up actions are documented (repeat).
MSDE Response:
MSDE respectfully disagrees with the Finding as it does have adequate processes
to ensure that criminal background checks (CBC) are obtained for all child care
employees and that the results of background checks and any subsequent Alerts
are adequately pursued. It agrees with Recommendations a and b. Finally, MSDE
respectfully disagrees with Recommendation c.
MSDE agrees with Recommendation 6a. During the audit a separate procedure,
“Verifying Staff Employment in Child Care Facilities During Annual
Unannounced Inspections”, was created and became effective on September 18,
2015. This separate procedure clarified existing procedures used during Annual
Unannounced Child Care Facility inspections which verified that all individuals
associated with Child Care Facilities had obtained a Criminal Background Check
(CBC) and that the individuals were properly recorded in CCATS. The separate
procedure requires child care specialists to compare the names of employees
listed in the payroll records of child care centers with those recorded in CCATS.
This procedure also requires that any differences(s) noted in personnel, whether
new or no longer working, as a result of the comparison of the records be input
into CCATS within ten days.
MSDE agrees with Recommendation 6b. While the Criminal Background Check
(CBC) for case 2 on OLA’s spreadsheet who was hired 30 months prior to the test
was not in the file when OLA tested the documentation on March 11, 2015, the

--- Page 34 ---
CBC had been performed on a timely basis and documentation was subsequently
obtained and placed in file.
MSDE has effective procedures to ensure that Criminal Background Checks
(CBCs) are received and reviewed for all employees working at child care
facilities. Criminal Background Checks have been obtained and are on file for the
remaining two noted exceptions which resulted from non-compliance with
MSDE’s CBC procedures. By June 30, 2016, these procedures will be
redistributed via email to all Licensing Staff emphasizing their importance and the
need to comply with them.
MSDE respectfully disagrees with Recommendation c. Bullet point 2 of the
Finding states that “…..follow-up actions were not taken or were not properly
documented for 6 Alerts.” MSDE has proper procedures to investigate all Alerts
received. These procedures require that all actions taken to follow-up on Alerts be
documented. MSDE followed its procedures for each of the 6 Alerts and had
provided to OLA in its response to the preliminary finding a detailed explanation
regarding the follow-up activities which were documented. Copies of the
documentation were also provided to OLA.
MSDE disagrees that it did not ensure the proper disposition, did not attempt to
determine the employment status of the individual and that documentation related
to the follow- up was inadequate for an Alert associated with a public school
system. Since the public school system never owned or operated licensed child
care facilities no facility existed to contact or inspect for this Alert. The follow-up
action taken for this Alert was adequately documented. The Agency thoroughly
reviewed, pursued and created adequate documentation supporting its follow- up
of this Alert.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MSDE determined the individual was
not working with a child care center, we believe that MSDE should have
contacted the school system to ensure the individual was not working with
children.
Regarding the remaining five Alerts, the second bullet point states “In addition,
for 5 Alerts, MSDE relied on assertions from the child care centers that the
individuals were no longer employed and did not review payroll records to verify
these assertions.” Per its documentation, MSDE made exhaustive attempts to
determine the employment status of the individuals associated with each of the
five Alerts. Specifically, for each of the five cited Alerts, using the ‘Individual
named in the Alert’ MSDE performed a total system search of the CCATS
database after which the ‘Named Individual’ was not found. This means that a

--- Page 35 ---
search was conducted for the individual throughout the entire CCATS system,
which covers the entire State of Maryland, to determine if the individual was ever
associated with any child care provider in CCATS, or with any of the other Office
of Child Care (OCC) Branches (Child Care Subsidy and Credentialing) since the
implementation of the CCATS system. In addition, MSDE performed searches of
all other possible relevant databases, such as CHESSIE/CIS (Department of
Human Resources databases) in its efforts to properly investigate the Alerts.
None of the five individuals were found in these databases. Following these
intensive internal efforts to identify the employment status of the five cited
individuals MSDE contacted knowledgeable personnel at the ‘Organizations’
associated with the Alerts and documentation was created and placed in file at
point of contact. Four of the five entities responded that the individuals had
‘never been employed’. The entity associated with the fifth cited Alert having a
date of March 3, 2014 responded that the individual’s employment ended July 21,
2006. Finally, for each of the licensed child care facilities associated with the five
cited Alerts MSDE had made Unannounced Annual Inspections before and after
the date of the Alerts. During these Unannounced Annual Inspections, none of the
individuals in the referenced Alerts were found to be employed. For these reasons,
MSDE believes that it did ensure that staff at its regional child care offices fully
investigated each of the five cited criminal background check Alerts and took
proper follow- up action. The Agency thoroughly reviewed, pursued and created
adequate documentation supporting its’ follow- up of these five Alerts.
Auditor’s Comment: We were advised by MSDE Child Care
management, both during and subsequent to the audit, that no follow-up
action was taken to confirm the verbal representations made by the
agency. In addition, no evidence of the efforts noted in the response has
been provided by MSDE.

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 7
MSDE did not restrict user access to the Child Care Subsidy Program
features on CCATS to those individuals requiring access to perform their
jobs and to prevent the recording of improper transactions.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MSDE
a. periodically generate and review reports of users’ assigned access
capabilities,
b. restrict user access capabilities for critical functions to those employees
who require such capabilities for their job duties and ensure proper
segregation of duties and independent review and approval of critical
transactions, and
c. immediately remove the unnecessary user access capabilities assigned to
the aforementioned individuals.
MSDE Response:
MSDE wants to note that the processes regarding the processing of Child Care
Subsidy Vouchers changed effective August 31, 2015 when a vendor assumed
responsibilities which were performed prior by Local Departments of Social
Services (LDSS) offices. The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) tested the
processes which were in effect prior to August 31, 2015. Consequently, MSDE
agrees with the Finding that in a pre-August 31, 2015 environment one object
(Voucher Receipting) was found to have been inappropriately granted to two roles
(POC Case Manager and POC Case Manager Supervisor). The CCATS Security
Matrix is in the process of being modified to correct this issue. It is the opinion of
the agency that other potential segregation of duties issues noted by the auditors
resulted from misinterpretation of information displayed on the CCATS Security
Matrix. As an example, the object (function) entitled ‘Eligibility’ does not mean
that roles (job titles) granted this function can determine whether an individual
applying for Child Care Subsidy is eligible since the CCATS system
mechanically determines whether the applicant is eligible. However, MSDE
disagrees with the Finding in a post-August 31, 2015 environment as the cited
inappropriate access no longer existed and no one individual has the capability to
perform from beginning to end all of the ‘critical’ functions associated with the
issuance of a Child Care Subsidy Voucher and related payments to Child Care
providers. Also, MSDE agrees with Recommendation (a) from both pre- and post-
August 31, 2015 environments and Recommendations (b) and (c) in a pre-August
31, 2015 environment.

--- Page 37 ---
Auditor’s Comment: Based on our analysis, all 558 individuals noted in our
report had improper access at the time of our test work, including the ability to
process applicant eligibility. While CCATS determines the eligibility, the
individuals cited in our report had user roles that allowed them to enter the data
that were the basis for these determinations and, therefore, could manipulate the
data to ensure eligibility.
In a post-August 31, 2015 environment, MSDE has established policies and
procedures to ensure that all staff have only the roles and permissions assigned
that are necessary for them to perform their specific job functions. All roles are
reviewed as required, or needed when new roles are added, to ensure proper
access, security and segregation of duties. In addition, MSDE and the vendor for
case management (XEROX) have quality assurance procedures in place to review
case management functions within the CCATS system both for the LDSS and the
vendor. In the case of the vendor, an internal quality assurance staff person
reviews cases on a daily basis and reports to the State any issues. The State staff
person reviews the cases identified by the vendor as well as conducting their own
review of a random sampling of cases. In the case of the LDSS, staff review cases
as according to the schedule developed to determine adherence to regulation and
policy. In both cases, if errors are noted, a corrective action plan is established
and any conflicts or unauthorized access are addressed immediately.
The following discussion clearly demonstrates that in a post-August 31, 2015
environment, no individual has the capability to perform from beginning to end
all of the ‘critical’ functions associated with the issuance of a Child Care Subsidy
Voucher and subsequent payments.
Step 1. An application is completed by an individual seeking Child Care Subsidy
assistance.
Step 2. The application is mailed, faxed or emailed to an outside central vendor
facility or if the family is applying for or receiving temporary cash assistance is
taken to a Local Department of Social Services (LDSS).
Step 3. If taken to a LDSS, a staff person (data entry personnel or caseworker)
keys the information from the application into the CCATS system. If submitted to
the Vendor, the information is keyed into the CCATS system by data entry
personnel.
Step 4. After the information is keyed into CCATS by data entry personnel the
case is available for the eligibility worker to review the case. The eligibility
worker verifies the information provided by the applicant with the information
entered into CCATS. If the information is correct, the eligibility worker selects
the Determine Eligibility button for the CCATS system to determine the
eligibility of the applicant.

--- Page 38 ---
Step 5. If the applicant is determined to be eligible by the CCATS system a
Child Care Subsidy Voucher can then be generated by the CCATS system.
Step 6. The voucher along with a cover letter is generated electronically by the
CCATS system, sent through an overnight print batch job and is mailed to the
eligible parent.
Step 7. Once the applicant receives the Subsidy Voucher they sign it and present
it to the child care provider of their choice.
Step 8. If the child care provider agrees to accept the Voucher, they complete the
provider section of the voucher, sign it and the countersigned Voucher is
submitted to the central vendor facility.
Step 9. The countersigned Voucher is scanned into the vendor’s work
management system.
Step 10. The countersigned Voucher is associated in CCATS with the child care
provider indicated on the countersigned voucher so that payments can be made to
the provider for child care services rendered.
It should be noted that the functions performed at the central vendor facility are
randomly assigned to personnel so that no one employee performs all the ‘critical’
steps in processing a Child Care Subsidy Voucher.
Also, as a result of a prior audit, each month the functionalities for at least one
role (job title) shown on the CCATS Security Matrix is reviewed for accuracy.
Finally, two additional security reports have been developed and were
implemented on December 31, 2015. The first report lists login activity for a user
by date, group and role. This report will be reviewed at least annually to
determine if any individual has multiple roles and that those roles are not in
conflict with access capabilities or their job responsibilities. The login report is
also reviewed to determine and monitor login activity. The report shows
successful logins only. CCATS is designed so that users do not have the option to
log into functions that are not authorized. Only the functions for which the
individual is authorized are visible to the user with unauthorized functions not
visible and therefore, not available for the user to choose. When the agency is
informed of any staff who has left employment the account is disabled
immediately. To ensure that no account is kept active after a period of inactivity,
the second report (the User Status Report) lists the user account status with the
last login date to identify inactive accounts. The User Status Report is produced
and reviewed on a monthly basis. Any account not used within the past 30 days is
disabled as appropriate. Any inactive account is automatically disabled by the
CCATS system after 60 days of inactivity.
In view of the above explanation of the controls, procedures and developed
reports related to the issuance of Child Care Subsidy Vouchers and related

--- Page 39 ---
payment, the reviews of eligibility determinations made during the LDSS reviews
and the Federal Improper Payment triennial reviews the Agency believes that
adequate procedures and controls exist regarding the issuance of Child Care
Subsidy Vouchers and related payments.

--- Page 40 ---
Finding 8
Contractors had unnecessary network level access to numerous critical
MSDE servers and workstations unrelated to the projects they were
assigned.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MSDE restrict each contractor’s network level access to
only those servers and workstations that each contractor needs to access.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and Recommendation.
MSDE agrees with the finding and recommendation that contractor network level
access be restricted to only the servers and workstations they need to access. As
of May 20, 2016, the list was scrubbed down to thirty one individuals remaining
on the cited VPN. By June 30, 2016 at the latest, OIT will determine the required
access for each of the 31 individuals and either remove them from the cited VPN
or will adjust their access to that needed to perform their jobs. Documentation
regarding this review process which will be run every 6 months will be created
and on file.

--- Page 41 ---
Finding 9
MSDE did not properly safeguard sensitive personally identifiable
information and malware protection over MSDE workstations could be
inappropriately disabled.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MSDE
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain sensitive PII and delete all
unnecessary PII,
c. for all retained PII use approved methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected, and
d. properly configure its anti-malware management console so that users
cannot disable their locally installed anti-malware software.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and Recommendations.
Regarding Recommendation a., by December 31, 2016 MSDE will perform an
inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII.
Regarding Recommendation b., by July 31, 2017 MSDE will determine if it is
necessary to retain sensitive PII and will also delete any unnecessary PII by the
same date.
Regarding Recommendation c., by December 31, 2017 all sensitive PII will be
encrypted using approved methods contained in the State of Maryland’s
Information Security Policy.
Regarding Recommendation d., MSDE has configured its anti-malware
management console as of June 4, 2015 so that users cannot disable their locally
installed anti-malware software.

--- Page 42 ---
Finding 10
Disaster recovery plans for two locations were not comprehensive and
backups of certain critical databases were not stored offsite.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MSDE comply with the IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines
by
a. developing and implementing comprehensive information systems
disaster recovery plans (repeat); and
b. storing all backups of critical data at an off-site secure, environmentally
controlled location.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and Recommendations.
Regarding Recommendation a., a Disaster Recovery Plan will be developed in
compliance with the State of Maryland’s IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines for
Headquarters by December 15, 2016. A Disaster Recovery Plan for DORS has
been developed and the first annual test of its functionality will be performed on
or before September 30, 2016.
Regarding Recommendation b., MSDE has commenced the procurement of
DoIT’s Enterprise Backup-as-a-Service (BaaS) solution and plans to have this off-
site backup system in place by July 30, 2016. The state DR service will have 2
separate, physically diverse and distinct backup sites. The MSDE backup data
will be fully available at either site, one is a commercial datacenter and the other
is a state approved datacenter more than 30 miles away for geographical diversity.

--- Page 43 ---
Finding 11
MSDE did not make timely disclosure to the appropriate legal authorities of
certain questionable payroll and personnel activity related to five employees.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MSDE
a. notify the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division and the
Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel of the aforementioned questionable
activity and, in the future, notify the appropriate entities in accordance
with the aforementioned Executive Order and OAG policy; and
b. adhere to guidance from those offices when conducting investigations and
imposing disciplinary action.
MSDE Response:
MSDE agrees with the Finding and Recommendations.
Regarding Recommendation a., by June 3, 2016 MSDE will notify the Office of
the Attorney General’s Criminal Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal
Counsel of the five questionable activities. Similarly, it will notify these entities
of any future questionable activities in accordance with the aforementioned
Executive Order and OAG policy.
Regarding Recommendation b., MSDE will adhere to guidance provided from the
Attorney General’s Criminal Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel
after referring cases to them due to questionable activity and receiving such
guidance.

--- Page 44 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Julia M. King
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditors
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Andrew S. Bien, CPA
Anthony V. Calcagno
Phillip C. Funkhouser
Julian N. Greene, CPA
Amanda L. Howell
James J. Podhorniak, CFE
Timothy S. Rice
Donald J. Rodis, III, CPA
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Staff Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditors