Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Hagerstown Region
Date: 01/06/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745ae
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:27:22.200073
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Hagerstown Region
January 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
January 6, 2010
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Hagerstown Region of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services, which comprises the Maryland Correctional Institution –
Hagerstown, the Maryland Correctional Training Center, and the Roxbury
Correctional Institution, for the period beginning June 1, 2006 and ending June
30, 2009.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by the Region.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Hagerstown Region is a separate budgetary unit within the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services and consists of the Maryland Correctional
Institution – Hagerstown, the Maryland Correctional Training Center and the
Roxbury Correctional Institution. These institutions are all medium security
facilities for adult male offenders. As of June 30, 2009, the Region had a total
population of 6,140 inmates and its fiscal year 2009 appropriation provided for
1,682 employee positions, including 1,271 correctional officers. According to the
State’s records, total Region expenditures were approximately $166.2 million
during fiscal year 2009.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 20, 2006. We determined that the
Region satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Region’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to the Region that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Region. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Hagerstown Region of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services for the period beginning June 1, 2006 and ending June 30,
2009. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
3

--- Page 6 ---
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, inmate and
welfare funds, payroll, cash receipts, and equipment inventories. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Region’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CPE
Audit Manager
David S. Propper
Senior Auditor
A’knea K. Smith
Staff Auditor