Title: Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
Date: 11/23/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1acc9d72456067468c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:42:05.349096
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and State
Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans
December 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Title 35 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland provides that the Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and State
Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP) is responsible for the
supervision and administration of the State’s three voluntary tax sheltered income
deferral plans for State employees and certain employees of local boards of
education and municipalities. These plans consist of the Deferred Compensation
Plan, the Tax Sheltered Annuity Plan (primarily for employees of State and local
educational institutions), and the Savings and Investment Plan, as permitted under
Sections 457, 403(b), and 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code, respectively.
Title 32 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland authorizes employer matching contributions of up to $600 per
participant each fiscal year, if appropriated, for State Employees’ Alternate
Contributory Pension Plan members who elect to contribute to the supplemental
retirement plans. These employer matching contributions are maintained in the
Match Plan and Trust, a defined contribution matching plan as permitted under
Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
The assets of all of MSRP’s plans are held in trust for the plan participants.
Under current tax laws, income taxes are not due from participants in these
supplemental retirement plans on amounts deferred, on amounts contributed by
the State, and on income earned on these amounts; rather, distributions are subject
to federal, state, and local income taxes when received. Effective April 2011, the
Board began accepting Roth contributions to both the 457 and 401(k) plans.
Unlike the other plans, Roth contributions are made on an after-tax basis, but
eligible distributions of Roth contributions and any earnings will not be further
taxed. Title 35 also provides that expenses incurred by MSRP for the
implementation, maintenance, and administration of these plans shall be paid
from the contributions to the plans or from the income or assets of the plans.
MSRP has designated a plan administrator for the supplemental retirement plans.
The plan administrator conducts the enrollment of all individuals who elect to
participate in the plans and acts as the agent of record in coordinating deferrals
between the State and the various investment carriers. A contractual agreement
has been executed between MSRP and the plan administrator that specifies the
rates to be assessed against participant account asset balances to cover related
administrative expenses incurred by or on behalf of the plan administrator. This
contract covers the period from January 1, 2013 through December 31, 2017.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Financial Statement Audits
MSRP engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to perform audits
of the plans’ financial statements for calendar years 2011, 2012, and 2013. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that these financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the respective net position of MSRP and the
changes in its net position held in trust for deferred compensation benefits in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
The audited financial statements of the plans indicate that, during calendar year
2013, amounts deferred by employees participating in the Deferred Compensation
Plan, the Tax Sheltered Annuity Plan, and the Savings and Investment Plan
totaled approximately $58.1 million, $2.5 million, and $82.6 million, respectively.
These financial statements further indicate that, as of December 31, 2013, the
assets available for plan benefits for the Deferred Compensation Plan, the Tax
Sheltered Annuity Plan, the Savings and Investment Plan, and the Match Plan and
Trust totaled approximately $1.5 billion, $82.9 million, $1.5 billion, and $173.7
million, respectively.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MSRP’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less
significant finding was communicated to MSRP that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the MSRP. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Board of Trustees of the
Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans (MSRP)
for the period beginning September 16, 2011 and ending August 19, 2014. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
4

--- Page 7 ---
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the MSRP’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included benefits paid to retirees and beneficiaries,
contributions from participating employees, and procurements and disbursements.
Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of
documents and records, and observations of MSRP’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MSRP engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to perform audits
of the plans’ financial statements for calendar years 2011, 2012, and 2013. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that these financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the respective net position of MSRP and the
changes in its net position held in trust for deferred compensation benefits in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. This independent certified public accounting firm also performed
certain agreed upon procedures to assist in evaluating the administration of the
plans for calendar years 2011 through 2013. In the related agreed upon
procedures reports, no findings were identified by the firm for the procedures
performed. We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to
provide audit coverage of certain aspects of MSRP’s operations (asset fee
collections, benefits paid). Our audit procedures in these areas were generally
limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
MSRP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Elaine D. Portnoy
Senior Auditor
Donald J. Rodis, III, CPA
Staff Auditor