Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Date: 11/07/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d72456067472e
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:56:25.234282
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Eastern Shore
November 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
University Affiliated Foundation
Finding 1 – UMES Did Not Exercise Effective Oversight of 9
Grants Awarded to Its Affiliated Foundation
Finding 2 – A UMES Management Employee Did Not Disclose 12
Certain Business Activities Conducted With the Foundation
as Required
Finding 3 – UMES Disbursed Federal Funds to Its Foundation 14
for Purposes Inconsistent with Applicable Federal Regulations
Finding 4 – UMES and Its Foundation Did Not Comply With Certain 15
University System of Maryland (USM) Board of Regents’ Policies
Student Accounts Receivable
* Finding 5 – UMES Had Not Established Adequate Controls Over 17
Certain Transactions Posted to Student Accounts
Finding 6 –Timely Actions Were Not Taken to Collect Outstanding 19
Student Accounts
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 – Capabilities Assigned to Individuals on the Financial 20
Management Systems Were Not Properly Restricted
Finding 8 – Controls Over UMES Accounts and Passwords Were Not 22
Sufficient to Protect This Information
Finding 9 – UMES Inappropriately Stored Sensitive Personally 23
Identifiable Information in Clear Text
Finding 10 – UMES’ Internal Network Was Not Adequately Secured 24
Finding 11 – Procedures for Installing and Monitoring Anti-Malware 25
Software on Network Computers Need Improvement
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Cash Receipts and Student Funds
Finding 12 – UMES Lacked Accountability and Control Over Its Collections 26
and Had Not Reconciled Certain Student Spending Account Balances
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 13 – UMES’ Execution of Certain Contracts Did Not Comply With 28
USM’s Policies and Certain Vendors Were Not Adequately Monitored
to Ensure Compliance With Contract Terms
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on University System of Maryland (USM)
University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES)
November 2014
 UMES did not exercise effective oversight of grants totaling $640,000
awarded to its affiliated Foundation. UMES allowed two of its management
employees who, at different times during the audit period, also served as
Foundation Executive Director, to exercise virtually complete control over
the grant transactions for both entities. In addition, the related scope of the
agreements was vague and immeasurable. Furthermore, UMES provided
grant funding to the Foundation in advance of the expenditures being
incurred; however, it did not obtain documentation to ensure the funds were
spent for their intended purposes. Finally, based upon our review, we were
unable to account for a $25,000 grant payment made by UMES to the
Foundation. This matter was referred to the Office of the Attorney General
(Finding 1).
UMES should preclude UMES employees who perform managerial functions on
behalf of its affiliated Foundation from representing both parties when
conducting business. In addition, UMES should ensure the grant agreements are
specific to deliverables and accomplishments and that these activities are
adequately monitored.
 The management employee who served as the Foundation Executive
Director since January 2013 was involved in business activities with the
Foundation that were not disclosed to UMES as required and raise questions
regarding a potential conflict of interest. This employee conducted business
with the Foundation through a limited liability corporation that this
employee owned. These business activities were financed, in part, by State
grants provided by UMES. In addition, this employee did not always file
financial disclosure statements with the State Ethics Commission (Finding
2).
UMES should immediately refer this matter to the State Ethics Commission and
ensure that the applicable employees properly disclose potential conflicts of
interest to UMES as required and file financial disclosure statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 UMES disbursed federal funds totaling $385,000 to its affiliated Foundation
for purposes inconsistent with applicable federal regulations (Finding 3).
UMES should expend funds in accordance with the applicable federal regulations
and should seek reimbursement from the Foundation for these grant payments.
 UMES and its affiliated Foundation did not comply with certain USM Board
of Regents’ policies. For example, resources provided to the Foundation by
UMES were not accurately disclosed. In addition, required reports were not
always submitted by the Foundation (Finding 4).
UMES should comply with the requirements of the Board of Regents’ policies.
 UMES had not established adequate controls over certain aspects of its
student accounts receivable. For example, non-cash credit entries related to
housing and board charges were not adequately reviewed to ensure
propriety. In addition, independent reviews were not performed to ensure
all eligible student accounts were timely referred to the Department of
Budget and Management – Central Collection Unit (Findings 5 and 6).
UMES should take the recommended actions to improve controls over student
accounts receivable.
 Numerous security and control issues were noted regarding UMES’
information systems. For example, personally identifiable information was
inappropriately stored in clear text (Findings 7 - 11).
UMES should take the recommended actions to improve security and controls
over its information systems.
 UMES lacked accountability and control over its collections and had not
reconciled certain student account balances to its records (Finding 12).
UMES should take the recommended actions to improve procedures and controls
over its cash receipts and student funds.
 UMES did not adequately monitor certain vendors to ensure compliance
with the related contract terms and certain contract procurement did not
comply with USM policies (Finding 13).
UMES should take the recommended actions to improve procedures and controls
over its contract procurement and monitoring.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) is a comprehensive public
institution of the University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the
jurisdiction of the USM’s Board of Regents. UMES offers an array of
baccalaureate programs in both traditional arts and sciences, and in applied
professional fields, as well as select professionally oriented graduate programs
and doctoral programs. Student enrollment for the Spring 2013 semester totaled
4,130, including 3,469 undergraduate students and 661 graduate students. The
UMES budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, and by restricted revenues, such as federal
grants and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, UMES’
revenues for fiscal year 2013 totaled approximately $125 million, including a
State general fund appropriation of approximately $30 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 11 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated August 29, 2011. We determined that UMES
satisfactorily addressed 10 of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
University Affiliated Foundation
Background
In September 2003, the University System of Maryland (USM) Board of Regents
approved the University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) request for the
creation of an Affiliated Foundation and Business Entity (Foundation) under the
Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated Foundations and its Policy on Business
Entities. This is the only Foundation affiliated with UMES. In accordance with
Board of Regents policies, there are annual written agreements that delineate the
purpose of the Foundation, which includes furthering and promoting charitable,
educational, and scientific purposes that foster and promote the general welfare
and mission of UMES through receipt and management of gifts and other activity.
The annual agreements further state that the Foundation will comply with the
Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated Foundations. The Foundation is under the
direction and control of a Board of Directors and does not have any employees.
Its administrative functions are performed by the Executive Director, who is also
a management employee of UMES.
Foundations are also created to provide financial support to their affiliated
University by providing funds acquired through fund-raising programs and
contributions from private sources. Since fiscal year 2011, according to the
Foundation’s disbursement journal, payments to UMES totaled approximately
$30,000. Conversely, during the period from January 2011 through January 2014,
State accounting records indicate UMES made 15 grant awards to the Foundation
totaling $640,000, funded by unrestricted funds of $90,000 and federal funds
totaling $550,000. These grant awards were executed and awarded to the
Foundation to support certain economic development projects, such as
agricultural projects.
Finding 1
UMES did not exercise effective oversight of grants awarded to the
Foundation.
Analysis
UMES did not exercise effective oversight of grants awarded to its affiliated
Foundation to ensure that grant funds were used appropriately and were properly
accounted for.
9

--- Page 12 ---
 UMES allowed the two UMES management employees who, at different
times during the audit period, also served as the Foundation Executive
Director, to exercise virtually complete control over the grant agreements and
related transactions for both entities. While the Chairman of the Foundation’s
Board of Directors signed the grant agreements on behalf of the Foundation,
the UMES employees, as liaisons for UMES’ dealings with the Foundation,
were responsible for executing the grant agreements on behalf of UMES and
submitting the invoices to UMES for payment of the grants on behalf of the
Foundation. The employees also initiated UMES’ payment of the invoices
and, after approval of the payments by certain UMES upper management
personnel, received the grant payments on behalf of the Foundation. Finally,
these employees managed the grant projects on behalf of the Foundation and
were responsible for monitoring the performance of the grant projects on
behalf of UMES. Although the Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated
Foundations allows a UMES management employee to also serve as the
Executive Director of the Foundation, the Policy stipulates that the employee
in this position may not represent both parties in any negotiation between
UMES and the Foundation.
 The grant agreements between UMES and the Foundation were not complete.
Specifically, the agreements did not include a time period for the performance
of the grant projects or require documentation of the Foundation’s overall
activities and achievements. In addition, although the grant agreements
required progress reports, the Foundation did not provide any such reports to
UMES. Furthermore, the scope of each agreement was vague and
immeasurable. For example, while the agreements stated that the Foundation
was to develop agricultural projects targeted for new entrants into agriculture,
the agreements failed to indicate any specific projects, deliverables, or
accomplishments that were to be achieved. In addition, we were advised by
the UMES employee who had been serving as the Foundation’s Executive
Director since January 2013 that there were no tangible benefits or product
deliveries to UMES under these agreements.
 UMES provided grant funding to the Foundation in advance of the
expenditures being incurred; however, it did not obtain documentation from
the Foundation, such as invoices, to account for the use of the grant funds to
ensure they were spent for purposes consistent with the intent of the
agreements. We obtained documentation from the Foundation’s accounting
firm and, based upon general descriptions provided, funds received from
UMES were used for travel and administrative expenses, as well as for
expenses related to agricultural projects. Certain expenditures appeared
questionable since they were primarily related to the Foundation’s general
10

--- Page 13 ---
operations and not directly attributable to the general purposes of the grants.
For example, during the period from January 2011 through January 2014,
$191,000 of these expenditures was incurred for accounting services provided
to the Foundation.
 Because of UMES’ lack of accountability over the grant funds advanced to the
Foundation, we reviewed the Foundation’s records to account for the
$640,000 in UMES payments made during the period from January 2011
through January 2014. Based on our review, we were unable to account for a
$25,000 grant payment made in March 2011. After obtaining a copy of the
cancelled check, we determined that the check was deposited in a bank other
than the bank used by the Foundation. As a result, this matter was referred to
the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division. A referral to the
Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or
that criminal charges will be filed. Given that UMES awarded additional
grants totaling $640,000 during the period from July 2006 through December
2010, UMES should consider determining if these grant funds have been
properly accounted for.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that the UMES employee(s) who also performs managerial
functions on behalf of the Foundation is not permitted to represent both
UMES and the Foundation in business transactions conducted between
them;
b. ensure that the scope of the grant agreements includes specific
deliverables or accomplishments, a time period for the performance of
the grant project, and detailed project requirements;
c. obtain the required progress reports that would enable UMES to
determine if deliverables were achieved;
d. obtain and review supporting documentation from the Foundation for all
grant expenditures, including the aforementioned $191,000, to ensure
grant funds are properly accounted for and spent in accordance with the
grant agreement, and recover all funds not appropriately spent; and
e. consult with USM’s Office of Internal Audit to determine the necessity of
conducting an expanded review of grant funds advanced to the
Foundation to include expenditure activity prior to January 2011.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
A UMES management employee was involved in business activities that were
not formally disclosed to UMES as required and that raise questions
regarding a potential conflict of interest. In addition, this employee did not
always file financial disclosure statements with the State Ethics Commission.
Analysis
The UMES management employee who, since January 2013, served as its liaison
with the affiliated Foundation and was the Foundation’s Executive Director, also
conducted business with the Foundation through a limited liability company
(LLC) that this management employee owned, and the employee did not report
this relationship to UMES. Furthermore, the employee did not always file
financial disclosure statements with the State Ethics Commission; in this regard,
UMES failed to notify the Commission of the employee’s requirement to file the
statements. Finally, this business arrangement raises questions regarding
potential conflicts of interest.
This employee began employment with UMES in November 2011 and assumed
the aforementioned UMES management position and the position of the
Foundation’s Executive Director in January 2013. As noted in Finding 1, in the
employee’s dual capacity, this individual exercised virtually complete control
over grant transactions for both entities. Our review disclosed the following
conditions pertaining to the employee’s business interests and involvement with
the Foundation:
 The employee was the controlling member of an LLC that owned the property
where four greenhouses, owned by the Foundation, were located for an
agricultural development project. Funded by UMES and the Foundation, this
agricultural project was proposed to provide information and training to local
farmers on the profitability of vegetable production using certain greenhouses
and production technologies. The greenhouses were built in fiscal year 2009,
prior to the employee being hired by UMES in November 2011, and
continued to be in operation as of April 1, 2014.
 The LLC and the Foundation entered into a memorandum of understanding
(MOU) regarding the ongoing agricultural development project covering the
period from January 1, 2012 to December 31, 2020. Under the terms of the
MOU, certain costs that are incurred by the LLC under the project including
but not limited to equipment, utilities, insurance, and repairs may be
reimbursed or paid by the Foundation on behalf of the LLC. Based upon our
review of certain documentation provided by the Foundation’s accounting
firm, these costs totaled approximately $380,000 for the period from January
12

--- Page 15 ---
2012 to March 2014. A significant portion of these costs appeared to be
funded by the $640,000 UMES paid to the Foundation under the 15 grant
agreements.
 The agricultural project was also funded directly by UMES under a two-year
federal grant awarded to UMES in September 2011 totaling approximately
$200,000. These funds were used to pay for a portion of this employee’s
UMES salary and the project’s operating expenses.
 According to the employee, the LLC had an agreement with a retail vendor for
the sale of products grown in the greenhouses built for the agricultural
development project and all of the revenue collected by the LLC under the
sales agreement was used to pay for the project’s operating expenses. The
amount of revenue collected by the LLC was not available.
 On behalf of the Foundation, this employee authorized payments to an entity
owned by a relative of the employee for construction services related to the
agricultural development project. Payments to this entity from October 2013
to April 2014 totaled approximately $115,000.
The employee violated UMES procedures by not submitting an annual report of
potential conflicts of interest for calendar years 2012 and 2013. The UMES
Procedures on Conflict of Interest in Research or Development state that each
employee who holds an interest with an entity engaged in research or
development, or an entity having a direct interest in the outcome of research or
development must complete a “Research or Development Interest Form” so that
potential conflicts of interest can be evaluated. The Procedures acknowledge the
uniqueness of situations that may involve UMES employees, where certain
relationships that would otherwise violate Public Ethics Law may be permitted.
In this regard, the portion of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland pertaining to Higher Education allows employees of a university to
serve as an official or employee of an affiliated foundation, to foster fundraising
and provide related services for the benefit of the institution. Nevertheless, these
relationships must be reported, reviewed, and approved in accordance with the
Procedures, and a copy of the “Research or Development Interest Form” must be
filed with the State Ethics Commission.
Furthermore, UMES did not notify the State Ethics Commission that this
employee met the criteria for filing the annual financial disclosure statements and
the employee did not file a financial disclosure statement with the State Ethics
Commission for calendar year 2012. While the employee filed a financial
disclosure statement for 2013 after our inquiries, we noted that certain of the
13

--- Page 16 ---
employee’s business interests were not disclosed. For example, the employee’s
position as the Executive Director of the Foundation was not disclosed, nor was
the employee’s interest in the LLC. State Ethics Law generally requires
employees who are grade 16 or above to prepare and submit a financial disclosure
statement to the State Ethics Commission covering the calendar year immediately
preceding the year of filing, within 30 days after appointment to the employee’s
position and by April 30 every year thereafter. The State Ethics Commission
relies on the employing State agency to identify the positions that meet the criteria
for filing and to request that the State Ethics Commission add the positions to the
financial disclosure filing program.
We discussed this matter with staff at the State Ethics Commission who advised
us that, because of the aforementioned exceptions contained in the Education
Article, it was not possible to determine if a violation of the Public Ethics Law
had occurred without a review by its staff on this matter.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMES
a. immediately refer this matter to the State Ethics Commission, obtain
advice as to whether the employee needs to file amended financial
disclosure statements for years when certain information was not
disclosed, and take appropriate action as directed by the Commission;
b. require the employee to immediately comply with the UMES Procedures
by completing and filing the “Research or Development Interest Form,”
promptly evaluate the matter, and take appropriate action;
c. identify all positions meeting the legal criteria for filing financial
disclosure statements, including the position held by this employee,
appropriately notify the State Ethics Commission for monitoring
purposes, and ensure that its employees file the required statements
annually; and
d. ensure that other employees, as applicable, comply with the UMES
Procedures.
Finding 3
UMES disbursed federal funds totaling $385,000 to its affiliated Foundation
for purposes inconsistent with applicable federal regulations.
Analysis
UMES disbursed certain federal funds to its affiliated Foundation which,
according to applicable federal regulations, was inappropriate because the funds
were not used for certain specified purposes. Specifically, at the request of the
14

--- Page 17 ---
aforementioned management employee who also served as the Executive Director
of the Foundation, UMES used Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) revenue as the
source of funding for 2 of the 15 grant payments made to the Foundation during
the period from January 2011 through January 2014. The two payments were
made in July 2013 and January 2014 and totaled $385,000.
In the 1990s, UMES received federal funds totaling approximately $4.3 million
from the U.S. Department of Commerce - Economic Development Administration
to establish the RLF to provide loans to local businesses for development and
growth. According to federal regulations, RLF income (interest and fees paid on
the loans) must be placed in the RLF capital base and used for future loans or to
cover eligible and reasonable administrative costs associated with RLF
operations. The grant payments to the Foundation using these funds violated
federal regulations since the funds were not used for either of these purposes.
Consequently, UMES’ use of the funds could result in federal fiscal sanctions,
including the suspension or termination of the RLF.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMES
a. spend federal funds consistent with the applicable federal regulations,
and
b. seek reimbursement from the Foundation for the aforementioned grant
payments and deposit these funds into the RLF account.
Finding 4
UMES and its affiliated Foundation did not comply with certain USM Board
of Regents’ policies.
Analysis
UMES and its affiliated Foundation did not comply with certain USM Board of
Regents’ policies. UMES and the Foundation are required to comply with the
Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated Foundations and Policy on Business
Entities. However, our review disclosed that UMES did not comply with certain
requirements of these policies.
 Resources provided to the Foundation by UMES were not accurately
disclosed in the annual agreements between UMES and the Foundation.
UMES assigned one employee to carry out the functions of the Foundation as
its Executive Director and provided administrative office space and the use of
facilities. According to the Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated
Foundations, although the Foundation is not required to reimburse UMES for
15

--- Page 18 ---
these resources, the resources must be properly quantified and included in the
annual agreements. Our review of the agreements and the financial statements
for fiscal years 2011 to 2013 disclosed that the annual staff resources received
from UMES were underreported by approximately $60,000 each year, and
non-staff resources were not quantified and included in the agreements, as
required.
 The Foundation engaged in activities, including the administration of research
grants, which potentially were in conflict with the role and mission of USM
and its institutions, without obtaining proper approval. For example, in June
2013, the Foundation was awarded a $300,000 grant from the Maryland
Energy Administration for the development of clean energy generation
technologies—a project that could be considered within the scope of the
mission of a research institution, such as UMES. Consequently, instead of
supporting research at UMES, the Foundation may be in competition for the
grant funding. The Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated Foundations
prohibits foundations from conducting activities that would be within the
scope of the mission of USM or any of its institutions, except with the
express, prior approval of the President of the institution, with a letter of
justification to the Chancellor of USM documenting the reasons why the
foundation is conducting these activities.
 UMES did not obtain certain required reports from the Foundation for fiscal
year 2013 until we requested them in February 2014 and certain other reports
had not been obtained. The Board of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated
Foundations requires the foundations to submit certain reports to the President
of the institutions within 120 days after the close of USM’s fiscal year. This
includes, but is not limited to, annual financial audit reports, a list of all state
and federal grants and contracts managed by the foundation, and an annual
report of the foundation’s major activities. These reports, which UMES
subsequently obtained after our request, must also be submitted to the
Legislative Reference Office by the Chancellor within 180 days of USM’s
fiscal year end. In addition, certain other reports required by the Policy were
not submitted by the Foundation for fiscal years 2011, 2012, and 2013.
During these years, for example, the Foundation did not provide a list of
Foundation Officers and Directors and a list of USM employees who received
compensation or other payments from the Foundation during the fiscal year
and the amount of the payments.
 Since the inception of the Foundation, UMES had not prepared and submitted
to the Chancellor a five-year business plan which should include, in part, the
financial relationship between the business entity and UMES and an
16

--- Page 19 ---
evaluation of whether the business entity met performance indicators
recommended to or adopted by the Board of Regents. The Board of Regents’
Policy on Business Entities requires the President of the institution to submit
updated five-year plans to the Chancellor within 120 days after the end of
USM’s fiscal year.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMES and its affiliated Foundation comply with the
requirements contained in the Board of Regents’ policies. Specifically, we
recommend that UMES
a. accurately disclose the value of staff and non-staff resources provided to
the Foundation in its annual agreements;
b. obtain proper approvals for Foundation activities that would be
considered within the role and mission of USM and its institutions;
c. obtain all of the required annual reports and submit them to the USM
Chancellor, as required; and
d. prepare and submit a five-year business plan to the USM Chancellor, as
required.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 5
UMES had not established proper controls over financial aid awards, certain
non-cash credits, and changes to student residency status.
Analysis
Sufficient internal controls had not been established to ensure the propriety of
financial aid awards and certain non-cash credits posted to student accounts. In
addition, reclassifications of student residency were not always supported.
 UMES did not independently verify certain financial aid awards and related
adjustments posted to student accounts for propriety. Award amounts were
based on various eligibility criteria and student financial data. UMES
conducted a review each semester of financial data submitted by
approximately 200 students to ensure that the data were accurately reported.
However, the employee who generated the report of students subject to review
was also responsible for modifying student financial awards in the automated
system. Additionally, the review did not ensure that the amount of certain
financial aid awards, including any adjustments, was accurately posted and
authorized by supervisory personnel. For example, the review did not ensure
that Honors scholarship awards were supported by approved Scholarship
17

--- Page 20 ---
Authorization Forms. Similar situations were commented upon in our
preceding audit report. According to UMES records, during fiscal year 2013,
financial aid awarded to students, including grants and scholarships, totaled
approximately $60.9 million.
 Non-cash credit adjustments posted to student accounts that related to housing
and board charges were not adequately reviewed to ensure their propriety.
Although there was an independent review of these non-cash credit
adjustments, the review did not include a verification of the credits to source
documents. As a result, unauthorized or inaccurate non-cash credit
adjustments could be made without detection. According to UMES records,
housing and board non-cash credit adjustments processed in fiscal year 2013
totaled approximately $2.8 million.
 Reclassifications of student residency status were not always supported and
approved. Our test of 15 residency reclassifications from out-of-state to in-
state status made during fiscal years 2013 and 2014, for both undergraduate
and graduate students, disclosed that UMES could not provide adequate
documentation to support 3 reclassifications. The Board of Regents’ Policy
on Student Classification for Admission and Tuition Purposes requires that a
student provide evidence of his or her residency status, such as a valid
Maryland driver’s license. Additionally, UMES policy requires that changes
to a student’s residency status be subject to the review and approval of the
Residency Committee. Accurate student residency status determinations are
critical because of the significant differences between in-state and out-of-state
student tuition rates. For example, full-time undergraduate tuition and fee
charges for the spring 2013 semester totaled $3,357 for Maryland residents
and $7,425 for nonresidents, a difference of $4,068, per semester. According
to UMES records, a total of 84 residency status changes were processed
during fiscal year 2013. Upon further investigation, UMES was later able to
determine the reclassifications were proper.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that financial aid awards are selected and reviewed by
independent personnel who do not have the capability to modify student
awards in the system;
b. ensure that the calculation and authorization of the selected financial aid
awards are reviewed and supported by appropriate documentation
(repeat);
c. ensure that non-cash credit adjustments related to housing and board
charges are verified to source documents; and
18

--- Page 21 ---
d. maintain adequate documentation supporting student residency
reclassifications, as required by USM policy, and ensure that all changes
are subject to review and approval by the Residency Committee.
We advised UMES on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 6
UMES did not have adequate internal controls to ensure the timely referral
of all delinquent student accounts to the Department of Budget and
Management – Central Collection Unit (CCU).
Analysis
UMES did not establish proper controls to ensure all delinquent student accounts
were referred to CCU in a timely manner. Specifically, one employee was
responsible for identifying delinquent accounts in the student accounts receivable
system and submitting these accounts to CCU without an independent review to
ensure that all eligible accounts were submitted timely. Our test of 15 delinquent
student accounts, which totaled approximately $123,000, disclosed that UMES
did not always take appropriate collection action relating to outstanding student
account balances as required by CCU regulations, as modified for UMES. Four
accounts submitted to CCU, with outstanding balances totaling approximately
$31,000, had not been referred to CCU for periods ranging from 4 months to 13
months beyond the required transfer date. In addition, two of the four student
accounts with delinquent balances totaling $13,000 were also allowed to register
for classes in subsequent semesters. UMES could not provide us with
documentation that the outstanding balances were covered by a USM policy
exemption (such as pending financial aid).
According to UMES’ records, the balance of the student accounts receivable
totaled approximately $2.3 million as of June 30, 2013, of which $1.8 million was
outstanding for over 120 days. During fiscal year 2013, delinquent accounts
totaling $1.8 million were referred to CCU.
The USM Board of Regents’ Policy on Payment of Tuition and Fees states that
tuition and fees are due and payable in full by the due date, unless the student is
covered by a specific exemption, such as pending financial aid. The Policy further
requires that appropriate administrative action (such as barring class attendance)
be initiated if timely payment is not received. CCU regulations, as amended for
UMES, require that each semester’s delinquent accounts be transferred to CCU at
the end of the final registration period of the subsequent semester.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMES
a. establish procedures requiring independent reviews to ensure all eligible
student accounts are referred to CCU in a timely manner;
b. transfer all delinquent accounts to CCU on a timely basis, as required;
and
c. not permit students with outstanding account balances to register for
subsequent semesters unless the student qualifies for an exemption as
specified in the Board of Regents’ Policy.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
UMES’ Administrative Computing and Information Technology units manage the
development, maintenance, and support of UMES’ information technology
infrastructure including all related networking, telecommunications, and business
information systems. These units maintain a UMES campus-wide network,
supporting both administrative and academic operations. They also provide
support for the student information system, the financial management systems,
and an important document management system. These units also operate an
integrated administrative and academic computer network, which provides
connections to multiple servers used for administrative and academic purposes.
The UMES network also includes separate email and file servers and firewalls. In
addition, UMES connects to the Maryland Research and Educational Network
(MDREN) which enables UMES to connect with the Internet and other USM
institutions.
Finding 7
UMES did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on the
financial management systems were adequately restricted.
Analysis
UMES did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on the financial
management systems were adequately restricted over recordation of cash receipt,
student account, and financial aid transactions. Our review of system capabilities
assigned to 84 active users disclosed that some users were assigned unnecessary
or inappropriate system capabilities.
 Our review of 13 critical functions related to cash receipts determined that 4
of the system users were assigned inappropriate access to one or more of the
critical functions to perform their assigned duties. For example, 2 of these
20

--- Page 23 ---
users could apply payments to student accounts and void receipts on the cash
receipts system.
 Our review of 14 critical functions related to student accounts determined that
19 of the system users did not need access to one or more of the critical
functions, such as processing non-cash credits, to perform their job duties.
 Our review of 3 critical functions related to student financial aid determined
that 4 of the system users were assigned inappropriate access to one or more
of the critical functions to perform their assigned duties. For example, 2 users
could add financial aid awards to the system and disburse the awards to
students.
This unnecessary or inappropriate access was caused, in part, by the insufficient
review of security reports of system access capabilities. Specifically, UMES
department supervisors periodically generated and reviewed security reports of
the access capabilities assigned to users that enable those employees to perform
critical functions. However, these reports only displayed the access capabilities
assigned to the employees working in each respective department. Therefore, the
supervisors reviewing these reports could not identify and correct improper access
capabilities related to their respective departments that were assigned to
employees of other departments.
USM’s Information Technology Security Guidelines specify that institutions are
responsible for ensuring that access rights reflect employee status, including
changes in employee status. In addition, institutions must segregate the functions
of system administration, programming, processing, and authorizing business
transactions, and security administration to ensure the appropriate separation of
duties for system users.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMES
a. restrict user access capabilities for critical functions to those employees
who require such capabilities to perform their assigned job duties, and
b. periodically generate and review computer system security reports that
include all users who are assigned access capabilities to perform critical
functions in the respective departments and correct instances of improper
access.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 8
Controls over UMES accounts and passwords were not sufficient to properly
protect this information.
Analysis
Controls over UMES accounts and passwords were not sufficient to properly
protect this information.
 An unencrypted master file of accounts and related passwords, which
contained in clear text, the userids and passwords for all critical UMES
systems (for example, databases, servers, network devices) was maintained on
a local workstation. Unauthorized disclosure of the contents of this file could
compromise the entire UMES enterprise. We were advised that UMES
deleted this file upon notification of this condition.
 Nine employees had access to a second copy of the aforementioned master file
and another file containing many critical administration userids and passwords
and had knowledge of the passwords to open and read these files. As a result,
these nine employees had inappropriate access to certain critical credentials
(beyond their job duties). With access to these critical credentials, these nine
employees could inappropriately modify production data for which they had
no responsibilities.
 An additional 13 employees had unnecessary read and modify access to a
shared folder on a server which contained a third copy of the aforementioned
master file. Although this copy was password protected, these 13 employees
could copy this file and then go offline (which would not be subject to any
lockout provisions) and attempt to “guess” the password (using automated
tools) and thereby gain unauthorized administrative access to all UMES
systems.
Critical login credentials should be kept confidential and only available to
employees who require such access for their job duties. The existence of several
copies of these account and password files creates an unnecessary risk that the
credentials of powerful accounts associated with the various critical UMES
systems could be exposed.
The USM Guidelines in Response to the State’s IT Security Policy states that
passwords must not be stored in clear text and that authorized users are
responsible for the security of their passwords and accounts.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that UMES
a. restrict access to account and password files to only those employees who
require such access so that employees do not have access to logon
credentials for systems and devices not under their control, and
b. password protect these files with strong passwords that are periodically
changed.
Finding 9
UMES inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information in
clear text.
Analysis
UMES inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) in
clear text.
 Full social security numbers of current and former students and employees
along with associated names and addresses were stored in unencrypted form
in a critical production database. We determined that 117,510 distinct,
unencrypted social security numbers were stored in this database.
 Documents relating to human resources, admissions, registration, and
financial aid contained the names and distinct full social security numbers of
68,513 current and former students and employees. These documents were
retained in an unencrypted manner on a document management server. In
addition, these documents were stored in a production database table and were
not encrypted.
 Applications that accessed the databases which contained the aforementioned
117,510 and 68,513 records displayed the full social security number to
application users. These displays were not designed to show truncated or
masked social security numbers but rather the full numbers.
This PII, which is commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft, should
be protected by appropriate information system security controls. The USM
Guidelines in Response to the State’s IT Security Policy requires that institutions
implement measures to protect confidential information from disclosure.
Specifically, institutions “must outline the protection measures that the institution
uses to protect nonpublic information at rest or in transit across networks.” The
guidelines define these protection measures as including “the deletion of
23

--- Page 26 ---
unneeded nonpublic information, the encryption of nonpublic information, or
other equally secure safeguards.”
Recommendation 9
We recommend that UMES
a. encrypt all database tables containing PII;
b. retain the documents containing PII, in the document management
server, in an encrypted volume; and
c. mask or truncate social security numbers from displays used by
application users who do not need access to full social security numbers.
Finding 10
The UMES internal network was not adequately secured.
Analysis
The UMES internal network was not adequately secured.
 Numerous computer labs throughout UMES had unnecessary network level
access to critical UMES administrative resources. UMES has a project
underway to logically segment and properly restrict network traffic from these
computer labs. However, at the time of our audit only 6 of 64 labs had been
remediated. Although we did not verify UMES’ assertions, we were advised
that UMES completed the network segmentation project in July 2014 and
properly segmented all UMES labs.
 Various other unnecessary and insecure connections were allowed to portions
of the UMES internal network, thereby placing various network devices at
risk. For example, we noted that any guest wireless network user had
unnecessary network level access to any UMES device over several frequently
used ports.
 According to UMES records, host-based intrusion protection systems (HIPS)
were utilized on 16 servers that processed encrypted traffic. However, we
identified 71 internal network addresses which could receive encrypted traffic
and did not have HIPS coverage. The absence of HIPS coverage for traffic to
these network addresses created security risks in that UMES’ network based
intrusion detection prevention system cannot read encrypted traffic flowing
into its network whereas HIPS can read and analyze such traffic and protect
critical servers from malicious traffic.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 10
We recommend that UMES
a. restrict access, at the network level, to key administrative resources to
only those entities requiring such access; and
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identify how HIPS coverage should be best applied to its network,
and implement such coverage.
Finding 11
Procedures for installing and monitoring anti-malware software on network
computers need improvement.
Analysis
Procedures for installing and monitoring anti-malware software on network
computers need improvement.
 UMES personnel advised us that anti-malware software was not installed on
approximately 100 computers with a specific operating system due to
performance issues. As a result of this condition, these computers were not
adequately protected from malware risks.
 UMES lacked assurance that malware protection software was installed on
many of its computers. As of March 2014, the anti-malware software console
dashboard reported the UMES network included approximately 350 additional
computers without anti-malware software. We were advised by UMES IT
personnel that this count of unmanaged computers was unreliable because the
source information included certain decommissioned or renamed computers.
As a result of these conditions, UMES lacked assurance that many UMES
computers had up-to-date anti-malware software installed.
The USM Guidelines in Response to the State IT Security Policy require that
standard virus protection programs be installed, updated, and maintained on all
desktops and laptops as well as servers.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that anti-malware software is installed on all UMES computers,
b. remove decommissioned and renamed computers from its source listing
of active computers so that the anti-malware software console dashboard
can accurately report the malware protection status for the population of
UMES computers, and
25

--- Page 28 ---
c. use the anti-malware software console dashboard to monitor all UMES
workstations and servers to ensure that all such devices are properly
protected and that all signature updates are promptly installed.
Cash Receipts and Student Funds
Finding 12
UMES lacked accountability and control over its collections and had not
reconciled certain student spending account balances.
Analysis
UMES did not establish sufficient accountability and control over its collections
and had not reconciled certain student spending account balances. According to
UMES’ records, during fiscal year 2013, collections totaled approximately $19.4
million, including approximately $6.8 million in credit card receipts and
approximately $1.6 million in student spending account funds.
 One employee in the Bursar’s office, who was responsible for processing
voids on the cash register system, also had access to the related cash receipts
and had the ability to process non-cash credit adjustments to student accounts
receivable records. In addition, independent verifications were not adequately
performed to ensure that all collections were deposited. Specifically, the
employee responsible for performing the deposit verifications did not use the
initial record of collections (cash register reports). Rather, the deposit was
verified to a cash receipt log maintained by the employee who prepared the
deposit.
 Two individuals had improper administrative access to an online banking
system used by UMES to process certain credit card collections. The access
assigned to these individuals gave them the capability to change the bank
account where the collections were deposited. One of these individuals
retained administrative access to the system for four months after retiring
from UMES. Additionally, as of March 2014, UMES had not reconciled its
record of credit card collections processed with the receipt of the related funds
in the State’s bank account maintained by the State Treasurer’s Office (STO)
since May 2011. Furthermore, independent source documentation was not
used when these reconciliations were last prepared. Specifically, for certain
credit card collections, the credit card transaction report used to reconcile to
the STO balance was prepared by one of the employees with the improper
capability to change the bank account where the payments were deposited.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Consequently, UMES lacked assurance that all credit card receipts recorded in
its automated system were received by the STO.
 The aggregate balance of individual student spending accounts had not been
reconciled with the fund account balance recorded in UMES’ records from
inception until November 2013. At that time, the reconciliation had an
unexplained difference of $66,000 where UMES’ fund account balance
($401,000) exceeded the total of the individual student accounts ($335,000).
Furthermore, this reconciliation had not been reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel. As a result, UMES lacked assurance that all
transactions affecting the individual student accounts were accurately
recorded. UMES issues multi-functional student identification cards that also
act as pre-paid debit cards. Students may deposit funds into their individual
spending accounts, allowing them to make cash-free purchases at approved
campus locations.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual dictates that there
be segregation of the cash receipts handling duties from the cash receipts and
accounts receivable record keeping functions. The Manual also states that the
reconciliation of cash receipts to deposit be performed using source
documentation by an employee independent of the cash receipts functions.
According to industry best practices, as described by the Department of
Information Technology’s State Information Technology Access Control
Standards, system access should be limited to the appropriate authorized
individuals and be properly controlled. According to the USM’s Accounting
Practices, for cash held at the STO and student spending account balances,
reconciliations must be completed, at least quarterly, that identify and document
the items in either the detail records, or the summary balances, as applicable. In
addition, the Accounting Practices require independent review and approval of
the reconciliations, and any necessary adjustments.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that employees with non-cash credit and void capabilities do not
have access to the related cash receipts and that deposits are verified to
the initial record of the collections;
b. periodically review the online banking system access capabilities and
restrict such access to employees who need it for their job duties;
c. ensure that the credit card transaction report used in the reconciliation is
prepared by an employee who does not have access to change the bank
account where the funds are deposited;
27

--- Page 30 ---
d. reconcile its record of credit card collections processed with the receipt of
the related funds by the STO, reconcile the total of its individual student
spending accounts with the fund account balance recorded in its records,
at least quarterly, and investigate and resolve any differences identified
by the reconciliations; and
e. ensure the reconciliations are reviewed and approved by independent
supervisory personnel.
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 13
UMES’ execution of certain lease agreements and contract extensions did not
comply with USM’s policies, and UMES did not adequately monitor certain
vendors to ensure compliance with contract terms.
Analysis
UMES’ execution of certain lease agreements and contract extensions did not
comply with USM and UMES policies. In addition, UMES did not adequately
verify a certain vendor’s billings for propriety and did not monitor its bookstore
contractor to ensure that sales commissions it remitted were in compliance with
contract terms.
 UMES executed lease agreements for student housing facilities without
obtaining the approval of USM’s Board of Regents, as required for certain
lease agreements in excess of $500,000. Since July 2009, UMES has entered
into annual agreements with two property owners for the leasing of off-
campus housing facilities to supplement its on-campus student housing
facilities. In fiscal year 2014, the value of these two agreements totaled $1.5
million and $564,000, respectively.
 UMES used a fuel contractor to obtain fuel without obtaining competitive
bids. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that UMES received the best
available price. In addition, UMES did not verify the fuel rates billed by the
vendor were in accordance with the contract. According to the State’s
records, payments made to this vendor in fiscal year 2013 totaled
approximately $890,000.
 UMES did not verify sales reports, which were used to calculate monthly
commission payments made by the operator of its bookstore. In this regard,
the vendor paid a commission to UMES based on a percentage of total store
(gross) sales. However, UMES did not verify reported sales, for example, by
28

--- Page 31 ---
utilizing operating statements prepared by an independent certified public
accounting firm, or obtaining cash register reports to ensure that the vendor
had remitted the appropriate amount of sales commissions, as provided by the
contract. UMES contracted with a vendor to operate its campus bookstore for
the term March 19, 2012 through March 19, 2013, with ten one-year renewal
options. The contract requires that UMES be paid a guaranteed annual fee of
$225,000 or a percentage of gross sales, whichever is greater. The vendor
reported sales during the first year totaling $1.96 million and, accordingly,
paid the guaranteed annual fee of $225,000 to UMES.
USM’s Policy on Acquisition, Disposition, and Leasing of Real Property requires
approval by the Board of Regents for leases in which an Institution is the lessee
and the consideration is expected to exceed $500,000 in any year. Additionally,
USM’s Procurement Policies and Procedures require a formal written
procurement process, such as competitive sealed bidding, for procurements that
are reasonable expected to exceed $100,000.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that UMES
a. obtain approval from USM’s Board of Regents for all lease agreements in
excess of $500,000, including the aforementioned student housing leases;
b. comply with USM’s Procurement Policies and Procedures by completing a
formal written procurement process for procurements exceeding
$100,000, including the aforementioned contract for fuel purchases;
c. ensure that prices paid for goods and services are in accordance with the
approved contract prices; and
d. verify reported gross sales from its bookstore contractor to ensure the
proper fees are remitted, as required by the contract terms.
29

--- Page 32 ---
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) for the period
beginning August 9, 2010 and ending December 1, 2013. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMES’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the affiliated foundation, cash receipts, student
accounts receivable, purchases and disbursements, student financial aid, and
payroll. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding
audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
UMES’ operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from UMES’ financial system for the purpose of testing student
accounts receivable and financial aid. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMES by the USM
Office (such as endowment accounting) and by the University of Maryland,
College Park (such as processing vendor payment transmittals and payroll).
These support services are included within the scope of our audits of the USM
Office and the University of Maryland, College Park, respectively. In addition,
our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of UMES’ compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including the components of the USM.
UMES’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMES’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMES that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMES, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
32

--- Page 36 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
University Affiliated Foundation
Finding 1
UMES did not exercise effective oversight of grants awarded to the
Foundation.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that the UMES employee(s) who also performs managerial
functions on behalf of the Foundation is not permitted to represent both
UMES and the Foundation in business transactions conducted between
them;
b. ensure that the scope of the grant agreements includes specific
deliverables or accomplishments, a time period for the performance of
the grant project, and detailed project requirements;
c. obtain the required progress reports that would enable UMES to
determine if deliverables were achieved;
d. obtain and review supporting documentation from the Foundation for all
grant expenditures, including the aforementioned $191,000, to ensure
grant funds are properly accounted for and spent in accordance with the
grant agreement, and recover all funds not appropriately spent; and
e. consult with USM’s Office of Internal Audit to determine the necessity of
conducting an expanded review of grant funds advanced to the
Foundation to include expenditure activity prior to January 2011.
University response
The University agrees with this recommendation.
a. Effective immediately, if there will be a grant award to the Foundation, the
Director of Sponsored Programs will be responsible for executing the
grant agreement and monitoring of the related grant on behalf of UMES.
b. If there should be any grants awarded, the Director of Sponsored Programs
will be responsible for ensuring that the scope of the grant agreements
includes specific deliverable or accomplishments, including time frame for
performance effective immediately.
c. If there should be any grants awarded, the Director of Sponsored Programs
will ensure that progress reports are submitted to enable UMES to
determine if deliverables are being achieved effective with new awards.

--- Page 37 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
d. All expenditures not in compliance will be appropriately identified by
March 31, 2015 and if necessary, a repayment plan established by June 30,
2015.
e. UMES will consult with the USM’s Office of the Internal Audit to
determine its feasibility of expanding the review of funds disbursed to the
foundation to include the period prior to January 2011 within thirty days
from receiving the audit report.
Finding 2
A UMES management employee was involved in business activities that were
not formally disclosed to UMES as required and that raise questions
regarding a potential conflict of interest. In addition, this employee did not
always file financial disclosure statements with the State Ethics Commission.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMES
a. immediately refer this matter to the State Ethics Commission, obtain
advice as to whether the employee needs to file amended financial
disclosure statements for years when certain information was not
disclosed, and take appropriate action as directed by the Commission;
b. require the employee to immediately comply with the UMES Procedures
by completing and filing the “Research or Development Interest Form,”
promptly evaluate the matter, and take appropriate action;
c. identify all positions meeting the legal criteria for filing financial
disclosure statements, including the position held by this employee,
appropriately notify the State Ethics Commission for monitoring
purposes, and ensure that its employees file the required statements
annually; and
d. ensure that other employees, as applicable, comply with the UMES
Procedures.
University response
a. UMES will immediately refer this matter to the State Ethics Commission,
obtain advice as to whether the former employee needs to file an amended
financial disclosure statement for years when certain information was not
disclosed and will take appropriate action as directed by the Commission.

--- Page 38 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
b. UMES will request the former employee to immediately comply with
UMES procedures by completing and filing the “Research or
Development Interest Form.” UMES will promptly evaluate the matter
and take appropriate action.
c. UMES has already taken action in notifying the State Ethics Commission
in relation to the employee referenced and all other employees as
appropriate upon the start of their service. UMES and the State Ethics
Commission reviewed the entire employee roster, approximately two
years ago, to ensure appropriate personnel were directed to prepare an
annual Financial Disclosure Statement. Since that review, all newly hired
individuals are reviewed accordingly.
d. UMES will immediately ensure that other employees, as applicable,
comply with UMES procedures.
Finding 3
UMES disbursed federal funds totaling $385,000 to its affiliated Foundation
for purposes inconsistent with applicable federal regulations.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMES
a. spend federal funds consistent with the applicable federal regulations,
and
b. seek reimbursement from the Foundation for the aforementioned grant
payments and deposit these funds into the RLF account.
University response
a. UMES misinterpreted the federal regulations and disbursed these funds as
grant funds to the Foundation. Effective immediately, the use of these
federal funds will be in full compliance with applicable federal regulations
and spent accordingly.
b. UMES has informed the granting agency of the misinterpretation in the
disbursement of these funds and reimbursement from the Foundation. A
resolution and timetable for the return of funds will be agreed upon as
soon as possible.

--- Page 39 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
Finding 4
UMES and its affiliated Foundation did not comply with certain USM Board
of Regents’ policies.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMES and its affiliated Foundation comply with the
requirements contained in the Board of Regents’ policies. Specifically, we
recommend that UMES
a. accurately disclose the value of staff and non-staff resources provided to
the Foundation in its annual agreements;
b. obtain proper approvals for Foundation activities that would be
considered within the role and mission of USM and its institutions;
c. obtain all of the required annual reports and submit them to the USM
Chancellor, as required; and
d. prepare and submit a five-year business plan to the USM Chancellor, as
required.
University response
a. UMES agrees with this recommendation and will fully comply with future
reports.
b. UMES fully agrees with the intent of this recommendation and will
comply as appropriate for future grants.
c. UMES agrees with this recommendation and will comply for future USM
Board of Regents report requirements.
d. UMES will comply as required for USM Board of Regents requirements
for business entities. Its most recent required report was done as required.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 5
UMES had not established proper controls over financial aid awards, certain
non-cash credits, and changes to student residency status.

--- Page 40 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that financial aid awards are selected and reviewed by
independent personnel who do not have the capability to modify student
awards in the system;
b. ensure that the calculation and authorization of the selected financial aid
awards are reviewed and supported by appropriate documentation
(repeat);
c. ensure that non-cash credit adjustments related to housing and board
charges are verified to source documents; and
d. maintain adequate documentation supporting student residency
reclassifications, as required by USM policy, and ensure that all changes
are subject to review and approval by the Residency Committee.
We advised UMES on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
University response
a. Effective July 1, 2014, the financial aid awards selected for review will
be determined by the Assistant Vice President for Administrative Affairs
who will generate the report of students based on the created query and
make random selections of students for review. The selection for review
will be sent to the Office of Student Financial Aid departmental auditor.
This will ensure that the generating of the report, the random selection
and the review are independent of any university personnel that have
capability to modify student awards in the system. The University will
conduct its second review for the 2013-2014 academic year to ensure
there is no variance by July 31, 2014.
b. After the finding from the 2010 legislative audit, the Office of Student
Financial Aid counselor who performs the function of internal auditor was
conducting a review of the sample selected by the Assistant Vice President
for Administrative Affairs of all awards originated by the Office of
Student Financial Aid such as Title IV Pell grant, loans, etc. and ensuring
verification was completed properly. The internal review of awards was
inclusive of any award originated by the Office of Student Financial Aid.
After discussions with the legislative auditor, the review/audit process will
be expanded to include all student awards, including adjustments, to
ensure that the awards and any adjustments are supported by appropriate

--- Page 41 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
documentation (i.e. – departmental scholarships, athletic awards, etc.).
The award/audit form has been reviewed and revised to include the review
of the enhanced items and to assist the OSFA internal auditor in
conducting a more thorough review, as suggested. As noted above, the
OSFA internal counselor performing the function of auditor will be
conducting an additional review for the 2013-2014 academic year to
ensure there is no variance.
c. In our response to the 2010 OLA audit, we stated that we would obtain the
support documentation from the original approver on our campus.
Following the 2010 OLA audit, UMES established an independent review
of these non-cash credit adjustments; however it was not verifying credits
to the source documents from students as opposed to the approver as
previously specified. Following a meeting with the legislative auditor, the
procedure has been modified to include the verification of the source
documentation from the originator (student). This verification process has
been completed through June 2014 in the manner suggested by the auditor
and is maintained monthly.
d. UMES agrees with this recommendation and will maintain appropriate
supportive documentation as ensure all future changes are made by the
Residency Committee.
Finding 6
UMES did not have adequate internal controls to ensure the timely referral
of all delinquent student accounts to the Department of Budget and
Management – Central Collection Unit (CCU).
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMES
a. establish procedures requiring independent reviews to ensure all eligible
student accounts are referred to CCU in a timely manner;
b. transfer all delinquent accounts to CCU on a timely basis, as required;
and
c. not permit students with outstanding account balances to register for
subsequent semesters unless the student qualifies for an exemption as
specified in the Board of Regents’ Policy.

--- Page 42 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
University response
a. UMES is in agreement with the recommendation of requiring independent
reviews to ensure all eligible student accounts are accurately and timely
referred to CCU. An independent reviewer from the Office of the Vice
President for Administrative Affairs will run the report of potential
eligible accounts and will compare this report to the actual submission
data.
b. UMES agrees with this recommendation. It has been discovered that a
flaw exists with the query that was developed to identify all accounts to be
transferred. We have found that if a student enrolls for a semester and
does not attend or confirm attendance, the query does not identify that
person until the following semester. That query has been corrected for the
appropriate implementation for the Fall 2014 semester.
c. UMES agrees with this recommendation. We will ensure that students
with outstanding balances are allowed to register only if the student
qualifies for an exemption as specified in the Board’s policy effective
immediately.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7
UMES did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on the
financial management systems were adequately restricted.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMES
a. restrict user access capabilities for critical functions to those employees
who require such capabilities to perform their assigned job duties, and
b. periodically generate and review computer system security reports that
include all users who are assigned access capabilities to perform critical
functions in the respective departments and correct instances of improper
access.

--- Page 43 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
University response
a. UMES accepts the recommendation, and will remove unnecessary access
assigned to the accounts identified.
b. UMES will enhance the existing security review and approval process
such that reports used by security approvers cover all users not just limited
to the approver’s department. All work has been completed.
Finding 8
Controls over UMES accounts and passwords were not sufficient to properly
protect this information.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that UMES
a. restrict access to account and password files to only those employees
who require such access so that employees do not have access to logon
credentials for systems and devices not under their control, and
b. password protect these files with strong passwords that are
periodically changed.
University response
a. UMES accepts the recommendation. The non-encrypted file containing
passwords was immediately deleted anywhere it existed. UMES
purchased an enterprise password manager to maintain secure passwords.
It provides a much more secure and segmented storage of critical
password information, ensuring that passwords are only available to
employees that require access.
b. UMES also has password policies on these files that ensure periodic
password changes and two-factor authentication.
All work has been completed.

--- Page 44 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
Finding 9
UMES inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information in
clear text.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that UMES
a. encrypt all database tables containing PII;
b. retain the documents containing PII, in the document management
server, in an encrypted volume; and
mask or truncate social security numbers from displays used by application
users who do not need access to full social security numbers.
University response
a. UMES accepts the recommendation. We will encrypt all tables
containing PII with the exception of Financial Aid due to business
process reasons.
b. UMES will encrypt all volumes containing PII in document management
storage.
c. UMES will mask social security numbers within the PeopleSoft system
with the exception of critical Financial Aids pages where security further
limits those that have access.
The above encryption steps of PII will be completed by July 2015.
Finding 10
The UMES internal network was not adequately secured.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that UMES
a. restrict access, at the network level, to key administrative resources to
only those entities requiring such access; and
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identify how HIPS coverage should be best applied to its network,
and implement such coverage.

--- Page 45 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
University response
a. UMES accepts the recommendation, and will apply the appropriate
restrictions to the identified systems providing a “least privilege” security
posture. We have added appropriate rules to prevent blanket access to
unrequired systems and removed all stale rules that were identified in the
audit. We have an existing quarterly process in place to audit our firewall
rule sets.
b. UMES is currently working on a pilot deployment of a HIPS solution. We
have deployed HIPS to several desktop systems, and will begin our pilot
deployment to servers in fall 2014.
A deployment of HIPS to systems identified in the risk assessment is targeted for
August 2016.
Finding 11
Procedures for installing and monitoring anti-malware software on network
computers need improvement.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that anti-malware software is installed on all UMES computers,
b. remove decommissioned and renamed computers from its source listing
of active computers so that the anti-malware software console dashboard
can accurately report the malware protection status for the population of
UMES computers, and
c. use the anti-malware software console dashboard to monitor all UMES
workstations and servers to ensure that all such devices are properly
protected and that all signature updates are promptly installed.
University response
a. UMES accepts the recommendation and has worked to ensure 100% anti-
virus installation on all systems that are deployed from IT. We created a
‘Desktop Management Team’ that was charged with updating and
implementing procedures to ensure all newly built systems receive the
anti-virus application before it is installed for the end-user.

--- Page 46 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
b.&c. UMES has implemented some automated tasks in the anti-virus console
that discovers any unmanaged systems daily and attempts to install the
software. UMES is working towards creating other automated tasks as
well as staff procedures and scheduled tasks to clean up stale records and
more closely monitor the anti-virus console for systems that report as
unmanaged or not having compliant anti-virus software, as well as
systems that do not have updated signatures.
UMES will create the remaining automated tasks and implement staff
procedures for monitoring, review and remediation, as well as implement
a solution for all UMES computers by September 2015.
Cash Receipts and Student Funds
Finding 12
UMES lacked accountability and control over its collections and had not
reconciled certain student spending account balances.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that UMES
a. ensure that employees with non-cash credit and void capabilities do
not have access to the related cash receipts and that deposits are
verified to the initial record of the collections;
b. periodically review the online banking system access capabilities and
restrict such access to employees who need it for their job duties;
c. ensure that the credit card transaction report used in the
reconciliation is prepared by an employee who does not have access to
change the bank account where the funds are deposited;
d. reconcile its record of credit card collections processed with the
receipt of the related funds by the STO, reconcile the total of its
individual student spending accounts with the fund account balance
recorded in its records, at least quarterly, and investigate and resolve
any differences identified by the reconciliations; and
e. ensure the reconciliations are reviewed and approved by independent
supervisory personnel.

--- Page 47 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
University response
a. UMES agrees with this recommendation. We currently log all non-
student accounts checks daily for tracking purposes. We will further
enhance this tracking to include all student accounts checks as well,
effective immediately. The Front Desk Account Clerk will open all the
mail, log every check received and restrictively endorse the back of the
check with the stamp. At that time, the clerk will deliver the checks to the
student accounts office for them to process that day in the PeopleSoft
System. To enhance reconciliation procedures, our General Ledger
Accountant will compare the validated bank deposit slip to the PeopleSoft
“Tender by Cashier” reports to ensure the balances are accurate. The
General Ledger Accountant will initial each of the “Tender by Cashier”
reports and also the white PNC bank deposit slip for proof of review.
b. UMES agrees with this recommendation and the Director of Auxiliary
Enterprises will review every six months effective immediately.
c. The credit card transaction report will be prepared by an employee who
does not have access to change the bank accounts where funds are
deposited, effective immediately.
d. UMES agrees with the finding that the EFT reconciliation was not
completed in full each month since May 2011. Our anticipation was to
have them completed and up to date by June 30, 2014; however, this was
unable to happen due to the time consumed with the implementation of
Kuali this calendar year. We expect to have these completed by March of
2015. We will continue to reconcile these on a monthly basis going
forward.
The UMES’ individual student spending account will be reconciled to a
current status by March 31, 2015. It will be reconciled on a monthly
basis. UMES will investigate and resolve any differences by March 31,
2015 and maintain on a monthly basis.
e. The reconciliations are to be reviewed and approved by the Associate
Comptroller.

--- Page 48 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 13
UMES’ execution of certain lease agreements and contract extensions did not
comply with USM’s policies, and UMES did not adequately monitor certain
vendors to ensure compliance with contract terms.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that UMES
a. obtain approval from USM’s Board of Regents for all lease agreements in
excess of $500,000, including the aforementioned student housing leases;
b. comply with USM’s Procurement Policies and Procedures by completing a
formal written procurement process for procurements exceeding
$100,000, including the aforementioned contract for fuel purchases;
c. ensure that prices paid for goods and services are in accordance with the
approved contract prices; and
d. verify reported gross sales from its bookstore contractor to ensure the
proper fees are remitted, as required by the contract terms.
University response
a. UMES agrees with this recommendation. UMES will seek approval from
the USM Board of Regents for all lease agreements in excess of $500,000.
However, the Office of the Attorney General reviewed the initial
agreement in 2009. The current lease agreement will be taken to USM
Board of Regents during the Fall of 2014.
b. UMES agrees with this recommendation. The University has been
operating from the State contract and did not realize it had expired and the
State no longer issues contracts for Number 6 fuel oil. A solicitation has
already been processed for this heating season. Bids have been received,
evaluated and a contract has been awarded. All other procurements over
$100,000 have complied with procurement policies and procedures.
c. Procurement will obtain the publications that track fuel prices for the
submission to the Physical Plant, and the Physical Plant will ensure prices
paid for goods and services are in accordance with approved contract
prices plus actual costs.

--- Page 49 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE
AUGUST 9, 2010 TO DECEMBER 1, 2013
d. UMES agrees with this recommendation. Effective July 2014, the
bookstore manager is required to provide to the Office of Auxiliary
Enterprises the monthly sales register reports for the bookstore operation.
These reports will be used to project, compare and access quarterly
commissions received.

--- Page 50 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Joseph E. McWilliams
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Andrew S. Bien
Olajide S. Mustapha
Staff Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditors