Title: Office of the Trust Clerk to the Circuit Court - Baltimore City
Date: 04/08/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d724560674710
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:54:06.455389
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Trust Clerk to the Circuit Court
Baltimore City, Maryland
February 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
February 17, 2011
Delegate Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator James C. Rosapepe, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Office of the Trust Clerk to the Circuit Court for Baltimore
City, Maryland for the period beginning January 1, 2008 and ending September
12, 2010. The Office oversees the administration of guardianships, estates, trusts,
and receiverships under the jurisdiction of the Circuit Court for Baltimore City.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by the Office during the
course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Trust Clerk to the Circuit Court for Baltimore City oversees the
administration of guardianships, estates, trusts, and receiverships under the
jurisdiction of the Circuit Court for Baltimore City. The Trust Clerk performs this
function by reviewing certain accounting reports filed by the fiduciaries in
accordance with the Maryland Rules of Procedure (Title 10 and Title 13). For
performing this function, the Office collected certain fees established by the
Court. These fees are deposited to the State’s General Fund.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Office’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Certain
less significant findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant
mention in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Office. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Office of the Trust Clerk to the Circuit Court for Baltimore
City, Maryland for the period beginning January 1, 2008 and ending September
12, 2010. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
3

--- Page 6 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts and fiduciary reports. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Office’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Office by the
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Baltimore City (such as payment of
operating expenses) and the Administrative Office of the Courts (such as payroll,
processing of invoices, and maintenance of budgetary accounting records). These
support services are included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Clerk of Circuit Court and the Judiciary.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor