Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Eastern Shore Hospital Center and Upper Shore Community Mental Health Center
Date: 11/19/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743c4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:35:59.273349
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
and
Upper Shore Community Mental Health Center
November 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 19, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) and the Upper Shore
Community Mental Health Center (USCMHC) of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene for the period beginning August 1, 2005 and ending March 23,
2008. ESHC and USCMHC provide psychiatric and related services to patients
from the nine counties of Maryland’s Eastern Shore.
Our audit disclosed that ESHC generally did not attempt to obtain certain medical
services for ESHC and for USCMHC at the lowest possible prices. In addition, a
contract with a State university to provide staffing for ESHC was not adequately
monitored to ensure that contractor billings were based upon contractor costs, and
the contract was not reported to the Department of Budget and Management, as
required.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response to this audit, on behalf
of ESHC and USCMHC, is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by
ESHC and USCMHC.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC), located in Cambridge, Maryland,
provides comprehensive psychiatric and related services to patients from the nine
counties of Maryland’s Eastern Shore. The services provided include inpatient
treatment and community service programs. During fiscal year 2007, ESHC,
which is accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations, had a licensed capacity of 80 inpatients, a budgeted average daily
population of 78 inpatients, and an actual average daily population of 77
inpatients. According to the State’s records, ESHC’s fiscal year 2007
expenditures totaled approximately $17.6 million. ESHC provides certain
administrative support services to the Upper Shore Community Mental Health
Center (USCMHC).
USCMHC, located in Chestertown, Maryland, provides mental health services to
patients from Caroline, Cecil, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot Counties. During
fiscal year 2007, USCMHC, which is also accredited by the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, had a licensed capacity of 64
inpatients, a budgeted daily population of 39 inpatients, and an actual average
daily population of 38 inpatients. According to the State’s records, USCMHC’s
fiscal year 2007 expenditures totaled approximately $8.9 million.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the one finding contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 29, 2005. We determined that the
finding was satisfactorily addressed.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contractual Services
Finding 1
Efforts were not made to obtain certain medical services for the Eastern
Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) and the Upper Shore Community Mental
Health Center (USCMHC) at the lowest possible prices.
Analysis
Our review of expenditures paid for certain medical services (such as physician
services and dental services) and the related procurement methods, disclosed that
efforts were generally not made to obtain such services at the lowest possible
prices. Rather than soliciting bids for these services, we were advised that ESHC
and USCMHC generally paid the prices charged by the providers. ESHC is
responsible for procuring goods and services for both centers. Expenditures for
these medical services at ESHC and USCMHC totaled approximately $715,000
and $321,000, respectively, during our audit period. Based on a test of selected
invoices paid by ESHC to two medical providers, which were paid $100,000
during our audit period, we noted that the rates paid to one provider were
excessive and there was no evidence of bids or of sole source justifications for
either of these services.
For one physician that provided cardiology services to ESHC patients, we tested
three invoices totaling $5,180. We noted that, for the same services, the rates paid
by ESHC were substantially higher than the reimbursement rates of the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Medicaid Program. While
we were advised that only a few ESHC patients are covered by Medicaid, we used
those rates, which are set by DHMH, for comparative purposes. The table below
shows the differences in rates for the service dates on the three invoices tested:
Table 1
Comparison of Rates Paid by ESHC to Medicaid Rates
Date of Service Amount Paid by Medicaid Rate Difference
ESHC
July 6, 2007 $1,510 $285 $1,225
July 25, 2007 $2,270 $703 $1,567
February 26, 2008 $1,400 $210 $1,190
Totals $5,180 $1,198 $3,982
4

--- Page 7 ---
The rates paid by ESHC for these services were also substantially higher than the
reimbursement rates of a large State employee health plan, resulting in a total
difference of $3,299. ESHC acknowledged the disparity in costs and, although
this issue had not been formally evaluated, management believed that a lack of
specialists in the geographic area willing to treat ESHC’s patients limited its
ability to negotiate or otherwise obtain services at a lower cost.
For the other medical services provider, we tested two invoices totaling $4,500
and noted that payments were made on a weekly basis for four hours of service at
$125 per hour. However, documentation of competitive bids for the services was
not available.
The State Procurement Regulations require that bids be solicited for all
procurements exceeding $2,500. These Regulations also include provisions for
sole source procurements, emergency procurements, and procurements by
negotiated award after unsatisfactory competitive bidding.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ESHC comply with the provisions of the State
Procurement Regulations with respect to obtaining medical services for
ESHC and USCMHC patients.
Finding 2
ESHC did not properly monitor contract billings for pharmacy services.
Analysis
ESHC did not adequately monitor a contract with a State university to provide
personnel for the operation of its pharmacy. Since this contract, for the period
from July 1, 2006 through June 30, 2009, was awarded as an interagency
agreement, it was not subject to the competitive procurement provisions of the
State Procurement Regulations and did not require Board of Public Works
approval. We noted the following conditions:
• Costs billed to ESHC were not compared with the university’s supporting
documents (such as payroll records). Under the terms of the contract, ESHC’s
payments to the university were to be based on the actual expenditures
incurred by the university. Payments to the university totaled $348,000
during fiscal year 2007.
• We noted that this contract was not reported to the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) as required by the fiscal years 2007 through 2009 budget
5

--- Page 8 ---
bills. Those bills required State agencies to report to DBM any agreements in
place between State agencies and any public institution of higher education
involving potential expenditures in excess of $100,000 over the terms of the
agreements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ESHC verify the accuracy of amounts charged on the
invoices from the State university by reviewing supporting documents,
including payroll records. In addition, we recommend that ESHC report the
contract to DBM, as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) and the Upper Shore
Community Mental Health Center (USCMHC) of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene for the period beginning August 1, 2005 and ending March 23,
2008. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ESHC’s and
USCMHC’s financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate
their compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also
determined the status of the one finding contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of ESHC’s and USCMHC’s operations. We also
tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
6

--- Page 9 ---
ESHC provided payroll, personnel, and certain financial support services (such as
monthly reconciliations) to USCMHC. Since these support services represent a
significant part of our audit effort with respect to the activities of USCMHC, a
combined audit was conducted.
ESHC’s and USCMHC’s management is responsible for establishing and
maintaining effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of
financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including
safeguarding of assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ESHC’s and USCMHC’s ability to maintain reliable financial
records, operate effectively and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations. This report also includes findings of significant instances
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to ESHC and USCMHC that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, on behalf of
ESHC and USCMHC, to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department
regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contractual Services
Finding 1
Efforts were not made to obtain certain medical services for the Eastern
Shore Hospital Center (ESHC) and the Upper Shore Community Mental
Health Center (USCMHC) at the lowest possible prices.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ESHC comply with the provisions of the State
Procurement Regulations with respect to obtaining medical services for
ESHC and USCMHC patients.
Center’s Response
The Center takes exception to the findings as COMAR specifically exempt
inpatient State facilities from the Medicaid fee schedule which was used by
Auditors as a comparative basis. Furthermore, the comparison of amounts paid
by the facility for medical services to the payments made by a large State
employee health plan is also not reasonable. The fees paid by the facility
represent usual and customary fees paid on behalf of uninsured individuals who
are not privileged to receive the same discounts made available to individuals in
large groups such as Medicaid and state health insurance plans. In spite of this,
some billings were discounted. Since the audit, we have contacted specialists
concerning their fee structures and found that the fees being charged for services
during the audit period basically remains the same.
This facility operates in a service area designated by the Federal Government as
being underserved in terms of physician services and as a result, it has been
increasingly more difficult to find specialists who are willing to treat our patients
in their offices who have psychiatric disorders and are also forensic. 1
1 Auditor’s Comment: We compared the amounts paid by one of the Centers for medical services
to the Medicaid fee schedule to assess the reasonableness of the prices paid and not to imply
that the Centers’ providers should be paid in accordance with the fee schedule. Based on the
comparisons performed, we continue to believe that the possibility for significant cost savings
exists. Furthermore, our finding states that efforts were generally not made to obtain medical
services at the lowest possible prices and that the Centers paid the prices charged by the
providers. During our audit, no evidence was provided to indicate that any attempts to obtain
these services at the best possible prices were made.

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
ESHC did not properly monitor contract billings for pharmacy services.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ESHC verify the accuracy of amounts charged on the
invoices from the State University by reviewing supporting documents,
including payroll records. In addition, we recommend that ESHC report the
contract to DBM, as required.
Center’s Response
The Center agrees with the findings that independent verification of payments
made to a State University for pharmacy services did not take place. Steps have
been taken to receive supporting documentation to perform this verification.
We concur with the auditors’ finding and recommendation to report any
agreements in place between State agencies and any public institutions of higher
learning to DBM. However, because the dollar value of the contract exceeded the
delegated procurement level authorized to Eastern Shore Hospital Center, the
contract had to be negotiated by the Department’s Office of Procurement and
Support Services (OPASS) and not by the Center. OPASS has agreed to submit
the University contract to DBM. Also, the Office of Procurement and Support
Services will make every effort to report MOUs processed to DBM as required in
the future.

--- Page 13 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CFE
Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors