Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Western Maryland Hospital Center
Date: 11/02/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ecc9d724560674764
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:00:30.878852
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Western Maryland Hospital Center
October 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC), which is located in
Hagerstown, provides chronic care and treatment to patients requiring a hospital-
level rehabilitation program, long-term nursing home care, and inpatient and
outpatient renal dialysis services for the residents of Maryland. As of June 30,
2014, WMHC had a licensed capacity of 123 inpatients and an average daily
population of 57 inpatients. WMHC is accredited by The Joint Commission,
which evaluates and monitors health care organizations nationwide to ensure the
highest quality of care is provided. According to the State’s records, WMHC’s
expenditures totaled approximately $24.9 million during fiscal year 2014.
Change in Executive Management
In May 2014, the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Office of
Health Care Quality (OHCQ), on behalf of the federal Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS), conducted a review of WMHC’s nursing home
facilities and operations. This review identified serious deficiencies, resulting in
substantial noncompliance with Medicaid and Medicare requirements. For
example, deficiencies identified included the failure to report and investigate
allegations of abuse and the failure to administer medications as ordered. WMHC
paid associated fines totaling $375,100 and was denied Medicaid and Medicare
reimbursement for new nursing home admissions beginning August 7, 2014 until
the deficiencies were determined to be satisfactorily corrected.
In response to the review, DHMH hired a consultant, at a cost of $288,000, to
provide recommendations to address the identified deficiencies. DHMH
concluded, based on the consultant’s assessments, that WMHC’s executive
management was not able to effectively implement the changes necessary to
address the deficiencies. In June 2014, DHMH hired a contractor to provide
professional personnel to replace three executive management positions to lead
WMHC and implement the necessary corrective actions. On September 22, 2014,
CMS and OHCQ determined that the deficiencies were satisfactorily corrected
and that Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements could resume. During the
period from August 7, 2014 through September 21, 2014, there were no new
admissions to WMHC. As of April 2015, WMHC made payments to the
contractor totaling approximately $912,000 and the management services were
extended through June 30, 2018.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Monitoring
Finding 1
The Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) did not perform a
sufficient verification of pharmaceutical contractor invoices prior to
payment.
Analysis
Billings from WMHC’s pharmaceutical contractor were not adequately verified
prior to payment. This contractor was responsible for obtaining and delivering on
a routine basis pharmaceuticals ordered by physicians. WMHC was to reimburse
the contractor for the actual cost of the pharmaceuticals and pay the contractor a
monthly administrative fee in accordance with the contract provisions.
 WMHC did not take steps to verify that it was billed only for pharmaceutical
costs that were not covered by its patients’ third party insurers (such as private
insurance, Medicaid, and Medicare) or were for uninsured patients.
According to the contract, the contractor may only bill for over-the-counter
medication and pharmaceuticals when the patient does not have insurance or
the insurance does not cover the ordered medication.
 WMHC did not consistently verify that delivered and invoiced
pharmaceuticals were supported by the related approved physician orders and
did not obtain wholesaler invoices to verify the contractor’s billed costs were
appropriate. During our test of 10 pharmaceuticals purchased on two
invoices, we noted one case where WMHC was billed $5,045 for a
pharmaceutical that was not supported by the quantity in the approved
physician order, resulting in a $4,245 overbilling. In this case, the quantity
billed and provided by the contractor exceeded the most cost-effective dosage
and the billed costs did not agree with the related wholesale price. Upon
bringing this to WMHC’s attention, the contractor reviewed previous billed
costs for this pharmaceutical on eight other invoices and determined that
similar overbillings occurred resulting in credit totaling $25,639 for the
identified overbillings. The contractor is required to fill pharmaceutical
orders based on approved physician orders in the most cost-effective manner
and provide its wholesaler invoices to document that the pharmaceutical costs
are billed at its cost.
 WMHC did not have a process to ensure it identified and received credits on
future invoices for pharmaceuticals returned. Pharmaceuticals can be returned
4

--- Page 7 ---
by WMHC (such as for expired or unused pharmaceuticals) or not accepted at
delivery as permitted by the contract.
WMHC has contracted with this vendor since July 2008. The current contract is
for the period from July 2014 through June 2019 for approximately $5.1 million.
According to the State’s records, WMHC paid the vendor $512,200 ($178,100 for
administrative fees and $334,100 for pharmaceuticals) during the period from
July 2014 to March 2015.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WMHC ensure that
a. invoiced pharmaceuticals costs are only for those costs not covered by the
patients’ insurance (or for patients without insurance) as specified by the
contract;
b. delivered and invoiced pharmaceuticals (both quantity and type of
pharmaceutical) agree to appropriate documentation (such as approved
physician orders);
c. pharmaceutical costs are billed at the wholesale cost paid by the
contractor; and
d. applicable invoice credits are identified and received for all
pharmaceuticals returned to the contractor, including the $25,639 credit
for the identified overbilling.
Finding 2
WMHC did not adequately review and approve labor hours billed by a
contractor providing professional management personnel.
Analysis
WMHC did not adequately review and approve labor hours billed by a contractor
that provided personnel for three executive management positions. As mentioned
earlier in this report, WMHC hired a contractor in June 2014 to provide
professional management personnel services. However, we noted that timesheets
supporting the contractor’s invoices were not approved by WMHC as required by
the contract. Although we were advised that the timesheets were approved by
individuals working for the contractor, WMHC could not tell us who the
individuals were or how the individuals determined the accuracy of the
timesheets.
In addition, WMHC did not always obtain adequate documentation for the hours
billed by the contractor. Our test of two invoices totaling approximately $218,800
disclosed that timesheets did not always exist or support the hours worked for two
5

--- Page 8 ---
individuals. For one of these individuals, representing $12,000 of the amounts
invoiced, timesheets were not provided. For the other individual, the hours
worked as recorded on the timesheets only supported $16,800 of the $20,160
invoiced.
According to State records, as of April 2015, WMHC had made payments to the
management personnel contractor totaling approximately $912,000. On June 3,
2015, DHMH obtained approval from the Board of Public Works to continue
using this contractor for executive management services for three more years, at a
total contract cost of approximately $2.6 million. Under this new contract,
payments to executive management are based on an annual firm fixed price rather
than based on hourly labor rates. We were advised by DHMH management that it
plans to continue this arrangement for the immediate future and there are no
current plans to hire state employees for executive management positions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WMHC
a. ensure that invoiced services agree to contract terms and supporting
documentation, as applicable, prior to payment; and
b. perform a review of all previously paid invoices to determine if hours
billed by the contractor were supported by the hours worked and take
corrective action (such as requesting approved timesheets or a refund for
any unsupported billings), as necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Western Maryland Hospital
Center (WMHC) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for
the period beginning May 7, 2012 and ending March 29, 2015. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine WMHC’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
6

--- Page 9 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, and payroll.
Our audit did not include billing and collection support services provided to
WMHC by Deer’s Head Hospital Center for renal dialysis and by DHMH’s
Division of Reimbursements for inpatient/outpatient care services. These support
services are included in the scope of our audits of the Deer’s Head Hospital
Center and DHMH’s Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
WMHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
WMHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect WMHC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to WMHC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of WMHC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Monitoring
Finding 1
The Western Maryland Hospital Center (WMHC) did not perform a
sufficient verification of pharmaceutical contractor invoices prior to
payment.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WMHC ensure that
a. invoiced pharmaceuticals costs are only for those costs not covered by the
patients’ insurance (or for patients without insurance) as specified by the
contract;
b. delivered and invoiced pharmaceuticals (both quantity and type of
pharmaceutical) agree to appropriate documentation (such as approved
physician orders);
c. pharmaceutical costs are billed at the wholesale cost paid by the
contractor; and
d. applicable invoice credits are identified and received for all
pharmaceuticals returned to the contractor, including the $25,639 credit
for the identified overbilling.
Administration’s Response:
The Administration concurs with the recommendations below.
a. The Center will ensure that the invoiced pharmaceuticals costs only include
those costs for hospital inpatients, uninsured patients/residents, or those costs
not covered by covered by the SNF residents’ insurance. The review and
verification will be documented.
b. The Center will ensure the delivered and invoiced drug quantities and types
agree with the resident/patient administration record. The Center will ensure
the delivered and invoiced drug quantities and types agree with the
resident/patient administration record to identify the drugs that were
administered to the patient. The drugs (with the exception of controlled
substances) that were delivered but not administered to the patient will be
returned to the vendor for credit. This review and verification will be
documented.
c. The Center will ensure pharmaceutical costs are billed at the wholesale cost
paid by the contractor. This review and verification will be documented.

--- Page 13 ---
d. The Center will ensure that applicable credits are identified and received by
the Contractor. This process will be documented. The Center has received
the $25,639 credit previously identified.
Finding 2
WMHC did not adequately review and approve labor hours billed by a
contractor providing professional management personnel.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WMHC
a. ensure that invoiced services agree to contract terms and supporting
documentation, as applicable, prior to payment; and
b. perform a review of all previously paid invoices to determine if hours
billed by the contractor were supported by the hours worked and take
corrective action (such as requesting approved timesheets or a refund for
any unsupported billings), as necessary.
Administration’s Response:
The Administration concurs with the Finding.
a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. The Center will ensure
that invoiced services agree to the contract terms and supporting
documentation, as applicable, prior to payment.
b. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The Center will
perform a review of all previously approved invoices to determine if hours
billed by the contractor were supported by an approved time sheet and take
corrective action for any that were not, including requesting approved time
sheets or obtaining a refund for any unsupported billings.

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Senior Auditor
Phillip C. Funkhouser
Staff Auditor