Title: Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund - Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2007
Date: 09/04/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674278
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:38:36.791855
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 4, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund (Fund) for
the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The Fund was established to preserve
productive agricultural land and is primarily funded by State and agricultural
transfer taxes and local subdivision matching funds. The Fund is administered by
the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF).
Our audit disclosed that MALPF lacked a comprehensive cumulative listing of all
easement acquisitions and needed to establish a process to ensure the accuracy of
easement purchase prices and related payments. We also noted that MALPF was
not effectively monitoring local land preservation programs and activities to
ensure that all appropriate taxes were remitted to the Fund.
An Executive Summary of our findings can be found on page 5. The Department
of Agriculture’s response to this audit, on behalf of MALPF, is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
during the course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Financial Information 7
Fund Status 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Easement Acquisitions
Finding 1 – A Comprehensive Listing of All Easement Acquisitions Was 9
Not Maintained
Finding 2 – Controls Over Easement Acquisitions and County Billings for 10
Easement Costs Were Inadequate
County Agricultural Land Transfer Taxes
* Finding 3 – County Programs Were Not Properly Certified, Resulting in 11
Certain Counties Improperly Retaining Transfer Taxes
Finding 4 – MALPF Did Not Ensure that Counties Properly Used Their 12
Share of Transfer Taxes or Remitted Unused Funds to the State as
Required
Inspections
* Finding 5 – Easement Inspections Were Not Performed as Required 13
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Exhibit A – Schedule of Financial Activity 17
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
September 2008
• A comprehensive listing of all easement acquisitions was not maintained
to ensure all easements were properly accounted for, and significant
discrepancies existed between the cost of easement acquisitions reported
in the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF)
2008 Annual Report to the General Assembly and the related amount
reported on the State’s accounting records.
MALPF should maintain a comprehensive, accurate listing of all easement
acquisitions and ensure consistent reporting of such activity.
• Supervisory reviews of certain critical calculations used in determining
the easement purchase price and for ensuring the propriety of certain
easement payments were either not being done or were not documented.
In addition, there were no procedures for ensuring counties were invoiced
for their share of the easement acquisition costs.
MALPF should ensure that critical calculations be reviewed by an
independent employee and that such reviews be documented. In addition,
MALPF should establish procedures to ensure that counties are properly
invoiced.
• County agricultural land preservation programs were not properly
certified, resulting in certain counties retaining a higher share of transfer
taxes.
MALPF should properly certify county agricultural land preservation
programs and determine the legality of recovering any amounts deemed to be
inappropriately retained by the non-certified counties.
• MALPF did not ensure that counties properly used agricultural land
transfer taxes that had been retained by the counties in accordance with
State laws and regulations, and did not ensure that counties remitted the
required amount of unused transfer taxes to the State.
5

--- Page 8 ---
MALPF should obtain and review annual reports and related audited financial
statements to ensure that counties are using the transfer taxes in accordance
with State law and are remitting all required amounts to the State.
• Easement inspections were not performed in accordance with federal
grant agreements or MALPF’s policy to ensure that landowners were in
compliance with the provisions stipulated in the easement agreements.
MALPF should establish procedures to ensure that all easement properties are
periodically subject to inspection, and establish procedures to ensure
appropriate follow-up action when counties fail to conduct required
inspections.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) was
established to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland in Maryland.
MALPF, which is governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of 12 members,
purchases land easements with Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
(Fund) revenue and places certain restrictions on the use of the land (for example,
the land cannot be subdivided for residential or commercial purposes). The Fund,
which is administered by the MALPF, generally derives revenues from State
transfer taxes, agricultural transfer taxes, local subdivision matching funds, and
federal grants. According to MALPF records since inception, as of June 30,
2007, MALPF had purchased 1,941 easements on 266,000 acres of land for a total
cost of $490 million, which includes local and federal contributions.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 20, 2007. We determined that MALPF
had satisfactorily resolved one of these findings; the other two findings are
repeated in this report.
Financial Information
Attached, as Exhibit A, is a schedule of the financial activity of the Fund for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. This schedule is not intended to and does not
provide the financial position and results of operations in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. Specifically, certain financial
statements and disclosures (such as balance sheet, summary of significant
accounting policies) have not been provided as would be required by generally
accepted accounting principles. The schedule was prepared on a modified accrual
basis of accounting which provides that revenues are recognized when they
become available and measurable, and expenditures are recognized when the
related liability is incurred.
The $31,889,041 fund balance in the Special Revenue Fund as of June 30, 2007
represents funds available to finance future expenditures, including easement
acquisitions. The $5,758,121 fund balance in the Trust Fund as of June 30, 2007
represents funds committed for the payment of easements purchased on an
installment basis.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Fund Status
MALPF recorded approximately $91 million in encumbrances at the end of fiscal
year 2007, which generally equates to the value of outstanding easement offers
and was consistent with the remaining budgetary appropriations from 2007 and
prior fiscal years. However, MALPF only had approximately $34 million to be
used for these obligations. The $57 million shortage was caused, in part, by the
attainment of less than budgeted revenue. Specifically, the actual revenue
realized by MALPF for fiscal year 2007 was approximately $45 million less than
the estimated revenue of $85 million appropriated for easements and used to make
offers for that year. The revenue shortfall was also affected by certain limitations
on federal funding that MALPF has experienced since late 2005, which were
addressed in the Department of Legislative Services’ Analyses of the Maryland
Executive Budget for fiscal years 2008 and 2009.
State law governing the Fund recognizes that estimated revenues may not be
realized and provides for adjustments in future years or the eventual de-
authorization of projects previously authorized.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Easement Acquisitions
Finding 1
A comprehensive listing of all easement acquisitions was not maintained to
ensure the easements were properly accounted for and reported.
Analysis
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) did not
maintain a comprehensive listing or database of all easements purchased, with
such detailed information as the number of acres covered by the easement and the
related purchase price. Consequently, MALPF was unable to support the dollar
value of easements purchased as reported to the General Assembly in its Annual
Report submitted in February 2008 or recorded in the State’s accounting records.
MALPF management acknowledged the limitations of the current easement
database, but advised us that a new database had recently been developed and was
in the process of being manually updated with the detailed easement information
from the inception of the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund to date.
However, as of March 18, 2008, MALPF had not entered all the information into
the new database and was unable to provide us with a comprehensive listing of
easements with relevant detailed information.
In addition to a lack of underlying data to support the total cumulative cost of
easement acquisitions reported in the MALPF Annual Report to the General
Assembly ($490 million), we also noted that the reported amount exceeded the
amount recorded on the State’s accounting records ($337 million) by $153
million. Although, approximately $91 million of this difference could be
attributable to outstanding offers made during fiscal year 2007 that had not been
capitalized on the State’s accounting system (since this usually occurs once the
payment is made), the remaining $62 million difference could not be readily
explained by MALPF management.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that, in the future, MALPF maintain a comprehensive
database of all easement acquisitions and that this information be accurately
reported in its Annual Reports and reconciled to the State’s accounting
records. We also recommend that MALPF investigate the aforementioned
discrepancy and take appropriate corrective action.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
Procedures and controls over easement acquisitions and for billing counties
for their share of the easement costs were inadequate.
Analysis
MALPF lacked adequate procedures and controls over easement acquisitions,
which totaled approximately $35 million during fiscal year 2007. Specifically,
the independent review and approval of certain critical calculations was not
documented. One employee was responsible for determining the Agricultural
Land Value (ALV) of properties being considered for easement purchases. Since
the ALV is subtracted from the appraised value of the land to determine the
acquisition cost, undetected errors could result in erroneous easement acquisitions
payments. Although MALPF management advised us that the calculations were
reviewed by an independent employee, this review was not documented.
Furthermore, MALPF lacked adequate procedures for ensuring that the counties
were invoiced for their share of easement acquisitions costs. We reviewed all
easement acquisitions that were to be fully or partially reimbursed with county
funds during fiscal year 2007 and identified one county that was not invoiced
$390,000 for its share of an easement acquisition. The failure to bill the county
was not detected by MALPF because there was no procedure to ensure all such
acquisitions were matched to billing records. According to MALPF records,
county funds used for easement acquisitions during fiscal year 2007 totaled
approximately $13.1 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that critical calculations be reviewed by an independent
employee and that such reviews be documented. In addition, we recommend
that MALPF establish procedures to ensure that all amounts due from the
counties for easements are properly invoiced, including the aforementioned
$390,000.
10

--- Page 13 ---
County Agricultural Land Transfer Taxes
Finding 3
County agricultural land preservation programs were not properly certified
resulting in certain counties retaining a higher share of transfer taxes.
Analysis
The certification process for county agricultural land preservation programs was
inadequate. Our test of all 17 county programs that were deemed certified by
MALPF through June 30, 2007 disclosed that the two-year certifications for 6
counties had actually expired prior to fiscal year 2007. As was pointed out in our
preceding audit report, for one of these counties, the certification had expired in
1999. Eight other county programs were certified even though they had not
submitted their recertification requests in a timely manner and the recertification
had not been approved until after the previous certification had expired. As a
result, the certification periods were retroactively applied for between 5 and 12
months, even though such retroactive approval was not provided for in State
regulations. Under State regulations, a county that lacks a properly certified
program may only retain 33 percent of its agricultural land transfer tax revenues
instead of the 75 percent retained by a certified county. According to MALPF
records, transfer tax revenue remitted to the State by the aforementioned six non-
certified counties totaled approximately $750,000 during fiscal year 2007.
However, if the counties had been treated as non-certified and remitted transfer
taxes at the higher percentage, these six counties would have remitted
approximately $2 million to the State during fiscal year 2007.
State laws and regulations specify that MALPF and the Maryland Department of
Planning are jointly responsible for certifying and recertifying county agricultural
land preservation programs. Counties are certified for a two-year period and must
submit a request for recertification in October of the year preceding their
certification expiration (for example, in October 2006 for certifications expiring
in June 2007) in order to maintain continuous certification status. Similar
conditions were noted in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We again recommend that MALPF establish a process to timely monitor the
certification status of the county agricultural land preservation programs
and to ensure that agricultural land transfer taxes remitted are consistent
with the certification status. We also again recommend that MALPF
determine the legality of recovering any agricultural land transfer taxes
retained by counties whose agricultural land preservation programs’
certifications had expired.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 4
MALPF did not ensure that counties properly used their share of
agricultural land transfer taxes or remitted the unused funds to the State as
required.
Analysis
MALPF did not have a process to annually monitor the use of agricultural land
transfer taxes to ensure that counties properly used their share of transfer taxes or
remitted the unused funds to the State as required. All counties are required by
State regulations to submit annual reports that are to include information
regarding the transfer taxes collected by the county, the nature of the counties’ use
of the taxes, and whether any unexpended taxes were due to the State. However,
as of May 2008, MALPF did not receive annual reports for fiscal year 2006 (due
in October 2006) from 9 of the 17 counties tested. Furthermore, the reports that
were received were not always prepared in accordance with State regulations. For
example, 2 of the 8 annual reports that were received were not signed by the Chief
Financial Officer or the independent auditor as required by State regulations.
Although, we were advised by MALPF management that this information may be
included in a county’s annual audited financial statements, these statements were
not obtained and/or reviewed to determine whether counties remitted all amounts
due to the State.
State law provides that each county shall remit the transfer taxes attributable to
instruments of writing that transfer title to parcels of wooded land and a
percentage of any remaining agricultural land transfer taxes to the State, most of
which is subsequently credited to the Fund. The remaining transfer tax revenue is
to be used by the counties for land preservation (for example, to purchase
development rights) and any taxes not expended or committed on or before three
years from the original date of receipt, shall be remitted to the State for deposit
into the Fund. According to the State’s accounting records, agricultural land
transfer taxes remitted to the State during fiscal year 2007 totaled $4.5 million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MALPF establish a procedure to obtain and review the
required annual reports and the related audited financial statements to
monitor the use of transfer taxes in accordance with State law and the
remission of amounts due to the State. We also recommend that MALPF
review the counties’ usage of agricultural transfer tax during prior years,
determine if the taxes were used for purposes provided for by law, and
recoup any taxes due to the State or improperly used.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Easement Inspections
Finding 5
MALPF lacked procedures for ensuring required annual inspections of
easement properties were performed.
Analysis
MALPF lacked procedures for ensuring inspections of easement properties were
performed as required. In 1983, the MALPF Board of Trustees directed MALPF
to establish a policy for the inspection of easement properties. Consequently,
MALPF established a policy requiring the counties to perform annual inspections
of 10 percent of the easement properties acquired with State and local funds, and
annual inspections of all easement properties purchased with federal grant funds.1
However, MALPF had not established a process to ensure inspections were
performed by the counties as required. In addition, MALPF had not established a
follow-up policy when a county did not perform the required inspections.
For example, our review of calendar year 2006 inspection reports found that
MALPF had not received 97 of the 173 reports required for easements acquired
with State and local funds.2 Furthermore, MALPF had not followed up with any
of the counties delinquent in submitting the inspections. As a result, there was a
lack of assurance that landowners were in compliance with the provisions
stipulated in the easement agreements. The failure to obtain the required
inspections has been commented upon in our five preceding audit reports dating
back to June 3, 2003.
Recommendation 5
We again recommend that MALPF take appropriate action to ensure that
easement inspections are performed as required, including establishing a
process to account for all required annual inspections and to take
appropriate follow-up action when counties fail to provide the inspections as
required.
1The MALPF grant agreement with the federal government requires annual inspections of all
easement properties acquired with federal grant funds.
2The number of required reports is based on 10 percent of the easements reported in the most
recent MALPF Annual Report.
13

--- Page 16 ---
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We audited the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund (Fund) for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s
financial transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We audit the Fund
annually as required by the Agriculture Article, Section 2-505 of the Code. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Fund’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Fund by the
Department of Agriculture. These support services (such as purchasing, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Department.
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation management is responsible
for establishing and maintaining effective internal control. Internal control is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations
including the safeguarding of assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules,
and regulations are achieved.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Fund’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Fund that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Department of Agriculture’s response, on behalf of the Foundation, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our
review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit A
MARYLAND AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION FUND
SCHEDULE OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2007
Governmental Fiduciary
Fund Type Fund Types Total
Special (Memorandum
Revenue Trust Only)
REVENUES:
State property transfer taxes $ 21,535,476 $ 21,535,476
Local subdivision matching funds for easement purchases 13,056,952 13,056,952
Agricultural transfer taxes 4,557,570 4,557,570
Interest earnings on funds reserved for installment purchases $ 206,783 206,783
Sale of land included in prior easement acquisitions 55,655 55,655
Other Non-recurring receipts 16,917 16,917
Total Revenues 39,222,570 206,783 39,429,353
EXPENDITURES:
Easement acquisitions 35,230,959 35,230,959
(1)
Tri-County Council Program 2,415,000 2,415,000
Administration 956,202 956,202
Land appraisal, legal, and settlement fees 670,366 670,366
Total Expenditures 39,272,527 39,272,527
EXCESS OF REVENUES OVER EXPENDITURES: (49,957) 206,783 156,826
OTHER SOURCES (USES) OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES:
Transfers in from Special Revenue Fund for easement
acquisitions purchased on installment basis 2,338,174 2,338,174
Payments made on easement acquisitions purchased
on an installment basis (2,260,427) (2,260,427)
Net Other Sources (Uses) of Financial Resources - 77,747 77,747
EXCESS (DEFICIENCY) OF REVENUES OVER
EXPENDITURES AND NET OTHER SOURCES
(USES) OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES (49,957) 284,530 234,573
FUND BALANCES, July 1, 2006 31,938,998 5,473,591 37,412,589
(2)
FUND BALANCES, June 30, 2007 $ 31,889,041 $ 5,758,121 $ 37,647,162
(1) Tri-County Council Program - MALPF provided funding to the Tri-County Council Program as a result of budget bill language
of the 2006 session. The Tri-County Council Program provides grants to counties to fund land preservation efforts.
(2) The Special Revenue Fund Balance is reserved for easement acquisition offers that were approved by the MALPF Board of
Trustees, but were not presented to the landowners as well as offers accepted by the landowners that were awaiting Board of
Public Works approval or settlement at year end.
17

--- Page 21 ---
RESPONSE TO THE LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
MARYLAND AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION FOUNDATION
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
July 1, 2006 to June 30, 2007
Easement Acquisitions
Finding #1
A comprehensive listing of all easement acquisitions was not maintained to ensure the
easements were properly accounted for and reported.
Recommendation #1
We recommend that, in the future, MALPF maintain a comprehensive database of
all easement acquisitions and that this information be accurately reported in its
Annual Reports and reconciled to the State's accounting records. We also
recommend that MALPF investigate the aforementioned discrepancy and take
appropriate corrective action.
Response #1
MDA and MALPF concurs. MALPF is in the process of creating a new,
comprehensive database of all easement acquisitions that will allow timely and accurate
reporting and a verifiable baseline for reconciling the State's accounting records. Once
completed, MALPF will then be able to investigate the discrepancy with the State's
accounting records. MDA has recently extended the contract of the staff we hired this
summer to enter data from easement files. MALPF expects the initial data entry and
verification task to be completed by December 31, 2008
Explanation: MALPF has traditionally relied primarily on its written records and,
secondarily, on an outdated, inaccurate, and incomplete database with limited number of
data fields. MALPF has undertaken a fundamental revision of its database so it can be
the preeminent source of accurate up-to-date information for reporting and policy-
making. Given the scope of this task and the discontinuation of support for the old
database (creating a lacuna for quick data accessibility, though all of the data remains
accessible in written form in the files), providing accurate and verifiable historical data
from the beginning of the Program is not yet possible. Data records back to FY 1996
have been completed, including entry of new data and verification of existing data for
completeness and accuracy from the files. Once all of the records in new database are
complete and verified, accurate reporting will be available based on relevant criteria for
any historical point or time period. The historical data will be recalculated and published
in the Annual Report and at the website once complete and accurate data are available.
Whether or not that data will be reconcilable to the figures recorded on the State's
accounting records can only be analyzed after the database has been completely
populated and the records verified. Corrective action appropriate to resolve any reporting
discrepancies will be taken at that time.
1

--- Page 22 ---
Finding #2
Procedures and controls over easement acquisitions and for billing counties for their
share of the easement costs were inadequate.
Recommendation #2
We recommend that critical calculations be reviewed by an independent employee
and that such reviews be documented. In addition, we recommend that MALPF
establish procedures to ensure that all amounts due from the counties for easements
are properly invoiced, including the aforementioned $390,000.
Response #2
MDA and MALPF concurs: As recommended, MALPF is developing, with the
administrators responsible for calculating agricultural value and certain other values, a
methodology for independent review and verification of work. This review will be based
on a formal procedure of random sampling of such calculations and will require a formal
"sign-off" by the person performing the independent verification
In addition, the Executive Director will be developing a procedure to ensure acquisitions
are matched to billing records when county and federal funds are involved in an easement
transaction. There will be a coordinated effort between the staff preparing the billing
documents and the MALPF administrators responsible for that county to ensure billings
for these non state funds are sent and funds received at the appropriate time after
settlements.
Explanation: MALPF notes that the legislative auditors did not identify any errors in the
calculation of agricultural land values, but were concerned with a formal "sign-off"
procedure that established a paper trail of responsibility. Calculations have always been
reviewed by an independent employee, but an official "sign-off" procedure was never
part of the process. We would offer that the Executive Director always verifies the
numbers making up an offer before offer letters and option contracts are sent to
landowners. His signature on the letter was considered our documentation that that
verification has taken place.
2

--- Page 23 ---
County Agricultural Land Transfer Taxes
Finding #3
County agricultural land preservation programs were not properly certified resulting in
certain counties retaining a higher share of transfer taxes.
Recommendation #3
We again recommend that MALPF establish a process to timely monitor the
certification status of the county agricultural land preservation programs and to
ensure that agricultural land transfer taxes remitted are consistent with certification
status. We also again recommend that MALPF determine the legality of recovering
any agricultural land transfer taxes retained by counties whose agricultural land
preservation programs' certifications had expired.
Response #3
MDA and MALPF concurs. This finding and recommendation are based on the gap
between the way the certification program is administered today and existing regulations
which were developed many years ago. The certification program has been operated in a
manner that is more flexible than regulations in effect during this audit period would
allow. In response to this finding and recommendation, the Maryland Department of
Planning has updated the applicable regulations both to take into account changes in the
statute applying to certification – HB 2 (Agricultural Stewardship Act of 2006) and HB
1354 (2007) – and to bring the regulations in line with how the certification program
actually operates. These regulations have been posted to the Maryland Register
(COMAR 14.24.8.00-.9999) and are expected to go into effect presently.
Finding #4
MALPF did not ensure that counties properly used their share of agricultural land transfer
taxes or remitted the unused funds to the State as required.
Recommendation #4
We recommend that MALPF establish a procedure to obtain and review the
required annual reports and the related audited financial statements to monitor the
use of transfer taxes in accordance with State law and the remission of amounts due
to the State. We also recommend that MALPF review the counties' usage of
agricultural transfer tax during prior years, determine if the taxes were used for
purposes provided for by law, and recoup any taxes due to the State or improperly
used.
Response #4
MDA and MALPF concurs. MALPF will explore procedures to obtain and review the
required annual reports and related audited financial statements of certified counties as
part of the certification review. With new legislation that has increased the amount of
and the funding distribution of the agricultural transfer tax, MALPF and MDA have
recently met with the Office of the Comptroller to review new forms for counties to use
3

--- Page 24 ---
in reporting collections of the agricultural transfer tax. MALPF will also explore with the
Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) incorporating the delivery and review of the
annual reports and audited statements as part of the recertification review. A
supplemental procedure will need to be developed cooperatively with MDP to address the
timely review of annual reports and audit statements of certified counties under the new
statutory and regulatory requirements. Further, as MALPF staff does not have the
necessary expertise to review audits and financial statements of certified counties, the
issue will be further reviewed within MDA to establish responsibilities and the
availability of staff resources to ensure that the reviews of certified counties' audited
financial statements are completed in a timely manner. Finally, MALPF notes that the
auditors did not identify any improper expenditure of agricultural land transfer taxes by
certified counties, but were simply concerned that a clear procedure is in place to monitor
compliance.
MDA and MALPF will also confer with legal counsel to determine if we are required to
recoup any agricultural transfer taxes from counties with delayed certification.
Finding #5
MALPF lacks procedures for ensuring required annual inspections of easement properties
was performed.
Recommendation #5
We again recommend that MALPF take appropriate action to ensure that easement
inspections are performed as required, including establishing a process to account
for all required annual inspections and to take appropriate follow-up action when
counties fail to provide the inspections as required.
Response #5
MDA concurs. MALPF has now been provided with a new state position and as of
October 7, 2007, has secured a full-time permanent employee, Kim Hoxter, devoted to
establishing a process to account for all required annual inspections and to take
appropriate follow-up action when counties fail to provide the inspections as required.
Ms. Hoxter has been very active working with counties to bring their easement
inspections up-to-date and is developing a formal set of procedures to make Board
recommendations on future monitoring and inspections policies in a report due to the
Board of Trustees on December 31, 2008.
4

--- Page 25 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Keonna M. Wiley
Senior Auditor
Catherine M. Clarke
Staff Auditor