Title: Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration
Date: 05/19/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744e3
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:20:10.437575
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
November 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Licensing – Controls Over Issuance and Inventory 6
Finding 1 – Although an internal investigation revealed that the Motor
Vehicle Administration (MVA) issued 270 fraudulent federally non-
compliant driver’s licenses and identification cards, the scope was
limited and we found many additional products that may have been
issued improperly. MVA also did not alter its procedures to correct
the related control deficiencies.
Finding 2 – Adequate controls were not established over MVA’s 11
inventory stock of blank driver’s license and identification cards.
Licensing – Suspension and Revocation
Finding 3 – MVA did not ensure that all driving records were reviewed 13
for possible administrative action, and our tests disclosed several
records for which required administrative action was not taken.
Finding 4 – MVA did not ensure that required supervisory reviews of 14
critical transactions recorded on driving records, including license
suspensions and revocations, were adequately performed and
documented.
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 5 – MVA did not ensure that labor rates included in a $21.4 15
million information technology (IT) contract were the most favorable
available, and MVA’s procedures for monitoring IT contracts and
billings did not ensure hours billed were reasonable, receipt of
deliverables, and compliance with contract terms.
Finding 6 – MVA did not adequately control electronically submitted 18
bids.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 7 – MVA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that 19
differences between recorded collections and amounts deposited by
branch offices were adequately investigated and resolved.
* Finding 8 – Collections received at MVA headquarters for vehicle 21
registration renewals processed at county offices were not adequately
controlled.
Information Systems and Controls
Finding 9 – Controls over the virtual server environment did not 23
properly protect critical virtual servers.
Finding 10 – Procedures for securing MVA’s numerous computers were 23
not sufficient.
Ignition Interlock Program
Finding 11 – Employees responsible for reviewing and approving 24
changes to critical data relating to the Ignition Interlock Program
also had access capability allowing them to change these data,
compromising effective internal control over the Program.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 12 – MVA did not adequately monitor corporate purchasing 25
card purchases and did not always comply with related State policies
and procedures.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 27
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) is part of the Maryland Department of
Transportation and functions under certain provisions of the Transportation
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MVA has jurisdiction over a variety
of activities related to the ownership and operation of motor vehicles, including
the registration and titling of vehicles. MVA maintains a headquarters location in
Anne Arundel County and 24 branch offices throughout the State with a total
authorized workforce of approximately 1,700 employees. According to MVA
records, during fiscal year 2016, MVA’s collections, which primarily consisted of
motor vehicle excise tax receipts and vehicle registration fees, totaled $1.7 billion.
According to the State’s accounting records, MVA’s expenditures totaled
approximately $220.3 million during fiscal year 2016, of which $61.2 million was
for contractual services.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 19, 2014. We determined that MVA
satisfactorily addressed eight of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Licensing – Controls Over Issuance and Inventory
Background
The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) is responsible for issuing commercial
and non-commercial driver’s licenses, license renewals, corrected licenses,
learner’s permits, and personal identification cards. MVA uses a computerized
driver’s licensing application system that includes an electronic license
application process that performs various verifications, such as matching the
applicant’s social security number (SSN) with a database maintained by the
federal Social Security Administration.
Chapter 309, Laws of Maryland 2013, effective January 1, 2014, authorized MVA
to issue federally non-compliant products (driver’s licenses and identification
cards) to Maryland residents who do not have a SSN and who do not have lawful
authority to be in the United States, provided that, for the previous two years,
these individuals filed Maryland income tax returns or were claimed as a
dependent on returns filed for those years. These products cannot be used for
official purposes as determined by the Secretary of the United States Department
of Homeland Security; for example, they cannot be used to purchase firearms,
access commercial flights, or enter federal buildings.
According to MVA’s records, during fiscal year 2016, MVA processed
approximately 6.7 million licensing transactions, which included 889,000 new
driver’s licenses resulting in $53.9 million in revenue. As of August 25, 2016,
there were approximately 4.8 million active products, including at least 82,660
federally non-compliant products.
Finding 1
Although an internal investigation revealed that MVA issued 270 fraudulent
federally non-compliant driver’s license (DL) and identification (ID) cards,
the scope of the investigation was limited and we found many additional
products that may have been issued improperly. MVA also did not alter its
procedures to correct the related control deficiencies.
Analysis
Although its internal investigation identified a number of federally non-compliant
DL and ID cards that MVA had improperly issued at one branch location based
on counterfeit documents, MVA did not alter its procedures to address the related
control deficiencies. Furthermore, MVA did not expand the scope of its
investigation to determine the full extent of such occurrences. Our data analyses
6

--- Page 9 ---
identified many more federally non-compliant DL or ID cards that could have
been improperly issued because of the use of fraudulent documentation by
applicants.
An internal MVA investigation revealed that 270 federally non-compliant DL or
ID cards had been improperly issued to walk-in applicants based on counterfeit
documents presented at an MVA branch location during a six-month period. In
addition to the documentation requirements for all applicants regarding proof of
identity and Maryland residency, applicants for federally non-compliant products
must also provide a letter from the Comptroller of Maryland, which reflects a
control number unique to each individual filer, as evidence of Maryland income
tax filings for the previous two years. It is a violation of State law for applicants
to knowingly make a false statement or to use false, fictitious, or fraudulently
altered documents when applying for a Maryland DL or ID card, which can result
in penalties of $500 and/or two months in jail.
MVA conducted this internal investigation based on an employee tip about
suspicious or unethical activity on the part of two MVA customer agents at this
branch. MVA’s investigation included a review of all the products issued by
these two customer agents for the period from October 13, 2015 through March 7,
2016. MVA referred the results of its investigation to the Maryland Attorney
General – Criminal Division, the Governor’s Office, the U.S. Attorney’s Office
for the District of Maryland, and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s
Immigration and Customs Enforcement. As a result of MVA’s investigation, two
employees were terminated and the 270 DL or ID cards were canceled.
Internal Control Deficiencies Were Not Addressed
Although the resultant report identified control deficiencies with MVA’s
procedures for processing applications for individuals who applied in person at
branch locations without an appointment, MVA did not change its procedures.
For example, MVA did not stop processing walk-in applications, nor did it
institute certain automated verification procedures for such applications that are
performed when applicants schedule appointments in advance.
Applicants for a non-compliant DL or ID card are instructed to make an
appointment using MVA’s Central Scheduling System and apply in person at an
MVA location. During the appointment-scheduling process, an automated
verification is performed through the System to ensure that the applicant received
a valid letter (with a unique control number) from the State Comptroller
indicating the individual met the tax filing requirements under State law and that
the Comptroller letter control number was not previously used.
7

--- Page 10 ---
If the applicant walked in without scheduling an appointment, this automated
verification was not performed. Specifically, during the walk-in application
process, only a limited verification was performed using MVA’s driver’s
licensing application system (DLS) to ensure the Comptroller letter control
number was in the proper format and was a valid number. There was no
automated verification in DLS to ensure the Comptroller letter control number
was issued to that applicant and was not previously used to obtain a product.
In addition, MVA did not conduct periodic reviews of its records to identify
instances in which the same Comptroller letter control number was used by
multiple individuals to obtain a product, and to identify instances in which an
applicant’s name did not agree to the name assigned to the Comptroller letter
control number, so that appropriate follow-up action could be taken.
OLA’s Expanded Analysis Identified Additional Improperly Issued DL and ID
Cards
MVA’s internal investigation was focused on a limited number of employees for a
relatively short period and was not expanded to determine the full extent of such
occurrences. Therefore, we conducted certain data analyses and matches to
determine whether additional DL or ID cards could have been improperly issued.
Specifically, using MVA’s DLS and its official record of Maryland DL and ID
cards, we extracted data for all active products, as of August 25, 2016, identifying
4.8 million products, of which 82,660 were obtained using a Comptroller letter
control number. As a result, we identified 329 individuals who may have
improperly received federally non-compliant DL or ID cards due to the use of a
fraudulent Comptroller letter control number.
 Multiple individuals used the same Comptroller letter control number to
obtain DL or ID cards. Specifically, 225 individuals used 62 Comptroller
letter control numbers to obtain a DL or ID card. For example, one
Comptroller letter control number was used to obtain 16 DL or ID cards.
Since every applicant must obtain his or her own unique control number, the
use of the same number by multiple applicants would suggest fraudulent use
of that number.
 We identified a number of instances in which the names on the Comptroller’s
records of letters issued (as received by MVA from daily files from the
Comptroller containing data for a one-year period) differed from the names on
the MVA file for the same Comptroller letter control number. Specifically,
222 individuals had obtained a DL or ID card using a Comptroller letter
control number in which the individual’s first and/or last name did not match
the name of the individual who was assigned the related number. This
8

--- Page 11 ---
included 104 individuals who were not previously identified in our first
analysis of 225 individuals. The potential exists for a greater number of such
occurrences since data received daily from the Comptroller is only for a one-
year period and MVA does not retain older versions of the data.
We judgmentally selected 15 of the 329 unique DL or ID cards identified by these
analyses and reviewed the individual files, including all documentation provided
to MVA to obtain the products. Our test disclosed that 14 of the 15 DL or ID
cards appeared to have been issued based on fraudulent documentation. The
remaining instance appeared to be the result of a clerical error in recording the
applicant’s name.
We also used MVA’s official DL and ID records for all active products and
identified at least 499 non-compliant DL or ID cards where the same primary
residence address was used by multiple individuals. Specifically, we identified 21
residential addresses that were used as the primary address for 11 to 40
individuals each. Of these 499 products, 497 were not identified by our
aforementioned analyses. Although there may be legitimate reasons for multiple
applicants to list the same address, the frequency with which certain addresses
were used appeared questionable.
We judgmentally selected 10 of these 497 DL or ID cards and reviewed the
individual files, including all documentation provided to MVA to obtain the
products. Our test disclosed that 5 appeared to have been issued based on
fraudulent documentation, such as counterfeit bank statements used as proof of
Maryland residency. Accordingly, this may be another useful review for MVA to
perform to identify improperly issued DL or ID cards.
While MVA did periodically perform reviews to identify addresses that were
listed as the primary residence for multiple DL or ID cards, these reviews were
not sufficient. Investigators performed site visits to these addresses and
interviewed certain individuals, such as the homeowner or property manager, to
determine whether to cancel DL or ID cards for certain individuals who
improperly listed the address as their primary residence. The investigators did not
routinely review the documentation on file at MVA, which may provide
additional information to help their investigative efforts.
9

--- Page 12 ---
A summary of our analyses is included in the table below. We provided MVA
with the detailed results of our analyses and testing.
Table 1: Schedule of OLA Analyses, Testing, and Results
For Non-compliant Products as of August 25, 2016
Analysis Performed
Same Same
Names
Comptroller Address Totals
Did
Letter Used Used
Not
Multiple Multiple
Match
Times Times
Total Number of Unique
Products Potentially
Issued Based on 225 104 497 826
Fraudulent
Documentation
Number Selected
10 5 10 25
for Testing
Number Tested That
Appeared to Be 10 4 5 19
Fraudulent
Efforts to Recover Fraudulently Obtained DL and ID Cards Were Limited
According to MVA management, its investigators typically attempt to retrieve
fraudulently obtained products. However, because fraudulent residency
documentation (in addition to fraudulent Comptroller letters) was often provided
during the application process, MVA’s recovery efforts were limited. Many
individuals may still have these products in their possession, allowing them to, for
example, drive and establish bank accounts if the products are not otherwise
validated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MVA
a. develop procedures, such as an automated verification process for all
federally non-compliant applicants, to ensure the same Comptroller letter
control number cannot be used by more than one applicant to obtain a
10

--- Page 13 ---
DL or ID card and to ensure that the control number was issued to the
applicant;
b. develop procedures to periodically identify instances in which a
Comptroller letter control number was improperly used to obtain a
Maryland DL or ID card, perform documented investigations, including
a review of applicable supporting documentation, and take appropriate
action;
c. expand its review of addresses used by multiple applicants to include a
review of applicable supporting documentation, take appropriate follow-
up action, and document work performed;
d. investigate the results of our analyses and cancel any cards which were
improperly issued, including the 19 products identified in our tests, and
refer the applicants to the appropriate authorities; and
e. identify the circumstances involved in issuing the potentially fraudulent
non-compliant products identified in our analyses and, in consultation
with the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal Division, take
appropriate action.
Finding 2
Adequate controls were not established over MVA’s inventory stock of blank
driver’s license and identification cards.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not established over MVA’s inventory stock of blank
driver’s license and identification cards maintained at its headquarters location, as
one employee had unilateral control over these cards. Specifically, this employee
ordered new cards from the vendor, received the cards, and recorded the receipt of
the cards and their unique inventory numbers in MVA’s inventory tracking
system without independent review. This employee also participated in periodic
physical inventories of the card stock. Consequently, there was a lack of
assurance that all cards received were properly recorded and accounted for. Since
the cards exhibit certain graphics referring to their purpose and identifying the
State of Maryland, there is a potential for these cards to be used for fraudulent
purposes. Consequently, it is incumbent upon MVA to ensure that adequate
controls are established to properly record and account for all cards received.
Our review of one purchase of 328,200 cards made in June 2016 disclosed that
only 320,700 cards were recorded in the inventory tracking system, a difference
of 7,500 cards. We were informed by the aforementioned employee that the
7,500 cards were received, but were not recorded because they were to be used for
11

--- Page 14 ---
testing purposes. This was confirmed by MVA management; however, there was
no documentation of the disposition of these cards.
The Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual requires that the
employee who receives inventory items be separate from the employee who
records the inventory items in the agency’s records, and that the employee
responsible for ordering items be separate from the employee who receives them.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MVA
a. adequately separate employee duties relating to the procurement, receipt,
and recording of its driver’s license and identification card inventory
stock;
b. develop a procedure, such as a documented independent supervisory
review, to ensure that all cards received are properly recorded in the
inventory tracking system; and
c. determine and document the disposition of the aforementioned 7,500
cards.
We advised MVA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Licensing – Suspension and Revocation
Background
MVA is responsible for processing certain administrative actions relating to
driver’s licenses, such as license suspensions and revocations. MVA receives
information daily that impacts drivers’ licenses, consisting primarily of traffic
citations and case convictions from the State’s district and circuit courts and from
other State and local entities. MVA personnel review this information and
determine any appropriate administrative action. For example, as specified in
State law, a license suspension or revocation generally occurs when a driver
accumulates a specified number of points on his or her driving record (8 and 12
points, respectively) based on traffic citations received. License suspensions may
also result from other offenses, such as the failure to pay court-ordered child
support and the existence of outstanding arrest warrants.
When MVA has determined that a license should be suspended or revoked, the
driving record with the manual determination is scanned into MVA’s Document
Imaging and Workflow System (DIWS) and the decision code is entered, which
automatically generates a letter of notification to the licensee advising him or her
12

--- Page 15 ---
of the determination. According to its records, MVA processed 279,533
suspension and revocation actions during calendar year 2015.
Finding 3
MVA did not ensure that all driving records were being reviewed, as
required, for possible administrative action, and our tests disclosed several
records for which required administrative action was not taken.
Analysis
Although MVA had established procedures to identify driving records to be
reviewed for potential administrative action resulting from traffic offenses
incurred, certain records were erroneously excluded from these procedures. After
our inquiries during the audit, MVA determined that certain cases in which the
driver had already accumulated 8 or 12 points on his or her driving record were
being incorrectly excluded from these review procedures. Our test of 31 excluded
records disclosed that required administrative action, such as license suspension,
was not taken against 8 of the drivers.
MVA converted traffic-related conviction information it received from the courts
on a daily basis to the required number of points as specified in State law, and
automatically posted the points to each individual’s driving record. An automated
report was generated of driving records to be reviewed by MVA personnel based
on the accumulated points on each record to determine what, if any,
administrative action should be taken.
In response to our audit inquiries, MVA determined that cases in which the
driver’s license had already been suspended or revoked were being erroneously
excluded from the report and, therefore, were not subject to its review. For
example, the report would exclude the driving record of a driver with a currently
revoked license (that is, had already accumulated 12 points) even if the driver was
later convicted of an offense requiring additional points. Such records should be
reviewed for a possible extension of the initial revocation.
We obtained an automated file of traffic offense convictions resulting in an
accumulated assessment of 8 or more points for 10 days during calendar year
2015 and compared the file with the count of driving records printed and
reviewed by MVA for these days. This comparison disclosed 5 days in which the
total count of driving records printed (393) was 34 records less than the number of
licenses identified by the automated file of traffic offense convictions (427).
Consequently, these 34 driving records were not subject to the review process and
any administrative actions required were not imposed.
13

--- Page 16 ---
With the assistance of MVA personnel, we reviewed 31 of the 34 records
identified on 2 of these days. Our review disclosed that 8 of the 31 drivers should
have had administrative action taken against them, such as license suspension,
revocation, or an extension of an existing suspension or revocation. For example,
2 drivers who were serving a 30-day suspension subsequently accumulated more
points which should have resulted in a 90-day suspension. The remaining 23 did
not require any additional administrative action primarily because of the timing of
the violations and the court convictions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MVA
a. ensure that all driving records with 8 and 12 accumulated points are
reflected on reports for subsequent review to determine if administrative
action is required;
b. investigate the aforementioned 8 driving records noted in our review and
take appropriate action; and
c. identify and investigate other driving records which have not been
reviewed, and take appropriate action in consultation with legal counsel.
Finding 4
MVA did not ensure that required supervisory reviews of critical
transactions recorded on driving records, including license suspensions and
revocations, were adequately performed and documented.
Analysis
MVA did not ensure that required supervisory reviews of critical transactions
recorded on driving records were adequately performed and documented. These
reviews are meant to ensure the propriety of these transactions, such as the
addition or removal of a license suspension or revocation, and accordingly, the
accuracy of the related driving record. MVA’s policy requires the supervisory
review of five percent of critical transactions processed.
 Supervisory reviews were not always performed as required. Our test of
1,044 critical transactions processed by 10 employees over five days disclosed
that, although 46 (4.4 percent) of the critical transactions tested had been
reviewed, none of the 176 transactions processed by 2 employees were
reviewed. Additionally, the number of transactions reviewed for 2 other
employees fell short of the five percent requirement. For example, only 1 of
95 critical transactions performed by one of these employees on the date
tested was subject to supervisory review.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 Our review of the 31 records referred to in Finding 3 (that is, records with an
accumulated assessment of 8 or more points that were excluded from the
administrative action review procedures) disclosed 5 instances in which a
supervisor indicated that the transaction had been subject to supervisory
review. Specifically, the supervisor noted that his or her review was
performed by examining the transaction and related notes recorded on the
applicable driving record in DIWS. However, as previously noted, these
driving records had not been scanned into DIWS and, accordingly, no
administrative action (critical transaction) was taken. Consequently,
supervisory review would have been an impossibility. Each supervisory
review conducted should be accurately documented.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MVA
a. conduct supervisory reviews of critical transactions recorded on driving
records in accordance with its policy, and
b. ensure that all such reviews are adequately and accurately documented.
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 5
MVA did not ensure that labor rates included in a $21.4 million information
technology (IT) contract were the most favorable available, and MVA’s
procedures for monitoring IT contracts and reviewing the related billings did
not ensure hours billed were reasonable, receipt of all deliverables, and
compliance with all contract terms.
Analysis
MVA did not ensure that a $21.4 million IT services contract was procured at the
most favorable labor rates available. In addition, MVA’s procedures for
monitoring this and other IT contracts and for reviewing the related billings were
not effective in ensuring hours billed and paid for were reasonable, the receipt of
all deliverables, and compliance with all contract terms. We examined four IT
contracts that were in effect during our audit period that had a collective value of
$57.2 million with related payments totaling $40.2 million as of May 11, 2017.
The contracts covered a full range of IT services to modernize and standardize
driver’s licensing and other business systems.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Most Favorable Rates for Certain Labor Categories Were Not Obtained From One
Vendor
MVA procured the $21.4 million contract, effective June 2013, using a
competitive sealed proposal process when lower rates for certain required labor
categories could have been obtained through a Consulting and Technology
Services (CATS) master contract maintained by the State’s Department of
Information Technology.
While the use of CATS to procure IT services is not required, the CATS master
contract may offer a financial advantage to an agency by providing preapproved
vendors with established not-to-exceed billing rates for each vendor and labor
category. In this instance, the vendor selected by MVA was also an approved
vendor under CATS; consequently, MVA could have either used CATS or
required the vendor to match the lower rates it offered under CATS. Although the
labor rates for certain labor categories included in the contract procured by MVA
were lower than the CATS contract, the labor rates for other categories were
higher. Over the course of the contract term, which continues through June 2023,
the higher contract rates could potentially cost MVA an additional $272,000.
Based on our review of three invoices, we noted that MVA paid at least $7,609
more than if MVA had obtained the rates available under the CATS master
contract.
Effective Contract Monitoring Was Not Established
For two contracts valued at $17.8 million, MVA did not establish comprehensive
task orders to direct the work and to allow MVA to effectively monitor the
contractor and related billings. For one of these two contracts, the deliverables
stated in the contract were not specific to help ensure that expected outcomes
were achieved. Furthermore, MVA did not issue task orders with specific
deliverables, estimated hours, and related costs that would help ensure that work
on individual tasks did not continue for inordinate periods resulting in excessive
costs. We noted that the work relating to one requirement (system migration),
had an initial completion date of February 15, 2016, according to the contractor’s
status report, but this date changed to January 16, 2017 on a subsequent status
report.
For the other contract, MVA did not review the task order proposals submitted by
the vendor to ensure the work was appropriate and the proposed costs were
reasonable. Our review disclosed two proposals for tasks that were specifically
excluded from the scope of work or were included in an earlier price proposal,
resulting in an overpayment of $97,279. Furthermore, the task order proposals
did not include completion dates as required. For example, one task, valued at
$58,394, remained unfinished and was subsequently included in the next task
16

--- Page 19 ---
order, increasing the cost to $63,915. Only a portion of the work was completed
and the task was again included in the subsequent contract with the same
contractor. MVA advised that the task was ultimately completed, but could not
provide documentation of the final cost for this work.
For three contracts totaling $46.6 million, MVA lacked sufficient evidence, such
as required delivery acceptance forms, that deliverables were properly completed.
For two of the contracts, MVA lacked evidence that required status reports, daily
training records, and project transition plans were received, reviewed, and
accepted as satisfactory. For one of these two contracts and for the third contract,
either MVA could not provide meeting minutes to evidence that required periodic
progress meetings were held or meeting minutes showed numerous occasions
where there were no MVA employees in attendance. The weekly meetings were
meant to provide an opportunity to review completed work, deliverables in
progress, and planned upcoming work. Under these circumstances, there is a lack
of assurance that MVA received all the services it paid for.
For two contracts totaling $28.6 million, MVA did not review the qualifications
of new contractor employees, and did not approve the employees, as called for in
the contracts. Between the two contracts, MVA paid for work performed by eight
individuals who were not approved in the original contracts, and who were not
subsequently approved by MVA. In addition, MVA did not prepare required
periodic evaluations for any of the contractor employees providing services under
these two contracts.
Insufficient Review of Invoices
For two contracts valued at $17.8 million, MVA did not adequately review the
related invoices to ensure compliance with contract terms and rates. For one
contract, the task order proposals and related invoices totaling $1.1 million for
two software modifications we reviewed were based on a flat fee; however, the
contract generally required such tasks to be performed on a time and materials
basis for established labor categories and to be supported by timesheets.
Under the terms of the other contract, monthly payments were to be based on the
number of hours worked by each contract employee. However, our review of
three invoices and the related timesheets submitted by the contractor disclosed
that the contractor adopted a billing practice, without formal approval from MVA,
in which time worked by a contractor employee in excess of 8 hours per day was
not immediately billed, but was instead accrued by the contractor to be billed at a
later date when the employee did not work. As of September 2016, the
contractor’s records indicated that there were 321 accrued hours, valued at
$27,992, owed to the contractor by MVA, and there was no indication that MVA
17

--- Page 20 ---
monitored the accrued time for propriety. In addition, on the three invoices
tested, the hourly rate charged for one employee ($85) was higher than the
approved contract rate ($76), resulting in overpayments totaling $6,552.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MVA
a. take all appropriate steps, including consideration of CATS contracts, to
obtain the lowest labor rates available for IT services required;
b. establish task orders to direct contractor work including estimated hours,
not-to-exceed costs, milestones, and completion dates;
c. review task order proposals to ensure the work is appropriate and the
proposed costs are reasonable;
d. adequately monitor contracts to ensure that all contract requirements are
met and deliverables are completed to MVA’s satisfaction, including
completion of signed delivery acceptance forms as required;
e. ensure that all contractor employees are reviewed for qualifications,
properly approved, and that a periodic evaluation is performed for each
resource as required;
f. ensure that all billings are in accordance with the time and materials
provisions of the contracts and established task orders and reflect
approved contract rates paid; and
g. perform a documented review of all invoices submitted for the contracts
tested to identify any overpayments made and take appropriate action to
recover any overpayments made, including those we identified.
Finding 6
MVA did not adequately control electronically submitted vendor bids.
Analysis
MVA had not established adequate controls over electronically submitted vendor
bids. For computer hardware and software procurements, MVA routinely
instructed vendors to submit their competitive sealed bids directly to the email
account of its procurement officer. However, the bid submissions were not
required to be password protected. Additionally, MVA did not maintain
documentation to indicate when the electronic bids were opened, nor were the
bids opened publicly. Our review of five procurements totaling $3.8 million with
bids that were electronically submitted disclosed that MVA did not properly
secure the electronic bids, document the bid openings, and hold the bid openings
in public for any of the electronic submissions.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MVA
a. establish procedures, such as requiring password protection, to properly
secure competitively sealed bids received electronically;
b. ensure that all competitively sealed bids are opened publicly; and
c. maintain documentation of bid openings.
Cash Receipts
Background
MVA collects fees and penalties for a variety of activities related to the ownership
and operation of motor vehicles, including the registration and titling of vehicles,
licensing passenger and commercial drivers, and enforcing insurance compliance.
Collections are received at the headquarters location in Anne Arundel County and
at 24 branch offices that individually may offer a full range of services or limited,
express services. MVA also operates its eStore, which provides online services to
its customers with connectivity via the Internet, and kiosks located at certain
shopping centers and branch offices. Furthermore, several county government
offices are authorized to process certain MVA transactions and collect and submit
the related fees to MVA.
According to its records, MVA’s fiscal year 2016 collections totaled $1.7 billion.
Of this amount, $376.2 million was received as walk-in collections at branch
offices. During our audit, we reviewed cash receipts procedures and controls at
three branch offices that had fiscal year 2016 receipts totaling $184.4 million.
Finding 7
MVA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that differences between
recorded collections and amounts deposited by branch offices were
adequately investigated and resolved.
Analysis
Procedures performed at MVA headquarters to account for all fees collected and
recorded in MVA’s Titling and Registration Information System (TARIS) by
branch office employees were not adequate. Differences between recorded fee
collections, bank deposits, and cash receipts recorded in the State’s records were
not always adequately resolved, and investigations were not properly documented
and subject to supervisory review.
 During daily TARIS reconciliations, discrepancies between recorded fee
collections and the corresponding bank deposits were not always adequately
19

--- Page 22 ---
investigated. For example, the employee performing the reconciliations often
accepted notifications of deposit corrections received from the bank as full
resolution of a discrepancy without conducting an investigation. Our test of
13 branch deposits totaling $184,000, with discrepancies totaling $94,900,
disclosed that 6 discrepancies totaling $18,300 were considered resolved in
this manner. However, in one instance, we determined that the bank
erroneously credited MVA’s account for $5,000 to resolve a deposit
difference that was actually caused by an MVA recording error, not an actual
difference in the deposit amount. According to MVA records, there were
5,728 discrepancies identified during the period from July 1, 2014 through
March 7, 2016 totaling $23.6 million.
In addition, if the employee could not resolve a deposit discrepancy, the
discrepancy was referred to the employee responsible for investigating
chargeback transactions and was listed on the TARIS reconciliation as
resolved. However, no follow-up was performed to ensure that the difference
was subsequently resolved. Of the 13 deposits tested, 3 discrepancies totaling
$24,500 were referred to this employee to be reviewed in conjunction with the
investigation of chargebacks, and were documented as reconciled without
adequate follow-up to ensure that the items were actually resolved.
 Similarly, investigations of chargeback transactions, which were differences
between cash receipts recorded on the State’s records and those recorded by
the bank as deposited, were also insufficient. The employee who investigated
chargebacks did not always examine adequate documentation, such as source
documents prepared by the applicable branch office, to resolve differences
between the State’s records and the bank’s records. The employee often
relied solely on deposit data already recorded in MVA’s records. However,
relying only on such data may not provide a complete and accurate
explanation as to why the chargeback occurred. Chargeback transactions were
reported to MVA by the Office of the State Treasurer. Adjusting entries to
clear the chargeback clearing account totaled $14 million for our audit period.
 The aforementioned investigations of reconciling items and chargeback
transactions were not adequately documented. For example, the employee
who investigated deposit discrepancies did not maintain documentation of the
review performed and how items were resolved. For all 13 deposit
discrepancies we tested, MVA reprinted all the supporting documentation
(TARIS deposit information, banking online documentation) at our request.
Finally, these investigations and adjustments were not subject to independent
supervisory review and approval.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MVA
a. ensure that differences identified by the daily reconciliations and
chargeback transactions are adequately investigated, including an
examination of all relevant supporting documentation;
b. maintain adequate documentation of the investigations performed; and
c. provide for supervisory review and approval of the investigations and
any resulting adjustments.
Finding 8
Collections received at MVA headquarters for vehicle registration renewals
processed at county offices were not adequately controlled.
Analysis
Collections received at MVA headquarters from 12 counties for vehicle
registration renewals processed on behalf of MVA were not adequately
controlled. Certain counties, including those that do not have MVA branch
offices, have authority under State law to process registration renewals at their
county offices and collect the related fees. These counties periodically forwarded
the related fees to MVA by check. These transactions were recorded in TARIS
when processed by the counties, but the transactions were not released to update
MVA’s detail records until the related checks were received and processed for
deposit by MVA. Amounts remitted to MVA by these 12 counties during fiscal
year 2015 totaled $3.7 million.
 Checks received from county offices were not always recorded and
restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt. Specifically, checks received
in the afternoon were not recorded and restrictively endorsed until the
following day. Although these checks were maintained overnight in a locked
cabinet within a secured room, numerous employees had access to the room as
well as the cabinet key which was maintained in an unlocked drawer.
 Duties were not adequately segregated since the same employee who received
the county checks and the related supporting documentation was also
responsible for performing the daily reconciliation designed to ensure that all
collections received were deposited and properly recorded in MVA’s records.
 MVA did not ensure that the funds and supporting documentation due from
the county offices were received in a timely manner and that the
documentation supported the transactions processed by the county offices.
Our test of 10 checks totaling $99,700 disclosed that 3 checks totaling
21

--- Page 24 ---
$45,600 were dated from 10 to 29 business days after the date of the last
registration renewal to which the checks applied. In addition, all required
supporting documentation was not submitted relating to 4 checks totaling
$37,300. State law requires county offices to submit all fees collected, and the
related record of registration renewals for each day at the end of each week.
Under these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could occur without timely
detection. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MVA
a. secure checks prior to deposit and ensure they are recorded and
restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt (repeat);
b. segregate the cash collection, account monitoring, and deposit verification
functions (repeat); and
c. monitor county transactions to ensure that all related collections and
supporting documentation are received at least weekly by MVA in
accordance with State law (repeat).
We advised MVA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Information Systems and Controls
Background
MVA’s Office of Information Resources (OIR) provides information technology
services to MVA. OIR operates and maintains various applications, servers, and
local networks throughout MVA’s numerous locations, including the headquarters
location and its branch offices located throughout the State. OIR interacts with
various contractors that provide information technology related services to MVA.
In addition, the Maryland Department of Transportation – Office of
Transportation Technology Services operates a mainframe computer for certain
MVA applications, such as the Driver Licensing system.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 9
Controls over the MVA virtual server environment did not properly protect
critical virtual servers.
Analysis
Controls over the MVA virtual server environment did not properly protect
critical virtual servers. Specialized software allows for a single physical host
server’s resources (that is, memory, CPU, and storage) to be defined and
subdivided into multiple virtual servers which can each operate as a separate,
unique server. As of October 2016, MVA was using 27 physical host servers to
host 190 virtual servers that primarily supported the critical eStore system which
provides online services to MVA customers with connectivity via the Internet and
kiosks located at MVA branch offices. These host and virtual servers are
managed via a central management console. We determined that 24 user accounts
(assigned to 16 unique individuals) were improperly granted the administrator
role over the aforementioned central management console that allowed these
individuals to make unauthorized changes to MVA’s virtual server environment
including the servers supporting the critical eStore system.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy, states that agencies must
ensure that only authorized individuals (employees or agency contractors) have
access to confidential information and that such access is strictly controlled,
audited, and that it supports the concepts of “least possible privilege” and “need to
know.”
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MVA restrict administrative access to its virtual server
environment to individuals whose job duties require such access.
Finding 10
Procedures for securing MVA’s numerous computers were not sufficient.
Analysis
Procedures for securing MVA’s numerous computers were not sufficient.
 MVA operated approximately 3,900 workstations and servers to support its
operations. Our testing determined that 607 of these computers did not have
any malware protection (either host or network based malware protection).
 MVA personnel advised that they periodically verified that host based
malware protection software was installed and operational on its computers by
23

--- Page 26 ---
comparing computer counts from its malware protection consoles to computer
counts of its directory services. However, there was no documentation that
substantiated these comparisons were performed.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy states that agencies, at a
minimum, must protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by
implementing (anti-virus, anti-malware) solutions that, to the extent possible,
include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MVA
a. ensure that all managed computers are running current, operational
versions of its host based malware protection software by performing
periodic comparisons of computer counts from its malware protection
consoles to computer counts from its directory services; and
b. document these comparisons and retain the documentation for future
reference.
Ignition Interlock Program
Finding 11
Employees responsible for reviewing and approving changes to critical data
relating to the Ignition Interlock Program (IIP) also had access capability
allowing them to change these data, compromising effective internal control
over the Program.
Analysis
Certain employees responsible for reviewing and approving changes to critical
data relating to the IIP also had access capability allowing them to change these
data, compromising effective internal control over the Program. Specifically,
seven employees who were responsible for reviewing and approving such
adjustments, either in a primary or back-up capacity, also had access granting
them the capability to adjust critical IIP data, such as the driver violation and the
period a driver was required to be in the Program. Furthermore, these employees
could process an unauthorized adjustment transaction and then delete the record
of the transaction after the change was made, thereby ensuring the adjustment
would not appear on the output reports for review purposes. As a result, improper
IIP transactions could be recorded without detection. The aforementioned
Information Security Policy requires that agencies maintain appropriate audit
trails of significant security events related to critical applications.
24

--- Page 27 ---
The IIP was established to formalize the monitoring process of the ignition
interlock device which helps prevent individuals convicted of alcohol-related
driving violations from driving while intoxicated. Drivers are enrolled in the
program for a certain period as a result of a court order, administrative hearing
order, or MVA Medical Advisory Board recommendation, or may voluntarily
enroll in the program in lieu of a driver’s license suspension or revocation.
According to MVA records, as of February 16, 2016 there were 10,584 drivers
actively enrolled in the IIP.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MVA
a. take appropriate action to ensure that all changes to critical IIP
information are subject to independent supervisory review and approval,
and
b. remove the IIP transaction deletion capability from all users.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 12
MVA did not adequately monitor corporate purchasing card (CPC)
purchases and did not always comply with related State policies and
procedures.
Analysis
MVA did not adequately monitor CPC purchases and comply with the
requirements of the Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card
Policy and Procedures Manual. According to the bank’s records, as of June 30,
2016 MVA had 87 active cards, and the related expenditures totaled
approximately $1.9 million during fiscal year 2016.
 Our test of 25 purchasing card transactions totaling approximately $53,000
disclosed purchases totaling $35,640 that appeared to have been split into
smaller transactions to circumvent competitive procurement requirements of
the State procurement regulations or the cardholder’s single transaction
spending limit. For example, one cardholder made three purchases on the
same day, in amounts ranging from $1,959 to $2,029, for the same product
from the same vendor. Two days later, this cardholder and a second
cardholder made three additional purchases, each under $2,300, for the same
product from the same vendor. Both cardholders had single transaction limits
of $2,500. State procurement regulations generally require the use of
statewide commodity contracts when available and provide that procurements
25

--- Page 28 ---
may not be divided to avoid the use of the competitive procurement process.
Furthermore, the Manual prohibits artificially splitting purchases to
circumvent CPC spending limits.
 Supervisory personnel did not perform a documented review of available
Level-3 purchasing card data to help determine the propriety of the CPC
transaction, as required by the Manual. Level-3 data, which are provided by
certain merchants, provide detailed descriptions of items purchased and
provide supervisory personnel with additional information to help detect
questionable purchases.
 MVA did not maintain a list of disputed transactions, as required by the
Manual, nor did it adequately follow up with the bank to ensure that
appropriate credit was received when the bank was advised of fraudulent
transactions. During our testing of CPC transactions, we noted that one
cardholder identified and reported six fraudulent transactions totaling $1,071
to the bank; however, credit had not been received and no follow-up action
had been taken until we brought this to MVA’s attention in July 2016, 20
months after the fraudulent charges were first reported.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MVA ensure compliance with the Corporate Purchasing
Card Policy and Procedures Manual. Specifically, we recommend that MVA
a. ensure that CPC transactions are not split to circumvent established
controls and in violation of Manual requirements;
b. incorporate and document the use of Level-3 purchasing card data in
supervisory reviews of the activity logs to help ensure the propriety of
CPC activity; and
c. establish procedures to follow-up, in a timely manner, on potentially
fraudulent transactions referred to the bank.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) for the period beginning
July 25, 2012 and ending December 14, 2015. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MVA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the titling and registration, licensing, license
suspension and revocation, and insurance compliance processes, as well as
procurements and disbursements for MVA’s operating expenses, cash receipts,
payroll, and information systems security. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as, processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided to
MVA by the State Highway Administration. These support services are included
within the scope of our audit of the State Highway Administration.
Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance
with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MVA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MVA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MVA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
27

--- Page 30 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and the Maryland Department of
Transportation’s Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and
expenditure data) and from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as
part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits
and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that
the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes
the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MVA’s automated systems for the purpose of testing
the propriety of licenses issued and motor vehicle registration and titling, as well
as certain administrative actions such as license suspensions and revocations. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MVA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MVA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
28

--- Page 31 ---
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MVA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Maryland Department of Transportation, on behalf of
MVA, to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results
of our review of its response.
29

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Draft Audit Responses
Period July 25, 2012 to December 14, 2015
Licensing - Controls over Issuance and Inventory
Finding 1
Although an internal investigation revealed that MVA issued 270 fraudulent federally non-
compliant driver’s license (DL) and identification (ID) cards, the scope of the investigation
was limited and we found many additional products that may have been issued improperly.
MVA also did not alter its procedures to correct the related control deficiencies.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MVA
a. develop procedures, such as an automated verification process for all federally non-compliant
applicants, to ensure the same Comptroller letter control number cannot be used by more
than one applicant to obtain a DL or ID card and to ensure that the control number was issued
to the applicant;
b. develop procedures to periodically identify instances in which a Comptroller letter control
number was improperly used to obtain a Maryland DL or ID card, perform documented
investigations, including a review of applicable supporting documentation, and take
appropriate action;
c. expand its review of addresses used by multiple applicants to include a review of applicable
supporting documentation, take appropriate follow-up action, and document work performed;
d. investigate the results of our analyses and cancel any cards which were improperly issued,
including the 19 products identified in our tests, and refer the applicants to the appropriate
authorities; and
e. identify the circumstances involved in issuing the potentially fraudulent non-compliant
products identified in our analyses and, in consultation with the Office of the Attorney
General – Criminal Division, take appropriate action.
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The MDOT MVA takes the issue of
fraud very seriously. In 2013, Maryland passed a law authorizing the issuance of driver’s
licenses and identification cards to individuals who cannot demonstrate lawful status. The
MDOT MVA already identified and immediately took administrative action against the
employees who did not follow the required procedures of ensuring the customer had an
appointment, which enforces a unique Comptroller Number. In addition, prior to the
legislative audit, the MDOT MVA initiated programming modifications in the Driver
Licensing System (DLS) to ensure that if a Comptroller Number has already been used, the
system will not allow the transaction to be completed. This change was completed in April
2017.

--- Page 35 ---
b. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. With the implementation of the new
programming in the DLS system, if there is an attempt to utilize a Comptroller Number that
has already been used, the system will stop the transaction and it will be reviewed by MDOT
MVA Investigations.
c. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. For the past two years, MDOT MVA
Investigations Division has been using an application that identifies if there are multiple
products issued in different names (i.e. no family relation) at a particular address. The
investigator will review the documents and personally visit the location, if necessary, to
verify whether the individuals reside at that address. If fraud is detected, then the products
are cancelled. During Calendar Year 2016, there were 360 license cancellations due to this
process. In addition, in March 2017, the MDOT MVA implemented a program in which if a
specific address is utilized a particular number of times, it will stop the transaction and refer
the individual to MDOT MVA Investigations for address verification. During Calendar Year
2017 through September, the MDOT MVA has canceled 1,204 licenses for residency fraud.
All reviews are being documented by MDOT MVA Investigations Division.
d. The Administration concurs with the recommendation and in December 2016 initiated the
process of canceling 18 of the 19 cards. One card was determined not to be fraudulent. As of
November 3, 2017, all 18 remaining cards have been cancelled. When a driver’s license is
canceled because of residency fraud, that individual is required to meet with an investigator.
If the MDOT MVA investigator concludes that there is sufficient probable cause to believe
that the customer committed fraud in their application, the MDOT MVA investigator will
issue a written citation charging the individual with violating Transportation Article § 16-301
(a), knowingly and fraudulently obtaining a driver’s license by misrepresentation. During
Calendar Year 2016, 146 citations were issued. A citation requires the customer to appear in
court and they face a maximum penalty of 2 months imprisonment, a $500 fine, or both.
e. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The MDOT MVA has taken swift
action to address fraud in the Comptroller Number and in residency as identified above. For
any individual or employee engaging in criminal conduct, MDOT MVA Investigations
Division contacts appropriate local, state, or federal law enforcement for possible
prosecution.
Finding 2
Adequate controls were not established over MVA’s inventory stock of blank driver’s
license and identification cards.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MVA
a. adequately separate employee duties relating to the procurement, receipt, and recording of its
driver’s license and identification card inventory stock;
b. develop a procedure, such as a documented independent supervisory review, to ensure that
all cards received are properly recorded in the inventory tracking system; and
c. determine and document the disposition of the aforementioned 7,500 cards.
We advised MVA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.

--- Page 36 ---
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. As of December 30, 2016, we
implemented the steps to segregate the duties related to the procurement, receipt, and
recording, of driver’s license and identification card inventory.
b. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. In January 2016, a procedure was
implemented that requires independent documented supervisory review of all cards within
the inventory system.
c. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. We investigated all of the 7,500
cards in question, of which 6,465 cards were verified though collection of data from parallel
testing and user acceptance testing programs. The balance of 1,035 cards were used for
Disaster Recovery Site and Maintenance Testing prior to establishing a perpetual record. All
1,035 cards were destroyed after testing was completed.
Licensing – Suspension and Revocation
Finding 3
MVA did not ensure that all driving records were being reviewed, as required, for possible
administrative action, and our tests disclosed several records for which required
administrative action was not taken.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MVA
a. ensure that all driving records with 8 and 12 accumulated points are reflected on reports for
subsequent review to determine if administrative action is required;
b. investigate the aforementioned 8 driving records noted in our review and take appropriate
action; and
c. identify and investigate other driving records which have not been reviewed, and take
appropriate action in consultation with legal counsel.
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The MDOT MVA implemented
procedures in January 2017 to ensure that all records with 8 and 12 point accumulations are
reviewed for administrative actions.
b. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The MDOT MVA completed a
review of the 8 identified cases and determined 2 of the 8 cases required additional
administrative action. As of November 2017, the appropriate administrative actions on these
2 license holders have been instituted.
c. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The MDOT MVA is reviewing
reports from January 1, 2016 forward to identify if there are additional cases that warrant
further administrative action. We anticipate completing the manual review by the end of
January 2018.

--- Page 37 ---
Finding 4
MVA did not ensure that required supervisory reviews of critical transactions recorded on
driving records, including license suspensions and revocations, were adequately performed
and documented.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MVA
a. conduct supervisory reviews of critical transactions recorded on driving records in
accordance with its policy, and
b. ensure that all such reviews are adequately and accurately documented.
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. On October 20, 2016, the MDOT
MVA policy on auditing critical transactions was redistributed to management and
supervisors to ensure audits are conducted per that policy.
b. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. Management has met with the
appropriate personnel to remind staff of the appropriate policies and will conduct periodic
reviews of audit documentation to ensure that requirements are met.
Contract Procurement and Monitoring
Finding 5
MVA did not ensure that labor rates included in a $21.4 million information technology
(IT) contract were the most favorable available, and MVA’s procedures for monitoring IT
contracts and reviewing the related billings did not ensure hours billed were reasonable,
receipt of all deliverables, and compliance with all contract terms.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MVA
a. take all appropriate steps, including consideration of CATS contracts, to obtain the lowest
labor rates available for IT services required;
b. establish task orders to direct contractor work including estimated hours, not-to-exceed costs,
milestones, and completion dates;
c. review task order proposals to ensure the work is appropriate and the proposed costs are
reasonable;
d. adequately monitor contracts to ensure that all contract requirements are met and deliverables
are completed to MVA’s satisfaction, including completion of signed delivery acceptance
forms as required;
e. ensure that all contractor employees are reviewed for qualifications, properly approved, and
that a periodic evaluation is performed for each resource as required;
f. ensure that all billings are in accordance with the time and materials provisions of the
contracts and established task orders and reflect approved contract rates paid; and
g. perform a documented review of all invoices submitted for the contracts tested to identify
any overpayments made and take appropriate action to recover any overpayments made,
including those we identified.

--- Page 38 ---
Response:
a. The Administration partially concurs and does use the CATS contract when deemed
appropriate. However, there will be times when a stand-alone RFP is a better procurement
method. Additionally, the CATS contract does not have the full range of vendors available
that MDOT MVA might want to allow the opportunity to propose. Also, the RFP cited was
reviewed and approved by DoIT, and was presented on their BPW agenda for approval. This
was such an important and large project, MDOT MVA wanted to allow the best companies
available on the open market to propose, not just those on the CATS contract.
b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. As of January 2017, MDOT MVA
issues task orders detailing work to be completed, estimated hours, not-to-exceed limits, and
completion dates for future work on this contract.
c. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. As of January 2017, MDOT MVA
has implemented a task order proposal review process to ensure proposed work and levels of
effort are appropriate and reasonable to the task. The contractor produces a Work Breakdown
Structure (WBS) detailing the tasks required to complete the task order, including estimated
hours, milestones, and completion dates. The WBS is evaluated and adjusted as required to
meet the task order requirements and keep costs at or below the funds allocated to the
contract. The MDOT MVA process ensures the contractor adheres to the WBS parameters
laid out in the contract.
d. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. MDOT MVA project or contract
managers ensure all contract deliverables are listed and monitored until completion. MDOT
MVA project or contract managers have reviewed the Deliverables Tracker for the project
and verified tasks to be monitored are sufficiently documented in the Deliverables Tracker.
Project or contract manager updates the tracker as needed weekly. In May 2017, the MDOT
MVA started to validate that executed signed acceptance forms are submitted for deliverables
that are completed to the satisfaction of the MDOT MVA.
e. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. As of January 2017, the MDOT
MVA implemented a revised process to review and provide approvals for substituted
resources. In addition, MDOT MVA prepares evaluations for any contracted resources as
required by the contract.
f. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. As of January 2017, the contract
manager reviews, verifies and documents that billings are in accordance with provisions of
the contracts and established task orders.
g. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. MDOT MVA conducted a
documented review of all invoices and determined that they were charged appropriately for
the resource requested. The invoices reflected the wrong labor category for a resource.
MDOT MVA requested that the vendor submit corrected invoices to reflect the appropriate
labor category and the vendor made the changes.
In addition, formal contract management training is under development and will be presented
prior to the end of July 2018 to all MDOT MVA Project Managers, Contract Managers, and Task
Managers, as well as any employees, no matter the title or job classification, that are responsible
for any type of management, monitoring, reviewing, and/or payment of contracts and invoices.

--- Page 39 ---
Finding 6
MVA did not adequately control electronically submitted vendor bids.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MVA
a. establish procedures, such as requiring password protection, to properly secure
competitively sealed bids received electronically;
b. ensure that all competitively sealed bids are opened publicly; and
c. maintain documentation of bid openings.
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. We have established standard
operating procedures (SOP) for bid openings, hardcopy and electronic. To ensure the
appropriate level of security, as of October 1, 2017, the electronic bid opening SOP includes
password protection requirements.
b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. We publicly open all competitive
sealed bids, electronic and hardcopy effective October 1, 2017.
c. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. Effective October 1, 2017, we
document all bid openings by creating a bid smmary which includes the contract number;
bid opening date; and name, city, state, and total bid price of each bidder.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
MVA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that differences between recorded
collections and amounts deposited by branch offices were adequately investigated and
resolved.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MVA
a. Ensure that differences identified by the daily reconciliations and chargeback transactions
are adequately investigated, including an examination of all relevant supporting
documentation;
b. maintain adequate documentation of the investigations performed; and
c. provide for supervisory review and approval of the investigations and any resulting
adjustments.
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. In September 2016, the Accounting
Division implemented new procedures (these procedures also apply to recommendations b
and c) ensuring that differences identified in daily reconciliations and chargeback
transactions are adequately investigated. Investigative support documentation is reviewed
by the supervisor and maintained with the corresponding adjusting entries.

--- Page 40 ---
b. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The Accounting Division will
continue to maintain adequate documentation of investigations performed.
c. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. The Accounting Division will
continue to ensure that the daily reconciliations, investigations, and corresponding
adjustments are reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel.
Finding 8
Collections received at MVA headquarters for vehicle registration renewals processed at
county offices were not adequately controlled.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MVA
a. secure checks prior to deposit and ensure they are recorded and restrictively endorsed
immediately upon receipt (repeat);
b. segregate the cash collection, account monitoring, and deposit verification functions
(repeat); and
c. monitor county transactions to ensure that all related collections and supporting
documentation are received at least weekly by MVA in accordance with State law (repeat).
We advised MVA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. As of July 2016, the
Accounting Division has implemented procedures to secure checks prior to deposit and
ensure that they are recorded and restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt. Further,
effective March 3, 2017, all checks are received and restrictively endorsed by the remittance
processor room supervisor.
b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation and has implemented procedures as
of July 2016 to segregate the cash collections and access, account monitoring, adjustments,
and deposit verification functions.
c. The Administration partially concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. Late deposits
have decreased significantly because of the MDOT MVA’s close monitoring of this issue.
Only 2 of the 12 locations have more than one occurrence of lateness, an improvement over
the prior legislative audit where all locations had occurrences of lateness. The Accounting
Division regularly monitors county transactions, and communicates with jurisdictions when
aware of late transactions to ensure that all collections and supporting documentation are
received at least weekly. Consistent with legislative audit recommendations, MDOT MVA
will discontinue this program for counties who continue to submit late deposits. This could
cause significant customer service issues for the nearly 20,000 customers who renewed their
vehicle registration through this option in 2016.

--- Page 41 ---
Information Systems and Controls
Finding 9
Controls over the MVA virtual server environment did not properly protect critical virtual
servers.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MVA restrict administrative access to its virtual server environment to
individuals whose job duties require such access.
Response:
The Administration concurs with the finding and as of March 31, 2017, the issue was resolved.
The unauthorized access for the individuals was removed. Each agency has its own directory
group and only sees their own environment. As of April 2017, quarterly reviews are conducted
to review accesses. Results of each review are documented and reviewed/signed off by
management.
Finding 10
Procedures for securing MVA’s numerous computers were not sufficient.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MVA
a. ensure that all managed computers are running current, operational versions of its host based
malware protection software by performing periodic comparisons of computer counts from
its malware protection consoles to computer counts from its directory services; and
b. document these comparisons and retain the documentation for future reference.
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. Beginning April 1, 2017, bi-weekly
reviews are being conducted to compare the number of devices per network directory records
versus the number of managed devices. Separate bi-weekly reviews are conducted to ensure
all devices have the latest malware/anti-virus software installed (not more than 90 days since
last available update).
b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation. Results of each review are
documented and reviewed/signed off by management and retained for audit purposes as of
April 2017.
Ignition Interlock Program
Finding 11
Employees responsible for reviewing and approving changes to critical data relating to the
Ignition Interlock Program (IIP) also had access capability allowing them to change these
data, compromising effective internal control over the Program.

--- Page 42 ---
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MVA
a. take appropriate action to ensure that all changes to critical IIP information are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval, and
b. remove the IIP transaction deletion capability from all users.
Response:
a. The Administration concurs with this recommendation. Programming revisions were
completed in May 2017 to ensure an independent supervisory review of case modifications.
The reports have been modified to reflect the user ID of both the individual performing the
audit approval and the individual who performed the transaction. Additionally, the system
has been programmed to block approval if the auditor approver and the individual who
performed the transaction have the same user ID.
b. The Administration concurs in part with this recommendation. The ‘deletion’ action is a tool
used for queue management to remove an item from a work queue but does not remove the
item from the record. Programming revisions in May 2017 limited this function to only the
Section Manager and Business System Administrator because this type of functionality is
still necessary in certain cases within the system. The program changes also allowed
consolidation on certain entries on one soundex record where there are many work items.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 12
MVA did not adequately monitor corporate purchasing card (CPC) purchases and did not
always comply with related State policies and procedures.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MVA ensure compliance with the Corporate Purchasing Card Policy and
Procedures Manual. Specifically, we recommend that MVA
a. ensure that CPC transactions are not split to circumvent established controls and in violation
of Manual requirements;
b. incorporate and document the use of Level-3 purchasing card data in supervisory reviews of
the activity logs to help ensure the propriety of CPC activity; and
c. establish procedures to follow-up, in a timely manner, on potentially fraudulent transactions
referred to the bank.
Response:
The Administration concurs with all recommendations.
a. In August 2016 and again in February 2017, a Memorandum was distributed to all
cardholders and reviewers as a reminder that split purchases are strictly prohibited. In
addition, an email notification of this violation to the CPC policy and regulation is being sent
to specific cardholders and their reviewers who are identified as either splitting a transaction
or there is an appearance of splitting a transaction.

--- Page 43 ---
A revised notice related to cardholder security and card usage will be distributed to all
cardholders and reviewers by December 2017. A Small Procurement Record (SPR) form is
being developed to outline systematic procedures on how to make a small purchase of $5,000
or less. Prior to April 2018, the SPR form will be distributed to all cardholders and
reviewers, and posted on the Office of Procurement and Contracts intranet site, to be used
when making a CPC purchase. A formal and updated CPC Training is under development
and will be completed by all cardholders and reviewers prior to the end of July 2018.
b. Effective September 2017, Level-3 purchasing card data and bank reports are analyzed
monthly to ensure appropriate and compliant CPC activity. All questionable purchases are
being addressed in writing by the CPC Program Administrator (CPCPA) via an email inquiry
to the cardholder and reviewer. A valid response is required and documented by the CPCPA.
c. Prior to February 2018, a standard operating procedure will be established for potentially
fraudulent transactions that have been referred to the bank, including timelines for follow-up.

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Julia M. King
Marissa L. Riddle, CPA
Senior Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Monica G. Pressley
Dianne P. Ramirez
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors