Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
Date: 02/27/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d15cc9d72456067452a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:29:34.529749
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing
November 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Licensing
Finding 1 – The Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing 5
(DOPL) did not have sufficient procedures to ensure that real estate
broker and salesperson licenses, and home improvement contractor
licenses were issued only to individuals who had met all required
qualifications.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2 – DOPL did not have adequate processes in place to ensure 6
that certain collections were deposited.
Guaranty Funds
* Finding 3 – DOPL had not established cash control accounts for the 8
Home Improvement and the Real Estate Guaranty Funds, and did
not reconcile cash transactions to the State’s records.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) of the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) licenses, regulates, and
monitors 25 business occupations and professions in concert with the applicable
boards and commissions whose members are appointed by the Governor.
According to DLLR records, as of June 30, 2016, DOPL regulated more than
237,000 licensees. Furthermore, according to the State’s records, DOPL’s
expenditures for fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately $10.7 million. These
expenditures were funded by general funds, as well as licensing and exam fees.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 27, 2014. We determined that DOPL
satisfactorily addressed two of these three findings. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Licensing
Finding 1
The Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) did not
have sufficient procedures to ensure that real estate broker and salesperson
licenses, and home improvement contractor licenses were issued only to
individuals who had met all required qualifications.
Analysis
DOPL did not have sufficient procedures to ensure that individuals who were
issued real estate broker and salesperson licenses, as well as home improvement
contractor licenses, had met all required qualifications for licensure as stipulated
in the law. The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR), on
behalf of DOPL, contracted with a vendor that was responsible for ensuring that
applicants for licenses from the Maryland Real Estate Commission (MREC) and
Maryland Home Improvement Commission (MHIC) met certain education and
experience requirements, and for administering the applicable examinations
required for licensure. However, DOPL did not take any steps to ensure that the
vendor was properly performing these responsibilities. For example, MREC and
MHIC did not conduct any independent reviews, as permitted by the contracts, to
ensure that the vendor adequately verified the qualifications of applicants.
Our test of the vendor’s records for 20 individuals that were issued either a real
estate salesperson or broker license, or a home improvement contractor license
during our audit period disclosed 2 home improvement contractor licensees for
whom documentation was not on file to substantiate that the vendor verified the
experience requirements for licensure.
State law requires applicants for a real estate broker and salesperson license to
successfully complete a course on real estate approved by MREC prior to taking
an examination to obtain a license. The law further requires that an applicant for
a broker’s license have at least three years of brokerage service experience
(affiliated with a licensed real estate broker). State law relating to home
improvement contractor licensure requires applicants to obtain at least two years
of trade experience that is satisfactory to MHIC prior to taking the examination to
obtain a contractor’s license.
As of June 30, 2016, there were 41,442 and 29,137 individuals in Maryland who
held active real estate (broker and salesperson) and home improvement contractor
licenses, respectively. During fiscal year 2016, MREC and MHIC issued 7,021
5

--- Page 8 ---
and 3,163 new real estate and home improvement contractor licenses,
respectively.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DOPL establish procedures to ensure that applicants
for real estate and home improvement contractor licenses met all required
qualifications in accordance with State law. Specifically, we recommend that
DOPL
a. inspect, at least on a test basis, the aforementioned vendor’s records to
ensure that applicants met the education and experience requirements for
licensure;
b. maintain documentation of the results of these inspections for future
reference; and
c. follow up on the aforementioned two licensees for which documentation
was not on file and take appropriate action.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
DOPL did not have adequate processes in place to ensure that certain
collections were deposited.
DOPL did not adequately verify that collections received centrally for three of the
four boards and commissions we reviewed were deposited. DOPL collected
$375,000 for these four units during fiscal year 2016, of which $339,000 was
collected for these three units. Checks received were initially recorded at a
central location and then transferred, along with the related documentation, to the
applicable units for processing. The checks were then returned to the central
location for deposit processing. Each unit was responsible for performing the
validated deposit verification for its collections. However, for three of the four
units reviewed, the initial record of collections was not subsequently used to
validate the bank deposits. Instead, these units compared a copy of the prepared
bank deposit slips and other related documentation to the validated bank deposit
documentation. Because this comparison did not include the initial record of
collections, there was a lack of assurance as to the proper disposition of all
receipts.
Our test of collections totaling $95,000, received during the period between July
2015 and January 2017, disclosed six checks totaling $1,800 that had not been
deposited in the State’s bank account for two of these three units’ and DOPL
could not readily determine the disposition of the checks. Subsequent to our
6

--- Page 9 ---
inquiries, DOPL determined that the checks had been either returned to the sender
or deposited to a separate lockbox account, which is used when a check cannot be
immediately processed.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires an
independent verification of collections to deposit, which should be performed
from the record of checks received.
According to its records, DOPL collected approximately $1.2 million during
fiscal year 2016 for its boards and commissions. Our audit did not include
collections of the boards and commissions received through the DLLR online
licensing system and collections received through the bank lockbox account, both
of which are processed by DLLR – Office of the Secretary and are included in the
scope of that audit.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DOPL ensure that the initial record of collections
received for the boards and commissions is used by independent employees
for verification to validated bank deposit documentation.
Guaranty Funds
Background
The Home Improvement and Real Estate Guaranty Funds were established by
State law to compensate individuals who are financially injured because of faulty
work performed by a licensed home improvement contractor and because of the
wrongful acts of a licensed real estate broker or salesperson, respectively. A
portion of each license application fee (for example, $100 for a contractor license)
is credited to the applicable Guaranty Fund. In accordance with State law, MHIC
and MREC, which administer these Funds, require that the licensees responsible
for these losses reimburse the Funds for amounts paid plus interest, as ordered by
the Commissions.
According to the State’s accounting records, during the fiscal year ending June
30, 2016, disbursements (claim payments and refunds) made from the Home
Improvement Guaranty Fund and the Real Estate Guaranty Fund totaled
approximately $782,000 and $193,000, respectively. Additionally, as of June 30,
2016, the cash balances in the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund and the Real
Estate Guaranty Fund totaled approximately $1.6 million, and $930,000,
respectively.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 3
DOPL had not established cash control accounts for the Home Improvement
and the Real Estate Guaranty Funds, and did not reconcile cash transactions
to the State’s records.
Analysis
DOPL had not established cash control accounts reflecting the related balances on
hand for the Home Improvement and the Real Estate Guaranty Funds.
Consequently, DOPL could not periodically reconcile the respective cash
balances of the Funds with the corresponding State accounting records to ensure
that all related cash transactions were properly accounted for and recorded.
In this regard, for fiscal year 2016, the total balance of receipts over
disbursements for the two Guaranty Funds was $620,000 according to the State’s
accounting records, while the balance was $441,000 according to DOPL’s
records. This indicates a $179,000 net difference in recorded cash activity
between the two records for the year. Although there may be legitimate reasons
for this difference, such as the timing of transactions, without adequate records
and controls in place to ensure that all transactions were properly recorded,
differences between DOPL’s and the State’s records may not be readily identified,
investigated, and resolved. Similar conditions have been commented upon in our
four preceding audit reports dating back to May 2005.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DOPL establish and maintain cash control accounts for
the Home Improvement and Real Estate Guaranty Funds, and periodically
reconcile the balances of those accounts to the respective balances recorded
in the State’s accounting records (repeat).
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Labor,
Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) – Division of Occupational and Professional
Licensing (DOPL) for the period beginning April 3, 2013 and ending January 29,
2017. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DOPL’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, licensing, and guaranty funds. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by the DLLR – Office
of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions
including cash receipts processed through DLLR’s online licensing system and
certain bank lockbox account transactions) are included within the scope of our
audits of the Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DOPL’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
9

--- Page 12 ---
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from DOPL’s automated licensing system for the
purpose of testing cash receipts, licensing, and guaranty funds. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DOPL’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DOPL’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DOPL that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The DLLR – Office of the Secretary’s response, on behalf of DOPL, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office of the Secretary regarding the results
of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 14 ---
Licensing
Finding 1
The Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) did not have sufficient
procedures to ensure that real estate broker and salesperson licenses, and home
improvement contractor licenses were issued only to individuals who had met all
required qualifications.
Recommendation
We recommend that DOPL establish procedures to ensure that applicants for real estate and
home improvement contractor licenses met all required qualifications in accordance with State
law. Specifically, we recommend that DOPL
a. inspect, at least on a test basis, the aforementioned vendor’s records to ensure that
applicants met the education and experience requirements for licensure;
b. maintain documentation of the results of these inspections for future reference; and
c. follow up on the aforementioned two licensees for which documentation was not on file
and take appropriate action.
DOPL Response:
The division concurs with this finding and recognizes that further action must be taken to ensure
that examinations for licenses are issued only to qualified applicants by the testing vendor.
a. The division will create an audit system to test proper vendor verification of experience
and other prerequisite requirements. On a quarterly basis, the division will send a
randomly selected list of applicant names to the testing vendor. The testing vendor will
be required to send electronic copies of approved applications to the board or
commission for review. Discussions with the vice president of the testing vendor have
already occurred. It is anticipated the new audit system will commence in early 2018.
b. When the vendor's records are reviewed through the new audit system, we will maintain
documentation of such results for future reference.
c. We have contacted the two licensees regarding the application requirements. We are
able to verify that both are currently qualified and maintaining active licenses, however
complete documentation from the original application process is no longer available. In
addition, both licensees originally passed the contractor examination and provided
sufficient financials, surpassed credit score review and proved sufficient insurance
coverage in their applications to support licensure with the commission. No additional
actions are required.

--- Page 15 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
DOPL did not have adequate processes in place to ensure that certain collections were
deposited.
Recommendation
We recommend that DOPL ensure that the initial record of collections received for the boards
and commissions is used by independent employees for verification to validated bank deposit
documentation.
DOPL Response:
The division concurs with this finding and recognizes the importance of accounting for all
collections and processing of payments. Changes to the cash handling process were made
during the audit to ensure that proper standards are in place vis-à-vis accountability and control
over certain collections.
To track these types of transactions, the payment center staff developed a log to capture all
mailed manual deposit (lockbox) transactions, comparing that against the lockbox statement to
verify receipt and deposit of each transaction. The log captures the signature of the person
performing the verification.
If checks are returned to the sender, the boards and commissions will keep letters on file that
the checks have been returned. If checks are mailed to the bank’s lockbox, the division will
keep records of what is sent and verify with the bank that the checks are received and properly
processed. Both returned checks and lockbox transactions will appear on logs that are verified
by independent employees.
Guaranty Funds
Finding 3
DOPL had not established cash control accounts for the Home Improvement and the
Real Estate Guaranty Funds, and did not reconcile cash transactions to the State’s
records.
DOPL Response:
The division concurs with this recommendation and acknowledges corrective controls, under the
advice and guidance of the auditors, were implemented during the audit.
The interpretation of the 2014 recommendation is that DOPL must verify the reconciliation
performed by the fiscal team based upon the AS/400 data. To satisfy this issue, a new monthly
report has been created from the AS/400. Data is entered in an Excel spreadsheet and
reconciled against the OOA monthly report (FMIS). The information in the spreadsheet was
backfilled to FY2016 during the audit and is currently being monitored on a monthly basis by a
DOPL fiscal staff member. The variance between these reports is minimal and can be
attributed to FMIS input timing during month-end or year-end closings. A fiscal services staff
member is performing the reconciliation of DOPL’s records with OOA reports and will report any
deviations to the deputy commissioner.

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Senior Auditor
Tony M. Kinsler
Staff Auditor