Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Office of the Secretary - Division of Administration
Date: 11/21/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744ab
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:12:31.277879
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
November 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 21, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Office of
the Secretary and Division of Administration (DLLR) for the period beginning
August 1, 2004 and ending August 31, 2007. The Office of the Secretary and the
Division of Administration provide executive oversight, general administration,
public information, fiscal services, information technology support, and
comprehensive planning for the other DLLR divisions.
Our audit disclosed that available security features were not fully used to enhance
controls over information systems and DLLR’s website, which is used to issue
and renew occupational and professional licenses and collect the related fees. For
example, DLLR’s network security over the electronic licensing application
process was not adequate, allowing unauthorized users the ability to view license
applicants’ confidential information.
We also noted that that DLLR did not timely recover approximately $540,000 in
federal expenditures, resulting in lost interest income, and DLLR recorded $10.4
million in unsupported accrued federal revenue transactions at the close of fiscal
years 2005 and 2006. Proper internal controls were not in place over purchasing
and disbursement transactions, as well as cash receipts and equipment.
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page 5 and DLLR’s
response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by DLLR personnel during the
course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – Security Over the DLLR’s Computer Network Was Not 9
Adequate
Finding 2 – Sensitive Information for Initial Unemployment Insurance 10
Claims Was Not Adequately Protected
Finding 3 – Security Measures Over the Electronic Licensing 11
Application Were Inadequate
Finding 4 – DLLR Did Not Adequately Log Security Events, 12
Monitor Security Reports, and Document Security Reviews and
Investigations
Finding 5 – Access Controls, Segregation of Critical Functions, and 13
Account and Password Controls Were Not Adequate
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 6 – Proper Internal Controls Were Not Established Over the 14
Processing of Purchasing and Disbursement Transactions
Federal Funds
Finding 7 – DLLR Did Not Have Adequate Procedures to Ensure All 15
Federal Expenditures Were Recovered Timely and Accrued Federal
Fund Revenues Totaling Approximately $10.4 Million Could Not Be
Substantiated
Cash Receipts
Finding 8 – DLLR Did Not Independently Resolve Certain Deposit 16
Adjustments and Record Collections in the State’s Accounting
System Timely
3

--- Page 6 ---
Equipment
* Finding 9 – DLLR Did Not Adequately Maintain Equipment Records 17
and Comply With Certain Provisions of the Department
of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary and Division of Administration (DLLR)
November 2008
• DLLR did not establish adequate security over its computer network.
For example, network level access was allowed from all internal
network addresses and an insecure connection protocol was used for
remote administrative access to two critical network devices.
DLLR should take the recommended actions to improve security over its
computer network.
• Sensitive information for initial unemployment insurance claims,
processed by DLLR’s Unemployment Insurance Division, was not
adequately protected. For example, claim records sent over the
Statewide Intranet and transferred over the Internet to and from
commercial payroll service providers were not adequately encrypted.
DLLR should ensure that unemployment insurance claims records are
adequately encrypted.
• Security measures over the electronic licensing application
administered by DLLR’s Divisions of Occupational and Professional
Licensing and Financial Regulation were inadequate. For example,
controls over credit card service provider accounts were inadequate
and certain licensee personal information on the web server was
stored in plain text.
DLLR should take the recommended actions to improve security over the
electronic licensing application.
• Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of
purchasing and disbursement transactions to ensure adequate
approval of all transactions. As a result, DLLR employees could
modify transactions after the related approvals were obtained.
DLLR should establish online approval requirements over all critical
documents to ensure critical transactions are not modified after approvals
are obtained.
5

--- Page 8 ---
• DLLR’s procedures to ensure that all federal funds were recovered
timely were inadequate. Approximately $540,000 in expenditures was
not recovered timely resulting in approximately $18,000 of lost
investment income. In addition, DLLR recorded accrued revenues
totaling $10.4 million to eliminate federal fund deficits without
ensuring that the related amounts were actually due from federal
grants.
DLLR should ensure that all federal funds are recovered in a timely
manner, and should ensure that all accrued revenue transactions are
adequately supported.
• DLLR did not establish adequate controls over cash receipts and
equipment. For example, DLLR had not properly investigated and
resolved missing sensitive equipment (such as computers) costing
$614,538.
DLLR should establish the recommended controls in these areas,
including investigating all missing equipment and taking appropriate
corrective action.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) consists of the
Office of the Secretary and the following seven operating divisions:
• Administration
• Unemployment Insurance
• Workforce Development
• Financial Regulation
• Labor and Industry
• Occupational and Professional Licensing
• Racing
The Office of the Secretary and the Division of Administration are included in the
scope of this audit and, according to the State’s records, had operating
expenditures totaling approximately $28.2 million during fiscal year 2007. These
two divisions provide executive oversight, general administration, public
information, fiscal services, information technology support, and comprehensive
planning for the other DLLR divisions. According to the State’s records, total
expenditures for these other divisions were $145.4 million during fiscal year
2007.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 15 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated June 9, 2005. We determined that DLLR had
satisfactorily resolved 14 of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
DLLR’s Office of Information Technology operates and maintains various servers
and applications to support all divisions, including certain file transfer
responsibilities related to the Division of Unemployment Insurance and an agency
website that provides online licensing services to the Divisions of Occupational
and Professional Licensing and Financial Regulation. Connectivity for DLLR’s
applications is provided by an internal computer network and a wide area network
for its headquarters locations and several branch offices. DLLR’s internal
network includes a firewall to provide protection from connections to un-trusted
networks, including the Internet. According to DLLR’s records, the Divisions of
Occupational and Professional Licensing and Financial Regulation oversee more
than 200,000 licensees. Fiscal year 2007 Office of Information Technology
expenditures totaled approximately $6 million, according to the State’s records.
Finding 1
Security over DLLR’s computer network was not adequate.
Analysis
Security over DLLR’s internal network, which hosts numerous critical servers,
was not adequate. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• Network level access was allowed from all of DLLR’s internal network
addresses (including employee workstations) to many critical DLLR servers
over all protocols and ports. As a result, these internal computer resources
were exposed to risks of improper access and modification.
• An insecure connection protocol was used for administrative access to two of
DLLR’s critical network router devices. As a result, usernames and
passwords used to obtain administrative access to these devices moved across
the network in clear text.
• A management service used to maintain and monitor DLLR’s core network
router used widely known default values to connect to this device.
Accordingly, there was increased risk that the device, which provided wide
area network connectivity, could be compromised and network services
disrupted.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that network level access to DLLR’s critical servers be
restricted to only those network addresses requiring such access over
required protocols and ports. We further recommend that remote
management services which access and monitor critical network devices use
only secure communications protocols. Finally, we recommend that the
default values used by a critical management service to connect to the core
router be changed.
Finding 2
Sensitive information relating to initial unemployment insurance claims was
not adequately protected.
Analysis
Sensitive personal and financial information relating to initial unemployment
insurance claims processed by DLLR’s Unemployment Insurance Division was
not adequately protected. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• On a daily basis, initial unemployment insurance claim records were retrieved
from a mainframe computer, over the Statewide Intranet network, and
transmitted to the DLLR file transfer server in clear text. Specifically, these
records were not encrypted even though the mainframe computer software
was capable of providing such encryption.
• DLLR did not encrypt unemployment insurance claim records while the
information was stored on its file transfer server.
• Records transferred over the Internet from DLLR’s file transfer server to three
commercial payroll service providers, and from these providers to the file
transfer server (after the service providers had updated their records), were
encrypted. However, the encryption level used was not adequate for critical
information transmitted across the Internet, increasing the risk that the
information could be converted into readable text. These records include
sensitive personal and financial information (such as the claimants’ names,
social security numbers, and income amounts).
• DLLR did not properly restrict access to the unemployment insurance claim
records stored on the DLLR file transfer server. Accordingly, each one of the
three payroll service providers had unnecessary read access to the
unemployment insurance claim records pertaining to the other two service
providers.
10

--- Page 13 ---
This sensitive personal and financial information is commonly sought by
criminals for use in identity theft. Accordingly, appropriate information system
security controls, such as those required by the Department of Information
Technology’s Acceptable Encryption Policy, need to exist to ensure that this
information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that unemployment insurance claim records in transit or on
the DLLR network be encrypted in compliance with the Department of
Information Technology’s Acceptable Encryption Policy. We also recommend
that DLLR allow each payroll service provider access to only its
unemployment insurance claimant information.
Finding 3
Security measures over the electronic licensing application were inadequate.
Analysis
Web server security measures over the electronic licensing application
administered by the Divisions of Occupational and Professional Licensing and
Financial Regulation were inadequate. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
• Controls over the credit card service provider accounts used to process credit
card payments for license fees were inadequate. We noted that a single credit
card service provider account was used by the Division of Occupational and
Professional Licensing to manage credit card verification and payment
settings, and to process credit card payments. A similar account was used by
the Division of Financial Regulation. Separate accounts should be established
for credit card payment transaction processing and for service management to
limit security risks. In addition, the use of these accounts was not limited to
specific Internet addresses, which would enhance security over who could
attempt to use these accounts. These service provider account names and
passwords were also stored in plain text on the web server computer, exposing
the names and passwords to anyone capable of accessing these files, and one
of these accounts could still be used by a terminated employee. Finally, this
account was also used by an employee who reconciled license information
with bank and credit card service provider reports and, accordingly, improper
refunds could be processed without detection.
• New occupational and professional licensee personal information, including
names, addresses, dates of birth, and social security numbers, was
unnecessarily stored in plain text on the DLLR web server that supported the
11

--- Page 14 ---
licensing function. According to DLLR records, during fiscal year 2007,
personal information for 26,401 individuals was recorded in this server’s files.
This information is commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft.
• The licensing web server account was granted excessive modification access
to critical files. Proper internal control requires that web server accounts be
granted limited access to sensitive system resources to reduce security risks
and attacks.
• There was no documentation to support DLLR’s claim that the licensing web
server logs were periodically reviewed by agency personnel to identify and
investigate noteworthy security-related events.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLLR improve security over its electronic licensing
application. Specifically, we made detailed recommendations, which if
implemented, should provide for adequate security over the electronic
licensing application.
Finding 4
DLLR did not adequately log security events, monitor security reports, and
document security reviews and investigations.
Analysis
DLLR did not adequately log security events, monitor security reports and
document security reviews and investigations. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
• The occupational and professional licensing application server was not
properly configured to log certain critical security events. For example,
authorization failures and changes to user accounts were not logged. In
addition, documentation frequently did not exist to support DLLR’s review
and investigation of security events that were recorded on security reports.
Accordingly, significant system activities, such as unauthorized access
attempts, changes to user accounts, and direct modifications of critical data
files may not be detected.
• For a critical database containing personal information for job seekers, certain
key system security and audit-related events were not logged, although the
capability to perform such logging existed. Furthermore, documentation did
not exist to support DLLR’s review and investigation of the database server’s
12

--- Page 15 ---
failed logon attempts. Therefore, significant database security violations
could go undetected, permitting unauthorized or inappropriate activities to
adversely affect the integrity of the production database.
Best practices for security control and monitoring provide that agencies should
ensure that information is accessed by the appropriate persons for authorized use
only. This should be accomplished by establishing an audit trail process to ensure
accountability of system and security-related events and a review process of
security audit logs, incident reports, and online reports, at least one time per
business day, using automated tools to facilitate the review where possible.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLLR log critical security server and database events,
review all relevant security logs, investigate events where necessary,
document these reviews and investigations, and retain this documentation for
audit verification purposes.
Finding 5
Access controls, segregation of critical functions, and account and password
controls were not adequate.
Analysis
Access controls, segregation of critical functions, and account and password
controls were not adequate. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• A default administrative database account had full access to a critical
database. Since this account, by default, includes local server administrators,
all local administrators on the server hosting this database had full
administrative access to this database. In addition, anyone able to achieve
local administrator privileges would automatically have full administrative
access to this database and could perform modifications to critical data.
• Security settings for the occupational and professional licensing application
server gave 52 accounts (including programmer accounts) unrestricted access
to a critical program library. As a result, these accounts could make
undetected changes to programs before the programs were placed into
production. Accordingly, erroneous or unauthorized changes to critical
production programs could occur without management’s knowledge and
approval.
13

--- Page 16 ---
• For the occupational and professional licensing application server, three
individuals had conflicting duties regarding security functions, programming,
and operations. As a result, these three individuals had complete system
access and control over this server. Furthermore, we noted that two of these
individuals shared a common userid, which removes individual accountability
for any actions performed.
• Network account and password controls were not adequate. For example, the
network security settings did not enforce account lockout, password length,
password complexity, password history, and password aging. Accordingly,
control settings for accounts and passwords did not provide adequate
authentication and access controls.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DLLR implement adequate access controls, segregation
of critical functions and account and password controls. Specifically, we
made detailed recommendations, which if implemented, should provide for
adequate controls in these areas.
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 6
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of
purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Analysis
Proper internal controls were not established over the automated processing of
purchasing and disbursement transactions to ensure an adequate approval of all
transactions. For example, DLLR established online approval rules over certain
critical procurement and disbursement transactions, including purchase orders.
However, these rules permitted the return of the documents to the employees
initiating the transactions after the independent approvals were obtained. As a
result, five employees who had the ability to initiate these transactions could
modify the transactions after the related approvals were obtained without
detection. During fiscal year 2007, DLLR used the State’s accounting system to
process disbursements totaling approximately $64 million.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DLLR establish online approval requirements over all
critical documents that ensure all critical transactions are subject to
adequate supervisory review and approval, including ensuring that these
transactions are not modified after approvals are obtained.
Federal Funds
Finding 7
DLLR did not have adequate procedures to ensure all federal expenditures
were recovered timely, resulting in lost investment income of $18,000. In
addition, $10.4 million in accrued federal fund revenues were not supported.
Analysis
DLLR did not have adequate procedures to ensure all federal fund expenditures
were recovered timely, and certain federal fund revenues were accrued without
being supported. According to the State’s records, DLLR’s fiscal year 2007
federal fund expenditures totaled approximately $116 million. Specifically, we
noted the following conditions:
• DLLR did not have adequate procedures to ensure all federal expenditures
were recovered in a timely manner. DLLR maintained an automated system
to account for federal fund activity, which was used for reporting activity to
the federal granting agencies and for processing related federal fund
reimbursement requests. However, DLLR did not ensure that all federal fund
expenditures, which serve as the basis for the reimbursement requests, were
recorded in its automated system. As a result, as of March 2008, DLLR failed
to identify approximately $540,000 in fiscal year 2007 federal fund
expenditures that should have been submitted for reimbursement. The failure
to request reimbursement of these funds on a timely basis resulted in a loss of
investment income to the State of approximately $18,000. DLLR
management advised us that these funds were recovered shortly after we
brought this omission to its attention. State budget law provides that, to the
extent consistent with federal requirements, federal funds should be used
before State funds are charged.
• DLLR could not support accrued revenue transactions totaling $10.4 million.
Specifically, our review of five year-end accrued revenue transactions
processed during the close of fiscal years 2005 and 2006 disclosed that DLLR
could not support the transactions. DLLR management advised us that it
accrued these revenues to eliminate federal fund deficits without ensuring that
15

--- Page 18 ---
the related amounts were actually due from federal grants. While DLLR
ultimately recovered these funds from the respective grants, this practice
violated the State’s fiscal year-end closing instructions issued by the
Comptroller of the Treasury’s General Accounting Division. These
instructions require that detailed documentation of accrued revenues be
maintained by agencies to support their accounting transactions.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DLLR establish procedures to ensure that all federal
expenditures are properly identified and recovered in a timely manner.
We also recommend that, in the future, DLLR ensure that all accrued
revenue transactions are adequately supported.
Cash Receipts
Finding 8
DLLR did not independently investigate and resolve certain deposit
adjustments and did not record certain collections in the State’s accounting
system in a timely manner.
Analysis
DLLR’s Office of Budget and Fiscal Services (OBFS) did not independently
investigate and resolve certain deposit adjustments and did not always record
collections in the State’s accounting system in a timely manner. Specifically, the
employee who investigated and resolved deposit adjustments for collections
received by mail (for example, for checks returned for insufficient funds) was
involved in processing the related collections. Because of this lack of separation
of duties, there was a lack of assurance that all recorded adjustments were proper,
and misappropriation and other discrepancies could occur without detection. In
addition, collections received by mail were not always recorded in the State’s
accounting system in a timely manner. Specifically, 13 of the 15 items tested,
totaling approximately $10.2 million, including one $10.1 million check, were
recorded in the State’s accounting system from 4 to 43 days after the dates of
deposit. The Comptroller of the Treasury’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires that cash receipts be recorded within two business days of the deposit to
facilitate the reconciliation of the State’s bank accounts.
DLLR’s collections totaled approximately $33.2 million during fiscal year 2007,
consisting of $8 million collected via the DLLR lockbox account, $7.6 million
receipts collected by other DLLR divisions and forwarded for deposit to OBFS,
16

--- Page 19 ---
$7.1 million in credit card receipts from electronic licensing activity, and $10.5
million in mail receipts. According to DLLR’s records, deposit adjustments
processed during fiscal year 2007 totaled approximately $175,000.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DLLR independently investigate and resolve all deposit
adjustments and ensure all collections are recorded on the State’s accounting
system in a timely manner. We advised DLLR on accomplishing the
necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Equipment
Finding 9
DLLR did not adequately maintain equipment records and did not comply
with various provisions of the Department of General Services’ Inventory
Control Manual.
Analysis
DLLR did not adequately maintain equipment records and did not comply with
record keeping and physical inventory provisions of the Department of General
Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, DLLR did not maintain
an independent control account and, our test of ten acquisitions, totaling
approximately $227,000, disclosed four items, totaling approximately $60,000,
which were not properly recorded in the detail records. In addition, DLLR did not
properly investigate and resolve missing items identified during physical
inventories. Specifically, we reviewed the most recent physical inventories for
four DLLR units that were completed during the period from July 2006 to April
2007; these four units had sensitive equipment (such as computers) totaling $4.3
million as of June 30, 2007. Our review disclosed that 413 sensitive items
totaling $614,538 were not located during the physical inventories and, as of
September 2007, these items had not been investigated and resolved. We were
advised that, as of July 2008, many items had been located and that the
investigation was continuing.
Similar conditions have been commented upon in our four preceding audit reports
dating back to 1996. The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that a control
account and detailed records be maintained to properly reflect all transactions for
all categories of property and that the detailed records be reconciled to the related
control account balance. The Manual further requires that physical inventories be
17

--- Page 20 ---
conducted and variances be investigated and resolved and such efforts be properly
documented and retained for audit verification. The reported book value of
DLLR’s equipment at June 30, 2007 totaled approximately $19.3 million.
Recommendation 9
We again recommend that DLLR comply with the Inventory Control Manual
requirements.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Office of
the Secretary and Division of Administration (DLLR) for the period beginning
August 1, 2004 and ending August 31, 2007. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DLLR’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of DLLR’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit included a review of certain support services (for example, payroll, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided by DLLR to its divisions.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of DLLR’s compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including DLLR.
Our audit scope was limited with respect to the DLLR’s cash transactions because
the Office of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the State’s main bank
accounts during a portion of the audit period. Due to this condition, we were
unable to determine, with reasonable assurance, that all DLLR cash transactions
prior to July 1, 2005 were accounted for and properly recorded on the related
State accounting records as well as the banks’ records.
19

--- Page 22 ---
DLLR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect DLLR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our
report also includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to DLLR that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DLLR’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DLLR regarding the
results of our review of its response.
20

--- Page 24 ---
Response of DLLR-Office of the Secretary and Division of Administration to
Audit Findings and Recommendations for the Legislative Audit of
October 2008
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Security over DLLR’s computer network was not adequate.
Agency Response:
DLLR Agrees with this finding.
• Under network security best practices recommends that these servers
would be more fully segregated from the rest of the DLLR internal
network. We are currently assessing the best way to provide the highest
security for these servers while also not impacting their operation or the
applications that require access to them.
• Best practice would include the use of a secure protocol to manage the
DLLR Network core devices. However, the current devices and operating
systems do not support the use of a secure protocol for management
connections. DLLR is evaluating if software upgrades are available for
these that will allow for secure management, or if the devices will have to
be physically upgraded to gain this functionality.
• Due to a configuration error the internal core router did have default
connection values. While this did not expose the internal network to any
external threats, it is less than desirable from a security perspective. These
default values have since been removed from the device removing any
possible threat.
1

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 2
Sensitive information relating to initial unemployment insurance claims was
not adequately protected.
Agency Response:
DLLR agrees with this finding.
• DLLR is discussing with ADC - the use of a secure transfer process.
• Response is included in next paragraph.
• The data can be handled in a more secure fashion, however, this issue will
have to be addressed and negotiated between Unemployment Insurance
and the companies that they are doing the transfers with. Under their
original transfer agreement there was no plan made for the encryption of
the data or method to be used, just an agreement that transfer encryption
would be used for the passing of data across public networks. When a new
agreement for data encryption is completed with the payroll companies,
OIT has no issue with implementing it. The existing encryption level for
the transfer was set because one of the payroll companies was unable to
support higher encryption levels at the beginning of the project. All
providers are now able to support strong encryption and that has now been
set as the minimum standard.
• The ability to view file names of other provider’s files was a rights error
by OIT. The issue was corrected as soon as it was discovered during the
audit. New server hardware and more restrictive server software account
configurations t have been installed. OIT also reviewed the file access
records since 2004, when the transfer was initiated, and found that there
had been no unauthorized access by any of the three providers to another
provider’s files.
2

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 3
Security measures over the electronic licensing application were inadequate.
Agency Response:
DLLR agrees with this finding.
• DLLR will obtain and install a separate credit card service provider
account for application processing and service management. The service
management accounts will be restricted to access by DLLR IP addresses
only. DLLR will store the credit card service provider accounts and
passwords for application processing in a secure location. Access to credit
card service provider accounts is being restricted immediately upon an
employee’s termination. Credit card service provider service management
accounts are now being assigned only to individuals not responsible for
reconciling the business licensing sales to the credit card service provider
/Bank accounts.
• DLLR will remove the plain text log files from the associated web server
and move the text log files to a different server.
• Modification access of the public use account has now been restricted to
the application document root.
• As web server logs are periodically reviewed by agency personnel to
identify and investigate security-related events documentation will be
maintained.
3

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 4
DLLR did not adequately log security events, monitor security reports, and
document security reviews and investigations.
Agency Response:
DLLR agrees with this finding.
• DLLR is now logging AF (Authority Failures), CP (User Profile
Changes), and the direct creation and deletion of records to critical data
files. DLLR is now documenting all investigations of questionable items
on its security reports.
• In order to automate and log the events, log monitoring software was
purchased and installed and a procedure has been put in place to review
and document audit violations.
4

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 5
Access controls, segregation of critical functions, and account and password
controls were not adequate.
Agency Response:
DLLR agrees with this finding.
• The Administrators Group was taken out from the authorized users.
• The critical program library has been changed to “Exclude” and library
access has been restricted to authorized individuals.
• DLLR will segregate the functions of system administration and security
administration to provide segregation of duties. The shared profile is no
longer being shared. All users are now uniquely identified.
• Certain users had account lockout, password length, password complexity,
password history, and password aging. We are in the process of migrating
all users to a platform that will enable us to provide adequate password
and account controls. After the migration is complete all restrictions will
be in place for all users.
5

--- Page 29 ---
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 6
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of
purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Agency Response:
The agency partly agrees with the finding. The agency FMIS administrator
established approval paths to require the approval from a higher level which
prevents anyone creating or releasing any two documents within a two or three
way match requirement from acting independently to create, approve and release
the documents. However there is a regulation of law that the last approver must be
duly authorized to release the documents. The system was in compliance with
regulation during the audit period including the most recent ADPICS and
R*STARS Security Officer Audit Reports that indicate no security violations.
In May 2008, the agency FMIS administrator completed removal of interface
security class 02 from users who have the ability to update procurement
documents and completed removal of interface security class 05 from users with
the ability to update vouchers. The agency believes separating the ability to post
critical documents satisfies the auditor’s concern and also renders the use of
approval paths as redundant controls. DLLR will provide this documentation to
the auditors.
6

--- Page 30 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 7
DLLR did not have adequate procedures to ensure all federal expenditures
were recovered timely, resulting in lost investment income of $18,000. In
addition, $10.4 million in accrued federal fund revenues were not supported.
Agency Response:
The agency concurs with the need to strengthen procedures relating to accounting
for federal funds on our Schedule G reconciliation. In this instance the initial
expenditure report did not include the $540,000 for the period in question. This
omission was discovered and a revised expenditure report was submitted to the
Department of Labor within two weeks of the original submission date. The effect
on Schedule G was corrected on the submission of the Fiscal Year 2008 Schedule
G per instruction from the General Accounting Division (GAD). DLLR has
initiated a follow up procedure to all revised expenditure reporting. The Chief of
Accounting or the Director of Budget and Fiscal Services will review and initial
all corrected reports to ensure that the drawdown and reporting of federal funds
have been handled correctly.
DLLR also concurs with this finding regarding accrued revenue transactions and
will ensure all accrued revenues will be supported with specific identification
from a subsequent collection. During the closeout federal fund revenues were
accrued in the aggregate to reflect federal fund balances due from the Schedule of
federal grants receivable (schedule G). DLLR will change this method to
specifically identify each grant receivable due and reconcile to a subsequent
collection.
7

--- Page 31 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 8
DLLR did not independently investigate and resolve certain deposit
adjustments and did not record certain collections in the State’s accounting
system in a timely manner.
Agency Response:
We concur with the findings and recommendations noted above. DLLR has
implemented corrective actions as noted below:
a) DLLR has restructured the process so that the employee who investigates
chargebacks related to collections is no longer involved in the collection
of revenue (deposit) process.
b) We agree with the recommendation that all deposits are recorded in
R*STARS within (2) business days and will to adhere to the
Comptroller’s Accounting Procedures Manual requirement. A memo
issued to the accounting staff dated June 3, 2008, changes the recording
procedures to allow posting to R*STARS within the time frame
designated.
8

--- Page 32 ---
Equipment
Finding 9
DLLR did not adequately maintain equipment records and did not comply with
various provisions of the Department of General Services’ Inventory Control
Manual.
Agency Response:
We concur with the auditors’ recommendation regarding compliance with the Inventory
Control Manual and provide the following information in support of our continued
reconciliation activity:
a) In June 2005, the Office of General Services (OGS) implemented a new fixed
asset tracking system (A-Track) and has completed 3 physical inventories since.
Since that time, we have located items that were not found in the initial 2005
inventory. To date, this includes items totaling $390,678 located since June 2007.
We expect recoveries to continue to increase in the next few months. OGS will
continue to work with our control agencies to clear up outstanding issues and
follow procedures discussed in the inventory control manual.
b) The Office of Budget & Fiscal Services maintains a control account based on the
fixed assets quarterly report of equipment purchases prepared from FMIS and
compares it to the monthly additions and subtractions report prepared by OGS.
OBFS then issues a quarterly variance report to OGS for reconciliation purposes.
The beginning total inventory is based on a previously reconciled balance.
9

--- Page 33 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
A. Jerome Sokol, CPA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Senior Auditors
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Albert E. Schmidt, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Amin N. Berrah
LaTeasa R. Lomax
Ramin M. Niknava
Staff Auditors