Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
Date: 02/05/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d72456067440a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:44:48.388969
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
February 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center, located in Cumberland, Maryland,
provides mental health services to adults in the State of Maryland. The Center is
accredited by The Joint Commission (formerly the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations). During fiscal year 2014, the Center
had a licensed capacity of 110 inpatients, a budgeted average daily population of
88 inpatients, and an actual average daily population of 86 inpatients. According
to the State’s records, the Center’s operating expenditures totaled approximately
$18.7 million during fiscal year 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 23, 2012. We determined that the Center
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Center’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Center. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Thomas B. Finan Hospital
Center of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for the period beginning
July 1, 2011 and ending September 21, 2014. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
3

--- Page 6 ---
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included disbursements for the Center’s operating
expenditures, as well as payroll and pharmaceutical inventories. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Center’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Senior Auditor
Phillip C. Funkhouser
Staff Auditor