Title: University System of Maryland - University of Baltimore
Date: 10/01/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d724560674722
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:55:31.195160
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
December 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 3, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Baltimore (UBalt)1 for the period beginning
September 13, 2016 and ending November 15, 2020. UBalt is an urban public
institution offering a career-oriented education at the bachelor’s, master’s, and
professional levels, with degree programs in law, business, and liberal arts with an
emphasis on applied and professional degrees.
Our audit disclosed that UBalt did not require or obtain a sufficient independent
review of the automated system used by its vendor responsible for collecting
student online payments to ensure that sensitive student information residing on
the system was properly safeguarded. Furthermore, UBalt did not adequately
verify student financial aid application data and adjustments made to student cost
of attendance budgets, both of which may impact a student’s financial aid award.
In addition, UBalt did not adequately monitor the placement and removal of
certain student account designations used to allow, deny, or defer critical actions,
such as registering for classes, receiving transcripts, and submitting unpaid
accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit for further collection action.
Our audit also disclosed certain information system security and control
deficiencies, including the lack of a process to ensure that critical user access
capabilities on UBalt’s financial management systems were adequately restricted,
and a lack of an adequate authentication method for certain remote access.
Furthermore, we noted a potential violation of State ethics laws and certain
monitoring deficiencies relating to travel services totaling $59,767 obtained from
1 As of March 2021, the University officially began use of the term UBalt in replacement of the
acronym UB.

--- Page 4 ---
a company operated by a UBalt employee. Finally, adjustments to employee
leave balances were not reviewed for propriety by supervisory personnel.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our
determination that UBalt satisfactorily addressed all of the prior audit findings.
The USM Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of UBalt, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address the audit issues. While UBalt generally agrees with the
recommendations in this report, we identified one statement in the response
requiring an “auditor’s comment” to further explain our position.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
UBalt. We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and UBalt’s willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Student Personal Information
Finding 1 – The University of Baltimore (UBalt) did not require or obtain 6
a sufficient independent review of the automated system used by its
vendor responsible for collecting student online payments, to ensure
that sensitive information residing on the system was properly
safeguarded.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2 – UBalt did not adequately verify student financial aid 7
application data and adjustments made to student cost of attendance
budgets.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 3 – UBalt did not adequately monitor changes to unpaid student 8
accounts to allow, deny, or defer critical activity, such as registering
for classes, receiving transcripts, or submitting unpaid accounts to the
State’s Central Collection Unit.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – UBalt did not have procedures for ensuring that access to 10
perform certain critical functions on its financial management systems
was adequately restricted and controlled.
Finding 5 – Remote access to the internal UBalt network by employees 11
and authorized contractors used a single authentication measure rather
than the more secure multi-factor authentication.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Possible Ethics Violation
Finding 6 – UBalt obtained travel-related services totaling $59,767 from 12
a company operated by a UBalt employee when these services were
available from existing vendors. In addition, UBalt did not have a
detailed written contract for certain of the services, and did not obtain
support for all amounts paid to the company, certain of which
appeared questionable.
Payroll
Finding 7 – Supervisory reviews of adjustment to leave balances were 15
not performed.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Baltimore (UBalt) is a public institution of the University
System of Maryland and operates under the jurisdiction of the System’s Board of
Regents. UBalt is an urban university offering a career-oriented education at the
bachelor’s, master’s, and professional levels, with degree programs in law,
business, and liberal arts with an emphasis on applied and professional degrees.
According to UBalt’s records, student enrollment for the fall 2020 semester
totaled 4,169, including 1,899 undergraduate students and 2,270 graduate
students.
UBalt’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and student
fees; a State general fund appropriation; and restricted revenues, such as federal
grants and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, UBalt’s fiscal
year 2020 revenues totaled approximately $130.2 million, including a State
general fund appropriation of $40.7 million, and its expenditures totaled $125.4
million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated January 12, 2018. We determined
that UBalt satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Personal Information
Finding 1
The University of Baltimore (UBalt) did not require or obtain a sufficient
independent review of the automated system used by its vendor responsible
for collecting student online payments, to ensure that sensitive student
information residing on the system was properly safeguarded.
Analysis
UBalt did not require or obtain a sufficient independent review of the automated
system used by its vendor responsible for collecting student online payments, to
ensure that sensitive student information residing on the system was properly
safeguarded. These reviews are required by University System of Maryland
(USM) policies. According to UBalt records, student online payments processed
by the vendor during fiscal year 2020 totaled approximately $11.8 million. Our
review disclosed that UBalt’s contract did not require the vendor to obtain a
control assessment report as required by USM IT Security Standards.
State law requires that a unit of State government, including a public institution of
higher education, or a third-party service provider under contract with the unit
shall implement reasonable security procedures and practices to protect personal
information. In addition, USM IT Security Standards require USM institutions to
obtain and review a control assessment report based on such a review performed
by a recognized independent audit organization. The Standards provide several
examples of acceptable reports, including the American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants (AICPA) System and Organization Controls (SOC) 2 Type 2
report.
The AICPA has issued guidance for various reviews of service organizations.
Based on this guidance, service organizations (like the aforementioned vendor)
may contract for an independent review of controls and the resultant independent
auditor’s report is referred to as a SOC report. There are several types of SOC
reports, with varying scopes and levels of review and auditor testing. The
aforementioned SOC 2 Type 2 report includes the results of the auditor’s review
of controls placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness for the period
under review and could include an evaluation of system security, availability,
processing integrity, confidentiality, and/or privacy.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UBalt comply with State law and USM IT Security
Standards by requiring and obtaining from the aforementioned vendor a
control assessment report, such as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, to ensure sensitive
student information provided to the vendor is properly safeguarded.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2
UBalt did not adequately verify student financial aid application data and
adjustments made to student cost of attendance (COA) budgets.
Analysis
UBalt did not adequately verify student financial aid application data and
adjustments made to student COA budgets. The accuracy and validity of these
two functions are critical to ensuring the propriety of financial aid awards made to
students. According to UBalt’s records, during fiscal year 2020, financial aid
awarded to students totaled approximately $65.6 million.
 UBalt could not document that it ensured its third-party vendor adequately
verified student financial aid application data, and that any needed corrections
to the data were made (by either UBalt or the vendor) and submitted to the
federal granting agency. The third-party vendor was responsible for
requesting documentation from students to support their application data.
Although UBalt advised us that supervisory personnel performed a limited
review of the third-party vendor’s verifications, there was no documentation
that these reviews were performed or the related extent.
 UBalt did not independently review student COA budget adjustments for
propriety. A student’s COA budget includes tuition and fees, room and board,
transportation, and other personal expenses, and is used to help determine the
maximum amount of financial aid available to the student. These budgets
may be adjusted for various reasons, such as variations in costs due to actual
tuition charges, loan origination fees, or premium meal plans. Although
UBalt had certain controls in place to verify the propriety of financial aid
awards, the controls would not identify improper aid resulting from an
unauthorized adjustment to a student’s COA budget. For academic year 2020,
UBalt performed 621 adjustments related to COA budgets totaling $1.5
million.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UBalt
a. document its review of the third-party vendor’s verification of student
financial aid application data, and ensure that the vendor or UBalt made
any needed corrections and properly reported any corrections to the
applicable federal granting agency; and
b. ensure that manual adjustments to COA budgets are subject to a
documented independent supervisory review, at least on a test basis.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 3
UBalt did not adequately monitor changes to unpaid student accounts to
allow, deny, or defer critical activity, such as registering for classes, receiving
transcripts, or submitting unpaid accounts to the State’s Central Collection
unit (CCU).
Analysis
UBalt did not adequately monitor the placement and removal of certain
designations on unpaid student accounts, which were used to allow, deny, or defer
critical actions, such as registering for classes, receiving transcripts, and
submitting unpaid accounts to CCU for further collection action.
 UBalt had no procedure to periodically review “pending payment”
designations added to student accounts. This designation was placed on a
student’s unpaid account when receipt of financial aid from a third party was
expected, but not yet received, which enabled the student to register for
classes. UBalt did not periodically determine if the ongoing designation was
still justified, and if the expected payment had been received. As of
November 2020, there were 220 accounts with unpaid balances totaling
$745,227 that had pending payment designations, of which, accounts totaling
approximately $331,730 had been outstanding for over a year.
 Our test of eight accounts totaling $40,620 with pending payment
designations that were outstanding for extended periods of time disclosed
that for five accounts, the respective student was allowed to register for two
to eight additional semesters even though a total of $26,570 from the original
amounts due remained unpaid. In addition, for two of these accounts, the
students were allowed to graduate with unpaid account balances, because the
pending payment designation had not been removed.
8

--- Page 11 ---
 UBalt did not forward accounts to CCU in accordance with the modified
submission timeline approved by CCU. Specifically, the aforementioned
five accounts had not been submitted to CCU as of February 9, 2021, even
though they were between 16 and 37 months beyond the required respective
transfer date. CCU regulations, as amended for UBalt, generally require that
each semester’s delinquent accounts be transferred to CCU during or at the
end of the subsequent semester (which is May 30 for the preceding fall
semester, and September 30 for the preceding spring semester).
 As of November 2, 2020, seven employees could release holds placed on
unpaid student accounts without independent supervisory review and
approval. An account hold generally prohibits subsequent transactions, such
as registering for classes and ordering transcripts. According to UBalt
records, there were approximately 33,600 account holds that were released
during our audit period, including 9,994 that were processed by six of the
aforementioned seven employees.
The USM Board of Regents’ Policy on Payment of Tuition and Fees states that
tuition and fees are due and payable in full by the stipulated due date unless the
student is covered by a specific exemption (such as pending financial aid). The
Policy further requires that appropriate administrative action (such as barring
class attendance and withholding of transcripts and grades) be initiated if timely
payment is not received.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UBalt
a. establish procedures to regularly review the propriety of pending
payment designations placed on student accounts, remove designations
that can no longer be justified, and take appropriate and timely collection
action for unpaid balances; and
b. ensure that all holds removed from student accounts are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
UBalt did not have procedures for ensuring that access to perform certain
critical functions on its financial management systems was adequately
restricted and controlled.
Analysis
UBalt did not have procedures in place for ensuring that access to perform certain
critical functions (such as modifying employee pay or student financial aid data)
was adequately restricted and controlled. Specifically, UBalt did not review
existing reports of users with access to critical functions to determine if the access
was proper and adequately controlled.
We reviewed system capabilities assigned to 160 users as of November 2, 2020
for 37 critical functions related to student financial aid, student accounts, payroll
and human resources, and procurements and disbursements and noted the
following conditions:
 Nineteen users had access to critical screens for financial aid, student
accounts, or payroll and human resources, even though they did not require
the access to perform their job duties. For example, we noted six users who
had access to make adjustments to employee pay even though they did not
require it for their job responsibilities.
 We noted 16 users who had access to process critical student financial aid or
procurement and disbursement transactions without independent review and
approval. For example, 12 users could modify student financial data used to
determine financial aid eligibility without independent review and approval.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UBalt establish formal procedures for ensuring that
access to perform critical functions within its financial management systems
is adequately restricted and controlled. Specifically, we recommend that
UBalt
a. periodically provide appropriate department personnel with available
security reports to perform reviews of user access to process critical
functions on its financial management systems;
b. ensure through those reviews that user access is both required for the
user’s job duties and adequately controlled by ensuring, for example, that
transactions processed are subject to independent review and approval;
and
10

--- Page 13 ---
c. eliminate the unnecessary user access noted in our finding.
Finding 5
Remote access to the internal UBalt network by employees and authorized
contractors used a single authentication measure rather than the more secure
multi-factor authentication.
Analysis
Employees’ and authorized contractors’ remote access to UBalt’s internal
network, using a Virtual Private Network (VPN) connection, required a stronger
security authentication measure than was in place during the audit. Our review
noted that 325 user accounts were granted such VPN-based remote network
access.
These remote VPN connections into UBalt’s internal network did not require
multi-factor authentication (MFA) for establishing access. Instead, access was
provided based upon only single factor authentication. MFA uses two or more
different credential factors to authenticate user network connections. Access to
critical networks and resources requires layers of security protections which
include use of MFA, to help prevent security risks tied to compromised user
credentials.
Best practices, as specified in the State of Maryland Information Technology
Security Manual, require Maryland agencies to ensure that MFA mechanisms are
employed for all remote access to networks.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UBalt implement multi-factor authentication for remote
connections into the UBalt network by employees and authorized
contractors.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Possible Ethics Violation
Finding 6
UBalt obtained travel-related services totaling $59,767 from a company
operated by a UBalt employee when these services were available from
existing vendors. In addition, UBalt did not have a detailed written contract
for certain of the services, and did not obtain support for all amounts paid to
the company, certain of which appeared questionable.
Analysis
State ethics laws were potentially violated when travel-related services totaling
$59,767 were obtained from a company operated by a UBalt employee when
these services were available from existing vendors. In addition, UBalt did not
obtain support for amounts invoiced, certain of which appeared questionable. The
company planned all aspects of one academic department’s study abroad program
trips including the payment of certain travel related costs such as airfare, lodging,
and meals. According to UBalt records, the company was paid for costs and
unspecified administrative fees totaling $59,767 during fiscal years 2018 through
2020. Although UBalt was aware of the situation and advised us of this potential
violation as part of our audit process, it previously did not advise or refer the
matter to certain parties as necessary or required.
Potential Ethics Violation
A former UBalt employee obtained travel-related services from a company
operated by another UBalt employee instead of using existing contracts with other
vendors providing these same services. The employee who operated the company
served in a senior management position in the academic department that requested
the contract and accompanied the students on the trips. The services were
obtained without any competitive procurement and UBalt management could not
explain the use of the company when they had existing contracts with other
vendors for the same services. In addition, the UBalt employee who operated the
company did not disclose this relationship on UBalt’s outside employment forms
for calendar years 2017 through 2019, although it was disclosed on the
employee’s calendar year 2020 form. The matter came to light in 2019 when a
new UBalt procurement employee questioned the propriety of the contract and
referred it to UBalt’s legal counsel, which advised that the business relationship
with the company could potentially violate certain State ethics laws, and
recommended that the contract be terminated.
Although UBalt subsequently terminated its relationship with the company, this
matter was not referred to the State Ethics Commission. Referral of such matters
by a State agency to the Commission is not required by State Law or regulation;
12

--- Page 15 ---
however, due to the concerns raised that State ethics laws may have been violated,
it is our opinion that UBalt should have referred this matter to the Commission for
evaluation. We consulted senior management personnel at the Commission, who
advised us that the UBalt employee’s financial interest in the company could
potentially be a violation of several State ethics laws (a position consistent with
UBalt legal counsel’s prior conclusion). Referral of a matter to the Commission
by a State agency does not mean that a violation took place. Any final decision as
to whether violations of State Ethics Laws did or did not occur would ultimately
be made by the Commission. UBalt advised us that this matter was discussed
with the Commission in October 2021, which was subsequent to our inquiries.
According to UBalt, the Commission did not provide any final decision or ruling
at the time of that discussion.
In addition, UBalt did not notify the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel and the
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) – Criminal Division of the potential
unethical conduct, as required. The Governor’s Executive Order, Standards of
Conduct for Executive Branch Employees, requires that all departments and
agencies of the State immediately report any instance of possible criminal or
unethical conduct by an employee to the Governor’s Chief Counsel and to the
agency’s chief legal counsel or the Criminal Division.2 UBalt disagrees with the
necessity of making these notifications since its legal counsel advised it that they
were not necessary under the circumstances of this situation. We take the
contrary position that the standard of “potential unethical conduct” requires
notification, especially as the legal counsel initially advised UBalt that the
business relationship with the company could have potentially violated certain
State ethics laws. As with a referral to the State Ethics Commission, the
notifications required of a State agency by the Governor’s Executive Order do not
mean that a violation of any State laws actually took place.
UBalt Obtained Certain Services from the Company Without a Written Contract
Our review of the procurement of these services disclosed that UBalt paid the
company $29,474 for travel services without a written detailed contract. UBalt
also paid the company an additional $10,644 for other services, such as research
related to study abroad, without a formal detailed contract.3 Although certain
payments did not have an associated detailed contract, UBalt did have purchase
orders for $40,118 in payments made without a detailed contract. USM
procurement policies require a written contract for services over $25,000. In our
opinion, while individual trip and service costs were less than $25,000 and
2 Although UBalt’s legal counsel was notified of the situation, this is not a substitute for the
referenced reporting to external parties.
3 Of the $59,767 paid by UBalt to the company, the remaining $19,649 was paid out under a
formal contract.
13

--- Page 16 ---
individually would not require a written detailed contract, the extended use of the
company for travel services in general, which cumulatively exceeded $25,000
warranted the establishment of a written detailed contract indicating each party’s
responsibilities. UBalt management advised us that it did not believe that the
various individual services associated with these trips, due to their unique nature,
could be consolidated into a single contract.
UBalt Did Not Verify the Propriety of Amounts Paid to the Company
UBalt did not verify the propriety of amounts invoiced and paid to the company,
which were generally paid prior to services being rendered. UBalt generally paid
the company in advance based on a budget for itemized costs that it advised was
jointly prepared by the company and UBalt for travel costs and administrative
fees. Although UBalt advised us that it participated in development of the
itemized cost budgets, it was unable to provide us with documentation of how the
budgets were determined. In addition, UBalt did not have any process for four of
the five trips to verify the actual cost of travel being provided (such as by
reviewing reports of trip expenses and supporting receipts for airfare, trains, and
meals).
In this regard, our review of all payments to the company disclosed that UBalt did
not have support for travel-related services related to four trips totaling $45,567.
In addition, UBalt did not have support for $10,114 of the aforementioned
$10,644 in other services provided by the company. Receipts obtained for a fifth
trip disclosed certain questionable costs reimbursed by UBalt, specifically $1,575
billed to the company for a certified public accounting firm to prepare business
tax returns and $190 for credit card membership fees. It was unclear as to how
these expenses related to the trip. UBalt paid $3,556 to the company for this trip,
while the UBalt Foundation paid certain other costs incurred.
In addition to the trip costs previously noted, UBalt separately processed expense
reimbursements for the employee who operated the company and accompanied
the students on the trips. These expense reimbursements related to meals
associated with four trips totaling $2,648 and credit card expenses related to the
trips totaling $6,212. Because of the lack of supporting documentation for the
trips, it was unclear if these expenses should have already been covered by the
payments made to the company.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UBalt
a. take the action necessary to comply with any decision which the State
Ethics Commission provides regarding this matter;
14

--- Page 17 ---
b. notify the OAG’s Criminal Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal
Counsel of the aforementioned matter and, in the future, notify the
appropriate entities in accordance with the aforementioned Executive
Order and OAG policy;
c. ensure that travel services are obtained from vendors identified by a
documented independent procurement process and that detailed
contracts are entered into for these services; and
d. review all payments made to this company and pursue and obtain
reimbursement for any unsupported or inappropriate costs.
Payroll
Finding 7
Supervisory reviews of adjustments to leave balances were not performed.
Analysis
Adjustments to employee leave balances were not reviewed for propriety by
supervisory personnel. During our audit period, UBalt processed 228 leave
adjustments that increased employee leave balances by 12,052 hours. We
reviewed five leave adjustments (selected based on significance) that increased
leave balances by 1,381 hours valued at approximately $49,000. While these
leave adjustments seemed appropriate under the circumstances for the five
employees, there was no documented supervisory review of the adjustments to
ensure they were accurate and properly supported. In addition to the
aforementioned increases, during the same period, 55 leave adjustments that
decreased employee leave balances by 1,629 hours were processed.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UBalt ensure that leave adjustments processed are
reviewed for propriety by independent supervisory personnel and that this
review be documented.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit the University System of Maryland
(USM) - University of Baltimore (UBalt) for the period beginning September 13,
2016 and ending November 15, 2020. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UBalt’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, student financial aid, payroll, and information
systems security and control. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UBalt by the USM
Office. These support services (such as bond financing) are included within the
scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal assistance programs and an assessment of UBalt’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including the components of USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of September 13, 2016 to November 15, 2020, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UBalt’s operations. Generally,
16

--- Page 19 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from UBalt’s financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UBalt’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UBalt, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UBalt’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UBalt that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UBalt, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
December 1, 2021
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – University of Baltimore
Period of Audit: September 13, 2016 through November 15, 2020
Dear Mr. Hook,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s amended responses to your draft report covering the examination of the
accounts and records of the University System of Maryland – University of Baltimore. Our comments refer to
the individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Mr. Kurt L. Schmoke, President, UBalt
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Mr. Robert L. Page, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Director of Internal Audit, USM Office

--- Page 22 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Student Personal Information
Finding 1
The University of Baltimore (UBalt) did not require or obtain a sufficient independent
review of the automated system used by its vendor responsible for collecting student online
payments, to ensure that sensitive student information residing on the system was properly
safeguarded.
We recommend that UBalt comply with State law and USM IT Security Standards by
requiring and obtaining from the aforementioned vendor a control assessment report, such
as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, to ensure sensitive student information provided to the vendor is
properly safeguarded.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2021
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore obtained and reviewed an unqualified SOC
corrective action or 2 type 2 report for the aforementioned vendor in May 2021. UBalt will
explain disagreement. continue to obtain and review these reports.
Page 1 of 8

--- Page 23 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Student Financial Aid
Finding 2
UBalt did not adequately verify student financial aid application data and adjustments
made to student cost of attendance (COA) budgets.
We recommend that UBalt
a. document its review of the third-party vendor’s verification of student financial aid
application data, and ensure that the vendor or UBalt made any needed corrections and
properly reported any corrections to the applicable federal granting agency; and
b. ensure that manual adjustments to COA budgets are subject to a documented
independent supervisory review, at least on a test basis.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2021
Please provide details of Semi-annually, the University of Baltimore will perform and document
corrective action or an independent review of a 10% sample of the third-party vendor’s
explain disagreement. verification of student financial aid application data. The first review
occurred on November 2 and 3 and no exceptions were noted. The next
review will occur in April 2022. In future reviews, if corrections are
needed, UBalt will ensure these are properly reported to the applicable
federal grant agency.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2021
Please provide details of Semi-annually, the University of Baltimore, specifically the Financial
corrective action or Aid leader, will perform and document an independent review of a 10%
explain disagreement. sample of manual adjustments to COA budgets to confirm the propriety
of such adjustments. The first review occurred on November 2 and 3 and
no exceptions were noted. The next review will occur in April 2022.
Page 2 of 8

--- Page 24 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 3
UBalt did not adequately monitor changes to unpaid student accounts to allow, deny, or
defer critical activity, such as registering for classes, receiving transcripts, or submitting
unpaid accounts to the State’s Central Collection unit (CCU).
We recommend that UBalt
a. establish procedures to regularly review the propriety of pending payment designations
placed on student accounts, remove designations that can no longer be justified, and
take appropriate and timely collection action for unpaid balances; and
b. ensure that all holds removed from student accounts are subject to independent
supervisory review and approval.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2021
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore will develop procedures and perform a
corrective action or semi-annual review of pending student account payment designations
explain disagreement. (PFA and TPA). The procedures will include guidance for determining
the propriety of pending payment designations, for the removal of
designations which can no longer be justified, and will set forth timely
and appropriate actions relative to collections for unpaid balances.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2021
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore will review all persons with the ability to
corrective action or remove financial holds and develop an independent documented
explain disagreement. supervisory review and approval for removal of these financial holds.
Page 3 of 8

--- Page 25 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
UBalt did not have procedures for ensuring that access to perform certain critical functions
on its financial management systems was adequately restricted and controlled.
We recommend that UBalt establish formal procedures for ensuring that access to perform
critical functions within its financial management systems is adequately restricted and
controlled. Specifically, we recommend that UBalt
a. periodically provide appropriate department personnel with available security reports
to perform reviews of user access to process critical functions on its financial
management systems;
b. ensure through those reviews that user access is both required for the user’s job duties
and adequately controlled by ensuring, for example, that transactions processed are
subject to independent review and approval; and
c. eliminate the unnecessary user access noted in our finding.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2021
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore will implement new procedures to
corrective action or periodically provide appropriate department personnel with system
explain disagreement. access reports to facilitate user access reviews of critical functions on its
financial management and human resources systems. These reviews will
occur twice per year.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2021
Please provide details of The above-mentioned review of the University of Baltimore’s financial
corrective action or management systems will ensure that users are restricted based on user’s
explain disagreement. job roles and responsibilities.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2021
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore will eliminate the unnecessary user access
corrective action or noted in the OLA report.
explain disagreement.
Page 4 of 8

--- Page 26 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Finding 5
Remote access to the internal UBalt network by employees and authorized contractors used
a single authentication measure rather than the more secure multi-factor authentication.
We recommend that UBalt implement multi-factor authentication for remote connections
into the UBalt network by employees and authorized contractors.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2021
Please provide details of All remote user access employed Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA),
corrective action or by May 2021, except for the VPN because of a software issue. MFA for
explain disagreement. the VPN was implemented in August 2021.
Page 5 of 8

--- Page 27 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Possible Ethics Violation
Finding 6
UBalt obtained travel-related services totaling $59,767 from a company operated by a
UBalt employee when these services were available from existing vendors. In addition,
UBalt did not have a detailed written contract for certain of the services, and did not obtain
support for all amounts paid to the company, certain of which appeared questionable.
We recommend that UBalt
a. take the action necessary to comply with any decision which the State Ethics
Commission provides regarding this matter;
b. notify the OAG’s Criminal Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel of the
aforementioned matter and, in the future, notify the appropriate entities in accordance
with the aforementioned Executive Order and OAG policy;
c. ensure that travel services are obtained from vendors identified by a documented
independent procurement process and that detailed contracts are entered into for these
services; and
d. review all payments made to this company and pursue and obtain reimbursement for
any unsupported or inappropriate costs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The circumstances of the contract are viewed as a mutual mistake made
additional comments as by the University and the employee rather than any unethical conduct on
deemed necessary. anyone’s part. The matter was corrected immediately upon receiving
guidance from counsel.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: TBD
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore will comply in a timely manner with any
corrective action or directions that the State Ethics Commission provides on this matter.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 6b Disagree Estimated Completion Date:
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore administrators promptly conferred with the
corrective action or OAG Higher Education Division, terminated the contract, and acted
explain disagreement. fully upon guidance by OAG counsel and in compliance with reporting
requirements. In the future, UBalt will continue to consult OAG counsel
on these matters and act in accordance with the Executive Order.
Auditor’s Comment: UBalt’s response indicates disagreement with the
recommendation to refer this matter to the OAG’s Criminal Division and the Governor’s
Page 6 of 8

--- Page 28 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Chief Legal Counsel, and states that UBalt acted fully upon guidance by OAG counsel
and in compliance with reporting requirements. We continue to believe that UBalt
should have notified the Criminal Division and the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel of
this matter in accordance with the Governor’s Executive Order. However, as further
recommended, UBalt has agreed to act in accordance with the Executive Order in the
future.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: As applicable
Please provide details of If travel services are needed, the University of Baltimore will obtain
corrective action or them in accordance with USM Procurement Policies and Procedures.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 6d Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2022
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore is reviewing all payments made to this
corrective action or company and will seek to obtain reimbursement if appropriate.
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 8

--- Page 29 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 7
Supervisory reviews of adjustments to leave balances were not performed.
We recommend that UBalt ensure that leave adjustments processed are reviewed for
propriety by independent supervisory personnel and that this review be documented.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2021
Please provide details of The University of Baltimore will document an independent peer review
corrective action or of leave adjustments.
explain disagreement.
Page 8 of 8

--- Page 30 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Mindy R. Garrett
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Dorian A. Fournier
Ibijoke O. Owolabi, CPA
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Peter W. Chong
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors