Title: Maryland African American Museum Corporation
Date: 02/09/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d09cc9d724560674254
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:36:03.830499
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland African American Museum Corporation
November 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 17, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland African American
Museum Corporation (MAAMC) for the period beginning September 6, 2016 and
ending March 31, 2021. MAAMC, along with its Board of Directors, oversees
the programs of the Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American
History and Culture.
MAAMC did not always comply with its procurement policies. For example, for
certain procurements greater than $10,000, MAAMC did not obtain the required
management and oversight approvals or two written vendor proposals and,
therefore, MAAMC may not have received the best quality and value for the
related services. Additionally, MAAMC had not performed a physical inventory
of its full collection of artifacts or have an independent control account, as
required, and did not assign values to all items for insurance purposes.
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding MAAMC audit report. We determined that MAAMC
satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.
We conducted our audit fieldwork entirely during the period of the State’s
COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Also, the crisis had a direct impact on
MAAMC’s operations for a six-month period. Specifically, a Governor’s
executive order, effective March 5, 2020, resulted in the MAAMC closing its
facilities during the period from March 5, 2020 to September 10, 2020.
Consequently, MAAMC’s privately raised revenues were reduced during this

--- Page 4 ---
period, with a continued reduction from customary revenue levels expected until
normal programming can return to original levels. Although the MAAMC’s
facilities were closed during part of our audit period, the objectives and scope of
our audit were not significantly impacted.
MAAMC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of MAAMC’s response
which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require
the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Additionally, in
accordance with our policy, we have edited MAAMC’s response to remove the
name of a certain system.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MAAMC and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement
appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland African American Museum Corporation (MAAMC) was created
by State law in 1998 to oversee the development and future programs of the
Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American History and Culture,
located in Baltimore City, which opened to the public in June 2005. MAAMC is
constituted as a public instrumentality and an independent unit in the Executive
Branch. A Board of Directors manages the affairs of MAAMC, which appoints
an executive director to direct and supervise its administrative and technical
affairs.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2020, MAAMC’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $3.8 million, which consisted of $2 million in
general fund expenditures and $1.8 million in privately funded expenditures.
State Grants
Each year MAAMC enters into a Memorandum of Understanding with the
Department of Budget and Management which requires that funding from State
general fund grants should support no more than 50 percent of MAAMC’s
operating expenses. The State general fund grants totaled $2 million each year for
fiscal years 2018 through 2021. For fiscal years 2020 and 2021, the State
exempted MAAMC from the 50 percent match due to the COVID-19 pandemic’s
impact on MAAMC’s ability to raise private funds.
Financial Statement Audits
MAAMC engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019,
and 2020. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that MAAMC’s financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
MAAMC and the respective changes in its net assets and its cash flows for the
aforementioned years in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted
in the United States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 9, 2017. As disclosed in Figure 1
3

--- Page 6 ---
below, we determined that MAAMC satisfactorily addressed one of these
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Maryland African American Museum
Corporation (MAAMC) did not comply with
Finding 1 its endowment fund investment policy with Not repeated
respect to oversight of investments and
conflict of interest disclosure requirements
from its financial manager.
MAAMC did not always comply with its
Finding 2 written procurement policy regarding Repeated
obtaining written proposals and obtaining (Current Finding 1)
management approvals.
Adequate accountability and controls were not
Finding 3 Repeated
established over MAAMC’s museum
(Current Finding 2)
collections of art and historical artifacts.
Findings and Recommendations
Procurements
Finding 1
The Maryland African American Museum Corporation (MAAMC) did not
always comply with its written procurement policy regarding obtaining
written proposals and obtaining management approvals.
Analysis
MAAMC did not always comply with its written procurement policy regarding
obtaining written vendor proposals and management approvals. MAAMC is
exempt from following State procurement regulations, and has adopted a
procurement policy that is designed, in part, to assist the MAAMC’s Board of
Directors in exercising its oversight function. According to MAAMC’s records,
disbursements totaled approximately $13.0 million during fiscal years 2018
4

--- Page 7 ---
through 2021. Our test of 10 procurements selected based on materiality1 with
payments totaling $569,700 disclosed the following:
 MAAMC did not solicit at least two written vendor proposals for two
procurements for security and accounting services with associated payments
totaling $279,500. MAAMC only obtained one proposal for each of these
procurements and, consequently, MAAMC lacked assurance that the related
contracts provided the best quality and value for MAAMC.
 MAAMC did not obtain certain required approvals for five procurements with
associated payments totaling $439,500. For example, MAAMC did not have
documentation to support the approval of the Executive Director, the
Chairman of the Board, and the Board of Directors for one procurement with
payments totaling $254,500.
MAAMC policy for procurements greater than $10,000 requires two written
proposals and approval from the Executive Director and the Chairman of the
Board. The Policy further requires Board of Directors approval for procurements
greater than $50,000. Similar conditions regarding the failure to obtain written
proposals and required approvals were commented upon our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MAAMC comply with its procurement policy.
Specifically, we recommend that MAAMC
a. obtain at least two written proposals for all procurements greater than
$10,000 as required (repeat), and
b. ensure that procurements receive the appropriate documented approvals
in accordance with its policy (repeat).
1 We selected our test items based on the materiality of total payments to the vendors during our
audit period rather than the materiality of the individual procurements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Museum Collections of Art and Historical Artifacts
Finding 2
Adequate accountability and controls were not established over MAAMC’s
museum collections of art and historical artifacts.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not established over MAAMC’s museum collections of
art and historical artifacts. According to MAAMC’s detail records, as of March
2021, MAAMC’s collections included 11,701 items. Of this total, 8,900 (76
percent) had not been assigned a value, and the remaining 2,801 items were
valued at approximately $1.6 million for insurance purposes.
 MAAMC did not maintain an independent control record to help establish
accountability over the museum collections and to ensure that all museum
collection additions and removals were properly recorded.
 MAAMC had not established a policy requiring that items be assigned a value
for insurance purposes. According to MAAMC records, 8,900 (76 percent) of
the total artifacts were not assigned a value. The assigning of values for
artifacts is significant, because we were advised by the State Treasurer’s
Office, which provides insurance for the artifacts, that MAAMC would not be
reimbursed from insurance for the loss of artifacts that were not assigned a
value.
 Physical inventories of certain artifacts were not performed as required.
Specifically, as of March 2021, there were 4,375 artifacts (including items
with a total insured value of $1.2 million) that had not been inventoried for at
least three years. According to MAAMC policy, a physical inventory is to be
performed every three years.
 The employee who maintained the detail records of MAAMC’s museum
collections had physical access to the museum collections, performed the
physical inventories, and was responsible for recording any needed
adjustments to the records based on the results of physical inventories
conducted. These duties should be separated to establish accountability over
the museum collections.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of a control record and inadequate
separation of duties were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports and
the lack of an established policy for assigning values to items in the collection
was commented upon in our preceding audit report. While MAAMC agreed with
6

--- Page 9 ---
the recommendations in our preceding report, MAAMC management informed us
that staff turnover prevented the implementation of these recommendations,
including the necessary updates to its collection management policy.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MAAMC
a. maintain a control record of its museum collections that is independent of
its detail records (repeat);
b. develop a policy to identify items in its collections with potentially
significant values and ensure that values are assigned to these items in its
records (repeat);
c. perform independent physical inventories every three years, as required,
and update the detailed records accordingly; and
d. ensure that employees who maintain the detail records do not have
physical access to the collections (repeat).
We advised MAAMC how to segregate duties using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland African American
Museum Corporation (MAAMC) for the period beginning September 6, 2016 and
ending March 31, 2021. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MAAMC’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included endowment investments, purchases and
disbursements, and museum collections inventories. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of September 6, 2016 to March 31, 2021, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MAAMC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We performed various data extracts of pertinent information (such as expenditure
data and museum collection inventory) from MAAMC’s internal accounting
records. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MAAMC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided for in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MAAMC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
8

--- Page 11 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MAAMC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to MAAMC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MAAMC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MAAMC regarding the
results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 12 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland African American Museum Corporation
Agency Response Form
Procurements
Finding 1
The Maryland African American Museum Corporation (MAAMC) did not always comply
with its written procurement policy regarding obtaining written proposals and obtaining
management approvals.
We recommend that MAAMC comply with its procurement policy. Specifically, we
recommend that MAAMC
a. obtain at least two written proposals for all procurements greater than $10,000 as
required (repeat), and
b. ensure that procurements receive the appropriate documented approvals in accordance
with its policy (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide During the audit period MAAMC experienced turnover at the Executive
additional comments as level and in Facilities Management. During this time we renewed our
deemed necessary. contract with our largest African American vendor. The quote this
vendor provided was lower than historical quotes we had received for
competitive vendors, assuring MAAMC received the best value while
maintaining comparable quality for the services. Because of this
vendor’s pricing, sometimes competitors are reluctant to bid against
them for the Museum.
Of the expenses cited in Finding 1b, this one procurement for $254,500
represents 91% of the amount noted in Finding 1a.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/1/21
Please provide details of MAAMC will obtain competitive bids on future proposals as required by
corrective action or policy, unless at the determination of the Executive Director a Sole
explain disagreement. Source contract is deemed appropriate, as permitted by the Procurement
Procedures.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/1/21
Please provide details of MAAMC will obtain the required approvals for procurements in
corrective action or accordance with the Procurement Procedures.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 3

--- Page 14 ---
Maryland African American Museum Corporation
Agency Response Form
Museum Collections of Art and Historical Artifacts
Finding 2
Adequate accountability and controls were not established over MAAMC’s museum
collections of art and historical artifacts.
We recommend that MAAMC
a. maintain a control record of its museum collections that is independent of its detail
records (repeat);
b. develop a policy to identify items in its collections with potentially significant values and
ensure that values are assigned to these items in its records (repeat);
c. perform independent physical inventories every three years, as required, and update
the detailed records accordingly; and
d. ensure that employees who maintain the detail records do not have physical access to
the collections (repeat).
We advised MAAMC how to segregate duties using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide During the period covered by the audit MAAMC did not have enough
additional comments as staff in its Collections & Exhibitions (C&E) department to establish
deemed necessary. adequate separation of duties. The onset of the pandemic prolonged
MAAMC’s opportunity to increase C&E staff.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/1/21
Please provide details of MAAMC has hired additional staff in the Collections and Exhibitions
corrective action or Department. This staffing adds control layers to the oversight of the
explain disagreement. collection and of our collection management system.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/22
Please provide details of MAAMC will develop a policy to ensure that inventory items with
corrective action or potentially material values are valued in a timely manner.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/22
Please provide details of MAAMC will hire staff to assist us in meeting our policy. If budget
corrective action or constraints limit staff hires, MAAMC will develop a rotating policy to
explain disagreement. ensure that all objects are counted in accordance with the policy.
Page 2 of 3

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland African American Museum Corporation
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/22
Please provide details of MAAMC has hired additional staff in the Collections and Exhibitions
corrective action or Department. This staffing adds control layers to the oversight of the
explain disagreement. collection and of our collection management system.
Page 3 of 3

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
Mindy R. Garrett
Senior Auditor