Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Information Technology and Communications Division
Date: 03/14/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d72456067459c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:24:55.290470
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Information Technology and Communications Division
January 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Network and Data Center Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 –Personally Identifiable Information Was Not Appropriately 5
Safeguarded
Finding 2 – Procedures for Logging and Monitoring Critical Database 5
and Mainframe Security Events Were Not Sufficient
* Finding 3 – The DPSCS Network Was Not Properly Secured 6
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 8
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD) of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) operates the
DPSCS data center as a computer service provider for DPSCS operating agencies
(for example, the Central Region). ITCD provides data, information, and
communications services to DPSCS, criminal justice entities, and the public. In
addition, ITCD maintains application systems containing sensitive information,
such as the Sex Offender Registry Database and the Maryland Automated
Fingerprint Identification System, and operates a statewide computer network.
Furthermore, ITCD operates a wide area network (WAN) that connects with more
than 300 statewide remote sites, such as local law enforcement agencies, and the
DPSCS data center’s local network. DPSCS, through its WAN, offers its users
access to various information technology services including mainframe computer-
based applications (for example, the Criminal Justice Information System),
database management, network services, email, and the Internet. Finally, ITCD
maintains the mainframe operating system and security software environment in
which many agency applications are executed. ITCD’s fiscal year 2015 budget
totaled approximately $36 million and provided funding for 214 authorized
positions.
Our audit focused exclusively on the computer and network operations of the
ITCD data center. An audit of the ITCD fiscal operations was conducted as part
of the audit of the DPSCS Office of the Secretary, and a separate report was
issued on November 18, 2015.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 6, 2012. We determined that ITCD
satisfactorily addressed two of the findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Network and Data Center Information Systems Security and
Control
Finding 1
The Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD) did not
appropriately safeguard sensitive personally identifiable information.
Analysis
ITCD inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) in
clear text. Specifically, as of February 27, 2015, we identified a critical database
containing 2,562,700 unique social security numbers (SSNs) along with names,
and dates of birth in clear text. In addition, we determined that this sensitive PII
was not protected by other substantial mitigating controls.
This PII, which is commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft, should
be protected by appropriate information system security controls. The State of
Maryland’s Information Security Policy states that agencies should protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ITCD
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected.
Finding 2
Procedures for logging and monitoring critical database and mainframe
security events were not sufficient.
Analysis
Procedures for logging and monitoring critical database and mainframe security
events were not sufficient.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 For a critical production database, the use of numerous powerful system
privileges (for example, create role and update any table) and direct changes
to significant data and security tables were not logged. Accordingly,
unauthorized changes to this database could occur, that could result in
inappropriate changes to production data without detection by management.
 Documented reviews of reports of critical security events for the mainframe
security software and two significant production databases did not exist.
Although ITCD advised us that these security reports were reviewed, there
was no documentation evidencing the specific reports reviewed, the dates of
the reviews, the related findings and conclusions, and any subsequent
investigative actions. Accordingly, assurance was lacking that erroneous or
unauthorized activity, which could affect the integrity of DPSCS’ data files,
would be detected by management.
The State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy requires that information
systems generate audit records for all security-relevant events and that procedures
must be developed to routinely (for example, daily or weekly) review audit
records for indications of unusual activities, suspicious activities or suspected
violations, and to report findings to appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ITCD
a. log the use of all critical database system privileges and all direct
modifications to significant data and security tables, and
b. document its review of all critical database and mainframe security
software security reports and retain this documentation for future
reference.
Finding 3
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS)
network was not properly secured.
Analysis
The DPSCS network was not properly secured.
 The primary firewalls installed to protect the DPSCS network from external
untrusted entities allowed unnecessary and insecure connections to network
devices in the internal network. The firewalls’ rules were not configured to
adequately secure connections into the network from networkMaryland and
other untrusted sources. Therefore, critical network devices were susceptible
6

--- Page 9 ---
to attack which could result in a loss of data integrity or the interruption of
critical network services. The State of Maryland’s Information Security
Policy requires that agency systems be configured to monitor and control
communications at external boundaries. A similar condition was commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
 Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage did not exist for
encrypted traffic from the Internet and other untrusted third parties entering
the DPSCS network. Although the devices used to filter traffic and apply
IDPS coverage to such traffic had the capability to decrypt and inspect such
traffic for IDPS purposes, these features were not enabled on these devices.
Additionally, host-based intrusion protection system software was not
installed on any of the devices which received encrypted traffic. We
identified 57 separate destination devices that received encrypted traffic. The
Information Security Policy requires that agencies protect against malicious
code and attacks by implementing protections including the use of IDPS to
monitor system events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of
information systems and/or confidential information.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that ITCD
a. configure its firewalls to achieve a “least privilege” security strategy
giving individuals and devices only the access needed to perform
necessary tasks (repeat);
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks from encrypted network traffic to its critical devices and identify
how such traffic should be subject to IDPS; and
c. implement IDPS coverage as necessary, based on this review and
assessment.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) – Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD).
Fieldwork associated with our audit of ITCD was conducted during the period
from November 2014 to August 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ITCD’s internal
control over the DPSCS data center and network and to evaluate compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer systems that support
DPSCS and its user agencies.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included procedures and controls over the mainframe operating system, security
software, and databases. Our audit also included an assessment of the security
controls for critical routers, firewalls, switches, and virtual private network
appliances, as well as an assessment of the security controls related to ITCD’s use
of anti-malware software to protect DPSCS’ computers. We also determined the
status of the findings included in our preceding audit report on ITCD.
ITCD’s fiscal operations are audited separately as part of our audit of the DPSCS
Office of the Secretary. The latest report on the Office of the Secretary was
issued on November 18, 2015.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
ITCD’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
ITCD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
8

--- Page 11 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ITCD’s ability to operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes
findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to ITCD
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of ITCD, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 13 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Information Technology & Communications Division
Post Office Box 5743 • Pikesville, Maryland 21282-5743
Main №: 410-585-3100 • Facsimile №: 410-764-4035 • www.dpscs.maryland.gov
December 15, 2015
STATE OF MARYLAND
LARRY HOGAN
GOVERNOR
Stephen T. Moyer, Secretary
BOYD K. RUTHERFORD
LT. GOVERNOR Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
300 East Joppa Road, Suite 1000
STEPHEN T. MOYER Towson, Maryland 21286-3020
SECRETARY
WILLIAM G. STEWART
DEPUTY SECRETARY Via William G. Stewart, Deputy Secretary for Administration
ADMINISTRATION Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
WAYNE A. WEBB 300 East Joppa Road, Suite 1000
ACTING DEPUTY
SECRETARY Towson, Maryland 21286-3020
OPERATIONS
RHEA L. HARRIS Dear Secretary Moyer:
ASSISTANT
SECRETARY
PROGRAMS AND
SERVICES The following is the Information Technology and Communications Division’s (ITCD)
response to the Legislative Audit regarding the Division’s internal controls for the
DAVID N. BEZANSON
ASSISTANT Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) data center and
SECRETARY
CAPITAL PROGRAMS network. ITCD will aggressively pursue implementation of the recommendations.
C. KEVIN COMBS Network and Data Center Information Systems Security and Control
CHIEF INFORMATION
OFFICER
ARTHUR C. RAY, III Finding 1
DEPUTY CHIEF
The Information Technology and Communications Division (ITCD) did not
INFORMATION
OFFICER appropriately safeguard sensitive personally identifiable information.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ITCD
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII;
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary PII;
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or other
substantial mitigating controls; and
d. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not otherwise
properly protected.
We agree.
a. An inventory of systems that contain PII was conducted prior to the audit and will
continue on an ongoing basis. Anticipated Completion: Completed.
b. We have determined that it is necessary to retain the PII currently stored. Anticipated
Completion: Completed.

--- Page 14 ---
Page 2
c. We have determined that DPSCS databases do not require encryption because
DPSCS has an acceptable level of security controls in place, such as Data Loss
Prevention, Network Security Event Monitoring, and database change monitoring.
Real time alerts are sent to the firewall team, and system log and access activation is
reviewed weekly for unusual activity. The databases are housed in a secure location,
firewalls rules and Access Control Lists (ACL) are in place, and databases that store
PII have been identified in the Enterprise Architecture Resource (EAR). Individuals
that have access to the data have fingerprint based background checks. Finally, data
is transmitted through encrypted communication channels in compliance with DoIT
and FBI CJIS security policies. Anticipated Completion: Completed.
d. PII data will be moved to an encrypted database or added software will be used to
encrypt the existing fields for systems that need access to PII data. Encryption
solutions are dependent on the Department’s fiscal ability to acquire the needed
software for encryption. Anticipated Completion: October 1, 2018
Finding 2
Procedures for logging and monitoring critical database and mainframe security
events were not sufficient.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ITCD
a. log the use of all critical database system privileges and all direct modifications
to significant data and security tables; and
b. document its review of all critical database and mainframe security software
security reports and retain this documentation for future reference.
We agree.
a. We will add to the current tables logged, and log all direct modifications to
significant data and security tables. We anticipate that this may cause performance
issues which we will document if changes need to be made affecting what is being
logged. Anticipated Completion: July 1, 2016
b. A review process is now in place and will be conducted on a monthly basis. All
reviews will be documented and retained for audit purposes. We will add additional
information to the review process, as recommended. Anticipated Completion:
Completed.

--- Page 16 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
John C. Venturella, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Edward O. Kendall
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditors