Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Talbot County
Date: 08/21/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d72456067435e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:18:11.372858
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Talbot County, Maryland
August 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Talbot County and its incorporated municipalities, and others, and
subsequently distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2013
revenues totaled $12,462,920. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $8,674,738 was distributed to Talbot County and its incorporated
municipalities,
 $8,418 was distributed to others, and
 $3,779,764 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The Office’s fiscal year 2013 operating expenses, which were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation, totaled $892,478.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust and special purpose funds that,
according to its records, had balances totaling $209,749 as of February 28, 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 6, 2011. We determined that the Office
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Controls over cash receipts and employee access to related automated
records were not sufficient, and certain reconciliations were not being
completed.
Analysis
The Office had not established sufficient controls over cash receipts and
employee access to the Uniform Court System (UCS), which is an automated
Statewide record keeping system for criminal, civil, and juvenile case file
management and the related cash receipts and accounts receivable functions. In
addition, certain critical reconciliations were not being completed.
 Although the Office generated and reviewed output reports of non-cash credits
and void transactions, these reviews were not sufficient because they were
performed by an employee who had access to cash receipts and had system
capabilities to process non-cash credit and void transactions. According to the
Office’s accounting records, $2,668 in non-cash credits and $133,787 in
receipt voids were processed during fiscal year 2013.
 As of June 2014, the most recent review of user access to UCS was
completed in June 2013. Judiciary policy calls for user access to critical
systems to be reviewed for propriety quarterly. There are currently 11 active
users of UCS in the Office.
 The Office did not routinely reconcile collection activity recorded in the UCS
with the State’s accounting records. Our request to review reconciliations for
the months of November 2012, June 2013, and January 2014, disclosed that
none had been completed as of April 14, 2014. The Comptroller of Maryland
- General Accounting Division’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
State agencies perform timely reconciliations of critical financial information
with the State’s accounting records.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that output reports of non-cash credits and void transactions
recorded in the UCS are reviewed by an employee who is not assigned
system capabilities to process these transactions, verified to supporting
documentation, and that this review is documented;
4

--- Page 7 ---
b. ensure that system user access is reviewed in accordance with Judiciary
policy requirements; and
c. reconcile collection data recorded in the UCS to the State’s accounting
records as required.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Talbot County, Maryland for the period beginning February 17, 2011
and ending March 23, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions) and bank accounts. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report. Our audit procedures
included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and
records, and observations of the Office’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Office by the
Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such as payroll and
invoice processing and maintenance of budgetary accounting records) are
included within the scope of our audits of the Judiciary.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding that we consider to be a significant deficiency in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Office’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This finding is also
regarded as a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations.
The Judiciary’s response, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditor