Title: Maryland Food Center Authority
Date: 10/03/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d724560674418
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:46:55.430534
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Food Center Authority
April 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 1, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Food Center
Authority (MFCA) for the period beginning March 1, 2021 to November 15,
2024. MFCA is primarily responsible for establishing, maintaining, operating,
and promoting consolidated food markets within the State. MFCA owns and
operates regional food industry facilities, including the Maryland Market Center
and the Maryland Wholesale Produce Market located in Jessup, Maryland.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MFCA.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Food Center Authority (MFCA) is an instrumentality of the State
of Maryland and a public corporation. The primary purpose of MFCA is to
establish, maintain, operate, and promote consolidated food markets within the
State. MFCA owns and operates regional food service facilities, including the
Maryland Market Center and the Maryland Wholesale Produce Market located in
Jessup, Maryland. MFCA’s Board of Directors comprises 12 members including
the Comptroller of Maryland; the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture; the
Secretary of the Department of General Services; the Director of Maryland
Cooperative Extension at University of Maryland, College Park; and private
citizens appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.
According to State records, MFCA’s expenditures totaled $4.6 million during
fiscal year 2024, which is primarily funded through entrance and registration fees,
service fees, and rental income generated from the operation of the
aforementioned food service facilities.
Financial Statements
MFCA engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that MFCA’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of MFCA, and the respective
changes in financial position and cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings in our
preceding audit report dated August 18, 2021. See Figure 1 for the results of our
review.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
MFCA issued 38 contract modifications after the two
contracts had expired, including a $1.9 million
Finding 1 modification that increased the scope and more than Not repeated
tripled the cost of the original Maryland Market Center
renovation contract.
MFCA’s current procurement policies and procedures
were not approved by its Board of Directors as required by
Finding 2 Not repeated
State law, and did not require Board approval of
significant procurements to enhance oversight and control.
MFCA did not have a process to verify that changes to
Finding 3 Not repeated
employee leave balances were proper.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Maryland Food Service Authority’s (MFCA) internal control. Our audit
also did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable
laws, rules, or regulations. Findings that did not warrant inclusion in this report
were separately communicated to MFCA.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MFCA. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Food Service
Authority (MFCA) for the period beginning March 1, 2021 and ending November
15, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MFCA’s financial
4

--- Page 7 ---
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included accounts receivable, cash receipts, capital
construction projects, payroll, procurement, and disbursements. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 1, 2021 to November 15, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the MFCA’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MFCA’s financial system for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as accounts receivable. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MFCA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MFCA, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Matthew K. Gonglewski
Staff Auditor