Title: Office of the State Treasurer
Date: 10/27/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d724560674708
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:53:28.905462
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the State Treasurer
August 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
August 24, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the State Treasurer
(STO) for the period beginning March 28, 2018 and ending July 31, 2021. STO is
responsible for the receipt, disbursement, safekeeping, and investment of funds of
the State Treasury. STO is also responsible for procuring banking and financial
services for State agencies and maintaining an insurance program for State
property and personnel. In addition, STO coordinates the State’s general
obligation debt functions for the Board of Public Works.
STO has experienced significant delays and increased costs related to the
implementation of its new financial and insurance claims system. STO contracted
with two separate vendors to perform the implementation. The first vendor was
responsible for developing a plan to replace the existing system and serving as a
project administrator to oversee the project. The second vendor was to provide
additional technical staff responsible for customizing the new system under the
direction of the project administrator. The contract with the second vendor
established an estimated completion date of September 2019, but between June
30, 2019 and June 30, 2022, the estimated completion cost for the project
increased from $9.3 million to $21.3 million. As of June 30, 2022, two of four
system modules had been implemented, and the project was scheduled for
completion in fiscal year 2024.
Our audit disclosed that STO did not adequately monitor the project administrator
and did not pursue damages despite the above-noted significant project delays and

--- Page 4 ---
cost increases. In addition, STO could not support the propriety of modifications
to the technical staff contract totaling $5.9 million. As a result, STO could not
effectively monitor this contract and validate the related charges. As of June
2022, STO has paid $1.1 million for project administration services and $9.9
million for technical staff services.
Furthermore, STO had not taken any action to determine the propriety of amounts
paid to the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund (IWIF) for State employee workers’
compensation claims and related administrative costs, a condition that we have
reported upon since 2007. During the four-year period ending with fiscal year
2022, payments to IWIF totaled $350.5 million.
Our audit also disclosed certain deficiencies relating to information systems
security and control. However, in accordance with the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the
findings from this audit report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with
auditing best practices before the report is made available to the public. The term
“cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we have determined that the
redacted findings fall under the referenced definition. The specifics of the
cybersecurity findings were previously communicated to those parties responsible
for acting on our recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that STO satisfactorily addressed two of those three
findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
STO’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and related
recommendations and while there are other aspects of the response which will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. In accordance with our
policy, we have edited any vendor names or products mentioned by STO in this
document. In addition, consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements
of STO’s response related to the cybersecurity audit findings.
2

--- Page 5 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by STO.
We also wish to acknowledge STO’s willingness to address the audit issues and
implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Financial and Insurance Claims Management System
Finding 1 – The State Treasurer’s Office (STO) did not adequately 12
monitor the project administrator responsible for developing the
new financial and insurance claims system and did not pursue
damages when the project encountered severe implementation
problems, delays, and cost increases.
Finding 2 – STO did not sufficiently document several contract 14
modifications to expand and extend the services of the vendor
providing technical staff on the contract, which precluded STO
from effectively monitoring the contract and validating the related
charges.
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund (IWIF)
* Finding 3 – STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to 17
IWIF for the State’s workers’ compensation claims and related
costs, and did not follow up on deficiencies noted in Maryland
Insurance Administration audits.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 18
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 19
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 20
Agency Response Appendix
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the State Treasurer (STO) is responsible for the receipt,
disbursement, safekeeping, and investment of the funds of the State Treasury. It
is also responsible for reconciling the related bank accounts, procuring banking
and financial services for State agencies, and maintaining an insurance program
for State property and personnel. STO also coordinates the State’s general
obligation debt functions for the Board of Public Works. According to the State’s
records, during fiscal year 2022, STO’s expenditures totaled approximately $56.7
million (See Figure 1).
Figure 1
STO Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 48 80.0%
Frozen 1 1.7%
Vacant 11 18.3%
Total 60
Fiscal Year Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 6,073,508 10.7%
Technical and Special Fees 109,143 0.2%
Operating Expenses 50,480,417 89.1%
Total $ 56,663,068
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 6,057,620 10.7%
Special Fund 2,155,349 3.8%
Reimbursable Fund 48,450,099 85.5%
Total $ 56,663,068
Source: State financial and personnel records
As noted in Figure 1, STO had significant vacancies during the audit period. In
addition, there were significant changes in STO executive leadership including
7

--- Page 10 ---
long term employees. Furthermore, the current State Treasurer was elected six
months after the end of the time period covered by this audit report.
State law provides that State Treasury investments are limited to secured bank
accounts, full faith and credit obligations of the federal government, obligations
of certain federal agencies or instrumentalities, obligations issued and
unconditionally guaranteed by certain supranational issuers (for example the
World bank), repurchase agreements collateralized by those securities, certain
money market mutual funds, and limited amounts of commercial paper.
As of June 30, 2022, the State Treasury investment portfolio, based on market
value, totaled approximately $17.9 billion (See Figure 2 on the following page).
During the audit period, the portfolio balance increased significantly due to
improved market conditions as well as enhanced federal funding received for the
COVID-19 pandemic.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 2
State Treasury Investment Portfolio
as of June 30, 2022
(in thousands)
Commercial
U.S. Treasury
Paper1
$125,000
$2,100,000
1%
Money Market 12%
Funds$3,933,108
22% Repurchase
Agreements
(REPO)
Supranational
$4,066,831
$1,362,759
23%
7%
Federal Agencies
(Agricultural and
Home Loan)
$6,315,009
35%
1
Source: Agency records; Inventory by Market Value as of June 30, 2022.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 25, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 3 on the
following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that
1 During our audit period, State law limited commercial paper to 10 percent of the investment
portfolio. According to STO records, during the 12-month period between January 2022 and
December 2022, commercial paper, as a portion of the investment portfolio, exceeded this
maximum limit 4 times. Legislation effective June 1, 2023, eliminated this limit.
9

--- Page 12 ---
STO satisfactorily addressed two of those three findings. The remaining finding
is repeated in this report.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
STO did not determine the propriety of
amounts paid to the Injured Workers’
Insurance Fund for the State’s workers’ Repeated
Finding 1
compensation claims and related costs, a (Current Finding 3)
condition that has been outstanding since
at least 2007.
STO did not refer all delinquent accounts
receivable to the State’s Central
Finding 2 Not Repeated
Collection Unit in accordance with State
regulations.
STO did not publish contract awards
Finding 3 totaling $51.3 million on eMaryland Not Repeated
Marketplace as required.
STO did not periodically review the
propriety of access capabilities assigned
Finding 4 Status Redacted2
to users of three significant information
systems.
Sensitive personally identifiable
Finding 5 information maintained by STO was Status Redacted2
stored without adequate safeguards.
2 Specific information of the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1244(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Financial and Insurance Claims Management System
Background
In November 2016, the Office of the State Treasurer (STO) initiated a Major
Information Technology Development Project (MITDP) to replace its financial
and insurance claims management system (See Figure 4). The Department of
Information Technology (DoIT), which is responsible for MITDP projects,
designated STO to administer the project. STO ultimately contracted with two
vendors to design and develop the system. The first vendor was selected by STO
from a DoIT master contract and in March 2017
STO entered into a one-year contract that included Figure 4
four one-year renewal options totaling $1.3 Project Event Timeline
million with the vendor to serve as a project
Year Event
administrator with responsibility for developing a
2016 MITDP approved
plan to replace the system. Project Administrator
2017
Vendor Hired
The vendor subsequently recommended the 2017 Software Purchased
purchase of a ‘commercial-off-the-shelf’ software Technical Staff Vendor
2018
product that would be customized under the Hired
Source: Agency records
direction of the project administrator using
contracted technical staff. STO purchased the
software product in August 2017 through a DoIT software contract. In September
2018, STO procured another vendor (a one-year contract with 4 one-year renewal
options totaling $5.9 million) to obtain technical staff to work under the direction
of the project administrator.
The replacement system was to include four modules; accounting, insurance
claims, citizen and agency portal, and banking, and although the related contracts
included multi-year renewal options, the system was intended to be implemented
within one year. However, there were issues with the project implementation
which have resulted in significant increases in the cost of the project and delays in
the implementation of the project. STO advised us that the initial project
administrator was replaced at its request in February 2020. There were
performance issues with the replacement project administrator, which ultimately
led to termination of the contract in July 2021. STO did not contract for another
project administrator, and instead took on this function internally. As of June
2022, $11.5 million had been expended on the project (including $1.1 million to
the project administrator and $9.9 million to the technical staff vendor), and the
estimated cost to complete the project was $21.3 million.
11

--- Page 14 ---
We experienced significant delays in obtaining information related to the new
financial and insurance claims system. Specifically, neither STO nor the vendor
were able to provide meaningful information related to this contract that we
deemed necessary to complete our audit, until our fieldwork had been completed.
Our review of the information provided related to the aforementioned
procurements and the associated contract activity disclosed the following
conditions:
Finding 1
STO did not adequately monitor the project administrator responsible for
developing the new financial and insurance claims system and did not pursue
damages when the project encountered severe implementation problems,
delays, and cost increases.
Analysis
STO did not adequately monitor the vendor providing project administration
services for implementation of its new financial and insurance claims system,
which has encountered severe implementation problems, delays, and cost
increases.
• During the period from February 2020 through the contract’s termination in
July 2021 (with three noted exceptions) STO did not obtain contractually-
required status reports that were to be submitted with each monthly invoice to
ensure the project administrator was properly managing implementation of the
new system. The status reports were to track ongoing activities, including
tasks completed and the status of project deliverables and were intended to
disclose issues with the project progress and the status of efforts to resolve
them. STO also had not performed monthly evaluations of the project
administrators’ performance and the resultant deliverables submitted since
August 2019 due to employee turnover. Although STO management advised
that weekly meetings were held with the project administrator vendor, STO
could not document the information provided during these meetings to support
that the vendor was properly managing the project.
• We determined that the project currently is over budget and behind schedule.
As noted in Figure 5 on the following page, the project was initially estimated
to cost $5.2 million and be completed by September 2019. In June 2019 the
STO reported to DoIT that the cost to complete the project had increased and
the completion was approximately 18 months beyond the initial estimate.
According to DoIT’s fiscal year 2022 End-Of-Year Report on Major
Information Technology Development Project Fund, project costs to date
totaled $11.5 million (including the costs of the project administrator,
12

--- Page 15 ---
technical staff, the “commercial off-the-shelf” software, and any
administrative costs), and the estimated total cost to complete had increased to
$21.3 million. Furthermore, as of June 30, 2022, we found that only two of
the four system modules had been implemented, and the project is now
scheduled for completion December 15, 2023.
Figure 5
Increasing Costs of System Implementation Project
Estimates as of Date
Payments to
Date Completion
Date ($) Completion Date
Costs ($)
September 2018 513,600 5.2 million September 2019
June 2019 3.3 million 9.3 million June 2021
June 2022 11.5 million 21.3 million December 2023
Source: Agency records and DoIT reports
• The contract did not provide for liquidated damages, limiting STO’s ability to
recover any damages resulting from ineffectual project administration.3 As
noted above and in the next finding, the project encountered significant delays
and cost overruns (primarily due to increased need for technical staff), certain
of which in our opinion could raise questions about the adequacy of the
project administration. For example, STO processed three contract
modifications totaling $2.4 million, primarily for additional staff and labor
hours, within the first 18 months of the technical staffing contract which could
be the result of inadequate project planning and determination of project
requirements. STO did not determine the extent to which these issues resulted
from the project administrator’s performance and attempt to recover fees paid
for services that were not provided (such as the status reports noted above)
and/or the costs of additional amounts paid to the technical staffing vendor
discussed in the following finding.
In August 2021, DoIT completed a monthly assessment of the project status
and identified several critical areas of concern, including significant project
3 Although it would not have been applicable to this contract, Senate Bill 773 passed during the
2023 legislative session, established enhanced requirements for liquidated damages. For
example, the bill requires the Board of Public Works, in consultation with the Procurement
Improvement Council, to publish a model policy concerning the inclusion and use of liquidated
damages provisions in procurement contracts; requires units of State government to adopt a
written policy that is substantially similar to the Board's policy; requires a unit that decides not to
include a liquidated damages clause to obtain the approval of the head of unit, and document the
decision not to pursue liquidated damages.
13

--- Page 16 ---
delays in design and development and inadequate project schedule
management. In response, the project manager hired by the technical staffing
vendor prepared a project status update in September 2021 attributing these
deficiencies to the project administrator. Specifically, the review disclosed
that the project was months behind schedule, under-funded, and under-staffed.
STO ultimately submitted a re-baseline request (essentially a project
improvement plan) to DoIT, which included a new project schedule, a
schedule of remaining costs, and new spending and staffing plans.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that STO
a. monitor contracted services by obtaining and reviewing required
deliverables, such as project status reports, and formally conduct and
document periodic performance evaluations, as required;
b. determine the feasibility of recovering amounts paid for project
administration for any required deliverables that were not received; and
c. determine the extent to which the project administrator was responsible
for the delays and increased costs and in consultation with legal counsel,
pursue recovery of these costs to the extent practicable.
Finding 2
STO did not sufficiently document several contract modifications to expand
and extend the services of the vendor providing technical staff on the
contract, which precluded STO from effectively monitoring the contract and
validating the related charges.
Analysis
STO did not sufficiently document several contract modifications to expand and
extend the services of the vendor providing technical staff on the contract, which
in our opinion contributed to STO’s inability to effectively monitor the contract
and validate the related charges. As noted in Figure 6 on the following page, as of
April 2022 STO processed six modifications totaling $5.9 million which
increased the cost of the contract from $5,959,910 to $11,842,006. According to
STO, the modifications, which were reported to and subsequently approved by the
14

--- Page 17 ---
Board of Public Works, were necessary to obtain application development experts
due to unforeseen challenges with system implementation.4
Figure 6
Technical Staffing Contract Award and Modifications through April 2022
Contract Award or Dollar Approval
Description
Modification Amount Date
Original Contract Provide programmers to implement new
$5,959,910 9/5/2018
Award system, including 4 one-year renewal options
Add 3 months to the implementation phase;
Modification #1 1,308,947 6/5/2019 hire 2 additional positions and replace 2
positions
Add labor hours to meet date deadline for
Modification #2 628,242 9/4/2019
implementation; hire additional position
Add labor hours to ensure proper data
Modification #3 484,880 1/8/2020
conversion and smooth implementation
Add labor hours for programming support and
Modification #4 192,300 8/5/2020
application development resources
Add labor hours for programming support and
Modification #5 1,496,172 8/12/2020
application development resources
Add additional labor hours and labor categories
Modification #6 1,771,555 9/1/2021
to match actual need
Subtotal - Modifications $5,882,096
Total Contract Award $11,842,006
Source: Agency records
Our review of the modifications disclosed that they omitted critical data, such as
labor categories, the specific number of hours required or anticipated to complete
necessary tasks, related rates, and what specific work would be performed by each
labor category. The original contract included six different labor categories, each
with a different billing rate, varying from $111 per hour up to $218 per hour. As
a result, STO was unable to effectively monitor the work under the modifications
and ensure that it was commensurate with the related costs.
4 STO did not initially seek approval from the Board of Public Works (BPW) for contract
modification #4 which was approved by the Department of General Services. STO subsequently
included this contract modification with other later contract modification requests that were
submitted and approved by BPW.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our test of three invoices totaling approximately $543,000 for services performed
in June 2020, December 2020, and March 2021 disclosed that information
included on the invoices was insufficient for STO to ensure that the 3,379 hours
billed were appropriate for the related tasks performed. In addition, while the
invoices included descriptions of tasks completed by each of the technical staff
along with the associated number of hours charged, it was not clear whether the
work was performed by contractor staff in the appropriate labor category or billed
to the appropriate labor category. We also identified charges totaling
approximately $455,000 for 8 technical staff who were not included in the
contractor’s original proposal. STO was unable to provide documentation that it
had approved these substitutions.
As a result of the aforementioned conditions there was a lack of assurance that
amounts paid to the technical staffing vendor were proper and the related work
was performed by appropriate and qualified personnel.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that STO
a. ensure that all contract modifications include sufficient details to permit
it to adequately monitor and evaluate the related work performed and
costs billed, and
b. document its review and approval of changes in contractor personnel.
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund
Background
Under the terms of a 1990 contract (most recently modified in November 2001),
between the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund (IWIF) and the Board of Public
Works (BPW), IWIF is the third-party administrator5 and provides claims
processing services for workers’ compensation claims filed by State employees,
for which the State is self-insured. The contract provides that STO is responsible
for administering the contract on behalf of BPW.
State law also requires the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) to conduct
audits of IWIF every five years to determine whether the State is receiving
5 Effective October 1, 2013, Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company (CEIC), a private, non-
stock, nonprofit insurer, was established and became the State’s insurer of last resort for
workers’ compensation. In accordance with State law, IWIF continues to serve as the third-party
administrator until it no longer has any employees. As of October 2021, IWIF continued to exist
with 146 employees.
16

--- Page 19 ---
effective administrative services at a reasonable cost. The audit scope used by
MIA with input from STO includes a review of:
• The STO agreement with IWIF,
• Administrative expenses allocated to IWIF to be paid by the State,
• Internal controls over claims processing and the propriety of claim payments,
and
• Subrogation processes.
MIA is required to report the results of the IWIF audit to STO. We were advised
by MIA personnel that the audit primarily focuses on transactions that occurred
within the latest year of the audit cycle.
Finding 3
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF for the State’s
workers’ compensation claims and related costs, and did not follow up on
deficiencies noted in MIA audits.
Analysis
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF for the State’s
workers’ compensation claims and related costs, and did not follow up on
deficiencies noted in MIA audits. Payments to IWIF totaled $350.5 million for
fiscal years 2019 through 2022, consisting of claims costs ($290.4 million),
administrative costs ($59.0 million), and other adjustments ($1.1 million).
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF. Beginning in
April 2019, IWIF provided various reports of claims activity and administrative
costs to STO in accordance with the aforementioned contract. However, STO did
not use the reports provided or perform any other verification procedures to
confirm that the amounts reported by IWIF were for valid payments made on
behalf of State employees who suffered work-related injuries, and that
administrative fees and other claims-related charges were accurate and supported.
STO also had not taken any action to implement six recommendations made by
MIA in its June 2018 audit report of IWIF, including five recommendations that
were repeated from MIA’s previous audit. For example, although MIA
recommended that the IWIF contract be amended to reflect the current cost
methodology used by IWIF for calculating administrative fees, and to include
caps on the fees to ensure that they remain fair and reasonable, no action had been
taken by STO to ensure implementation of this recommendation.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Similar conditions regarding the verification of amounts paid to IWIF were noted
in our five preceding audit reports dating back to 2007. In response to our June
2019 report, STO agreed with our findings and indicated that it had implemented
the related recommendations to ensure the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF. As
noted above, although STO obtained certain information from IWIF during the
audit period, it did not use this information to ensure amounts paid to IWIF were
proper.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that STO
a. establish a documented process, such as verifying charges reported by
IWIF to supporting documentation, to determine the propriety of
amounts paid to IWIF for the State’s workers’ compensation claims and
related administrative costs (repeat); and
b. take appropriate action to address recommendations made by MIA in its
audit reports of IWIF, including those noted above.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 4 through 7 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with STO’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the State Treasurer
(STO) for the period beginning March 28, 2018 and ending July 31, 2021. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine STO’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, investments,
monitoring State agency bank accounts, reconciling the State’s bank accounts,
monitoring payments to the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund, and the State
Insurance Program. The audit also included information systems security and
control. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding
audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of March 28, 2018 to July 31, 2021, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
Furthermore, the timing of our audit fieldwork was impacted by delays in
receiving certain information and the extensive turnover in STO leadership.
Specifically, during the course of our audit we experienced significant delays in
obtaining information related to the new financial and insurance claims system
discussed in findings 1 and 2 of this report, most of which was received after we
completed our fieldwork. In our opinion, these delays were exacerbated by the
turnover in STO leadership and management employees responsible for numerous
areas addressed by our audit.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of STO’s operations. Generally,
20

--- Page 23 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from STO’s automated financial record keeping system for the purpose of
testing banking and insurance transactions. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
STO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to STO, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect STO’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to STO that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to STO and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
STO’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise STO regarding the results of our review of its
response.
22

--- Page 25 ---
APPENDIX
MARYLAND STATE TREASURER
Dereck E. Davis
August 21, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook,
Along with this letter you will find responses from the State Treasurer’s Office (STO)
with regards to the fiscal compliance audit of the STO for the period of March 28, 2018,
through July 21, 2021.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the members of the Office of Legislative
Audits, who spent a great deal of time and effort preparing the audit. They were an
impressive, professional team and we appreciate their attention and concern.
I recognize that there were some difficulties in collecting documents from our divisions
as we were experiencing an unprecedented number of vacancies and we are grateful for
your patience. I would like to acknowledge, however, the outstanding STO employees
who have continued to accomplish so much, despite limited staff and resources.
Sincerely,
Dereck E. Davis
Treasurer
Goldstein Treasury Building • 80 Calvert Street • Annapolis, Maryland 21401

--- Page 26 ---
Office of the State Treasurer
Agency Response Form
Financial and Insurance Claims Management System
Finding 1
STO did not adequately monitor the project administrator responsible for developing the
new financial and insurance claims system and did not pursue damages when the project
encountered severe implementation problems, delays, and cost increases.
We recommend that STO
a. monitor contracted services by obtaining and reviewing required deliverables, such as
project status reports, and formally conduct and document periodic performance
evaluations, as required;
b. determine the feasibility of recovering amounts paid for project administration for any
required deliverables that were not received; and
c. determine the extent to which the project administrator was responsible for the delays
and increased costs and in consultation with legal counsel, pursue recovery of these
costs to the extent practicable.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide STO agrees to the analysis and has no concerns with factual
additional comments as accuracy
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Ongoing
Please provide details of STO agrees to adequately monitor all contracted Project
corrective action or Management services by obtaining and reviewing project status
explain disagreement. reports, and formally conducting and documenting manager
performance evaluations. Project status reports are currently being
held on a weekly/bi-weekly basis, which reviews timeline, budget
and progress. The contract in question has since expired.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of There was not a provision for collecting liquidated damages in the
corrective action or contract in question. STO has since met with Counsel to establish
explain disagreement. language for future contracts.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of There was not a provision for collecting liquidated damages in the
corrective action or contract in question. STO has since met with Counsel to establish
explain disagreement. language for future contracts. The contract that employed the
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 27 ---
Office of the State Treasurer
Agency Response Form
former project manager responsible for the delays and lack of
deliverables expired in March 2022.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 28 ---
Office of the State Treasurer
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
STO did not sufficiently document several contract modifications to expand and extend the
services of the vendor providing technical staff on the contract, which precluded STO from
effectively monitoring the contract and validating the related charges.
We recommend that STO
a. ensure that all contract modifications include sufficient details to permit it to
adequately monitor and evaluate the related work performed and costs billed, and
b. document its review and approval of changes in contractor personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide STO agrees to the analysis and has no concerns with factual
additional comments as accuracy
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of All staff involved in this contract have left STO and the contract has
corrective action or been handed over to Operations where it has undergone an internal
explain disagreement. audit. The last modification (9/2022) was a reflection of the
necessary cleanup to bring the contract into compliance. The Office
has also put in review and approval processes to ensure that the
timesheets are reviewed and matched against hourly rates each
month.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/15/2023
Please provide details of STO began a new communication with the vendor to approve all
corrective action or project personnel and in many cases are involved in the interview
explain disagreement. process. Additionally, an email is sent once a contractor has left the
project. This contract is due to expire September 2023.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 29 ---
Office of the State Treasurer
Agency Response Form
Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund
Finding 3
STO did not determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF for the State’s workers’
compensation claims and related costs, and did not follow up on deficiencies noted in MIA
audits.
We recommend that STO
a. establish a documented process, such as verifying charges reported by IWIF to
supporting documentation, to determine the propriety of amounts paid to IWIF for the
State’s workers’ compensation claims and related administrative costs (repeat); and
b. take appropriate action to address recommendations made by MIA in its audit reports
of IWIF, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide STO agrees to the analysis and has no concerns with factual accuracy.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2023
Please provide details of The Director of Finance at STO has been meeting with the Senior
corrective action or Accounting Manager at IWIF to discuss the State’s workers’
explain disagreement. compensation program and review claims and expenses.
It is worth noting that a public accounting firm that specializes in
insurance, conducts an annual audit of IWIF, which includes
various tests of controls as well as an audit of the Schedule of Claims
Administration Activity for the State of Maryland, a supplemental
schedule in IWIF’s financial statements. The audit report with the
Schedule is provided to STO and GAD annually.
As part of the State’s audit of their Annual Comprehensive
Financial Report (ACFR), additional tests of controls are performed
of State claim transactions to verify items such as: the claim is
compensable, the documentation of approvals are maintained, and
the transactions included in the financial records are valid and
supported. The STO was included in conversations with IWIF
regarding the testing and there have been no control issues noted.
We will continue to work with IWIF and the State’s auditor during
the annual audit as well as IWIF management to test claims
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 30 ---
Office of the State Treasurer
Agency Response Form
expenses on a sample basis and we will document evidence of our
review.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2024
Please provide details of The primary recommendation in the IWIF audit is for the State and
corrective action or IWIF to update the agreement. An updated agreement would
explain disagreement. specify additional services provided by IWIF, funding requirements,
reporting dates, administrative fees, and our intent to either
continue or discontinue catastrophic loss protection. We will work
with IWIF to establish a new agreement. We expect this will be a
time-consuming endeavor and we will pursue allocating internal
resources to assist with a new contract.
Other recommendations have been discussed with IWIF.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 31 ---
Office of the State Treasurer
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
OLA has determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section, including
Findings 4 through 7 related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government
Article 2-1224(i). Although, the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with STO’s responses, have been redacted from this report copy,
STO’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 32 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Stephen R. Alexander, CFE
Tari J. Covington
Lindsay M. Dunn, CPA
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Staff Auditors