Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center and Joseph D. Brandenburg Center

NOTE: The Joseph D. Brandenburg Center closed on June 30, 2011.
Date: 05/23/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d72456067440c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:45:10.862739
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center
and
Joseph D. Brandenburg Center
May 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center, located in Cumberland, Maryland,
provides mental health services to adults in the State of Maryland. According to
its records, during fiscal year 2011, the Thomas B. Finan Center had a licensed
capacity of 110 resident patients, was budgeted for an average daily population of
88 resident patients, and had an actual average daily population of 82 resident
patients. According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2011 operating
expenditures for the Finan Center totaled approximately $17.9 million. The
Thomas B. Finan Center provided various support services (for example, payroll,
purchasing, and maintenance of accounting records) for the Joseph D.
Brandenburg Center.
Prior to June 30, 2011, the Joseph D. Brandenburg Center, located on the grounds
of the Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center, provided residential care, treatment, and
support to citizens who were developmentally disabled. It had a licensed capacity
of 25 resident patients, and a daily budgeted and actual population of 6 resident
patients. During fiscal year 2011, the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(DHMH) closed the Brandenburg Center and transferred the patient population to
other facilities commensurate with individual patient needs. A decision was made
to consolidate DHMH’s mental hygiene facilities due to a reduction in the number
of patients requiring services and to eliminate the costs to maintain these
facilities. According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2011 operating
expenditures for the Brandenburg Center totaled approximately $2.6 million.
Asset Liquidation
As of February 2, 2012, the liquidation of Joseph D. Brandenburg Center
equipment was finalized and all equipment items were transferred to other
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene facilities. Prior to the facility’s
closure, the Center’s equipment had a total cost of approximately $305,000.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated December 17, 2008. We determined that the Centers
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement of Goods and Services
Finding 1
The Thomas B. Finan Center lacked documentation, in certain instances, to
support its compliance with State Procurement Regulations.
Analysis
The Thomas B. Finan Center lacked documentation, in certain instances, to
support its compliance with State Procurement Regulations. Specifically, our test
of 20 payments, totaling approximately $263,000, disclosed that the Center did
not have required documentation to support the procurement process, such as
written solicitations and sole source justifications, for 10 payments totaling
approximately $96,000. We were advised by the Finan Center’s management that
these purchases were primarily awarded as sole source or emergency
procurements; however, this determination and the basis for these procurements
were not documented in writing, as required. The 10 payments ranged from
$5,100 to $19,500 and the total value of the related procurements was
approximately $127,000.
Furthermore, for 4 of the aforementioned 10 payments, the Finan Center’s
representation that they were sole source procurements appeared questionable
because we noted that other vendors provided similar goods or services.
State Procurement Regulations generally require that competitive bids be obtained
for all procurements over $5,000 and that the reasons for sole source and
emergency procurements be documented in writing. According to the State’s
records, the Finan Center purchased goods and services totaling approximately $3
million during fiscal year 2011. These purchases included procurements both
over and under $5,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Finan Center comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the State Procurement Regulations.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 2
Corporate purchasing cards were not promptly cancelled for terminated
employees.
Analysis
Corporate purchasing cards were not promptly cancelled for individuals who were
no longer employed by the Centers. Our test of 33 cards issued to employees who
terminated employment with the Centers during the audit period disclosed that 20
of the cards were not promptly cancelled. Specifically, these accounts remained
active for at least 9 days and up to 8 months after the employees left the Centers.
We determined that credit card charges were not incurred by these employees
subsequent to their departures.
According to the bank’s records, as of June 30, 2011, the Finan Center had 10
active corporate purchasing cards and the related expenditures for both Centers
totaled approximately $238,000 during fiscal year 2011.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Finan Center promptly cancel any corporate
purchasing cards issued to individuals no longer employed by the Center.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center and the Joseph D.
Brandenburg Center of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for the
period beginning July 1, 2008 and ending June 30, 2011. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Centers’
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included disbursements for the Centers’ operating
expenditures, as well as payroll and pharmaceutical inventories. Since the Joseph
D. Brandenburg Center closed on June 30, 2011, our audit also included a review
of the procedures used by the Brandenburg Center and the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene with respect to its closing (such as equipment liquidation and
discharged patient funds). Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate
personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of the Centers’
operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this
report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but
were not independently verified.
The Centers’ managements are responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Centers’
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also
includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Centers that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, on behalf of
the Centers, to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results
of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Thomas B. Finan Center and Joseph D. Brandenburg Center
Legislative Draft Audit Report: Findings and Responses
Finding 1
The Thomas B. Finan Center lacked documentation, in certain instances, to support
its compliance with State Procurement Regulations.
Auditor’s Recommendation
We recommend that the Finan Center comply with the aforementioned requirements of
the State Procurement Regulations.
Center’s Response
The Center concurs with the recommendation. The Center will procure goods and
services utilizing proper procurement methods and maintain appropriate records.
Competitive bids, emergency purchases and sole justification will be properly utilized
and appropriate records maintained. All current Maintenance contracts scheduled for
renewal will be reviewed and appropriate records maintained by June 30, 2012. The
major expense of $19,500 was for anti-ligature doorknobs to replace the old style knobs
that had become a patient safety issue. Examples of the other questionable procurements
were for dietary equipment repairs, and fire alarm maintenance. The Center will do a
better job of documenting the procurements and maintaining the proper paperwork for
audit review.
Finding 2
Corporate purchasing cards were not promptly cancelled for terminated employees.
Auditor’s Recommendation
We recommend that the Finan Center promptly cancel any corporate purchasing
cards issued to individuals no longer employed by the Center.
Center’s Response
We concur with the recommendation. The Center will promptly process the appropriate
paper work through DHMH General Accounting to cancel any corporate purchasing card
for any employee who separates from service at the Center. The Center did collect all
cards before the employees departed and cut them into small pieces. No charges were
placed on any of the cards that had not been cancelled. Lastly, there are no cards for
departed personnel that have not been cancelled.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Lauren R. Crue
Senior Auditor
Daniel R. Brann
Staff Auditor