Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, Baltimore County
Date: 03/23/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d724560674740
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:57:47.550863
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
March 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Student Residency
Finding 1 – UMBC Had Not Established Sufficient Controls Over 9
Changes to Student Residency Status Determinations
Payroll
Finding 2 – UMBC Did Not Ensure That Employees Appearing on 10
Multiple State Payrolls Were Adequately Investigated
Finding 3 – Human Resource and Payroll Capabilities Assigned to 11
Individuals on the Financial Management Systems Were Not
Adequately Restricted
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – The UMBC Network Was Not Sufficiently Secured 12
Student Financial Aid
Finding 5 – UMBC Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Financial Aid 13
Transactions Posted to Student Accounts
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 6 – UMBC Did Not Always Comply With Certain Corporate 15
Purchasing Card Requirements and Related Procurement Policies
and Procedures
Disbursements
Finding 7 – Proper Internal Controls Were Not Established Over the 16
Processing of Disbursement Transactions
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC)
March 2016
 Changes to student residency status were not always verified for
propriety and certain employees had unnecessary access to the financial
management system that allowed them to record changes to student
residency. Proper residency status for each student is critical to ensure
that the proper amount of tuition (in-state or out-of-state) is charged
(Finding 1).
UMBC should ensure that reviews of student residency changes include
residency changes made by all departments and that user access capabilities
are restricted to those employees that require such access.
 Controls over the payroll process could be improved as UMBC did not
ensure that employees on multiple state payrolls were adequately
investigated nor ensure that human resource and payroll capabilities
assigned to employees on the financial management systems were
adequately restricted (Findings 2 and 3).
UMBC should investigate employees on multiple state payrolls and document
their efforts and ensure user access capabilities are adequately restricted.
 UMBC’s network was not adequately secured. For example, intrusion
prevention systems were not in place to protect the network from risks
associated with encrypted traffic (Finding 4).
UMBC should take the recommended actions to adequately secure the
network.
 UMBC did not ensure that employee capabilities on the financial
management system were adequately restricted to prevent improper
financial aid transactions and also did not establish additional controls to
ensure the propriety of certain financial aid transactions posted to
student accounts (Findings 5).
UMBC should take the recommended actions to improve controls over
financial aid transactions.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 UMBC did not always comply with corporate purchasing card
requirements and related procurement policies and procedures nor
establish necessary safeguards to prevent unauthorized disbursement
transactions from being processed (Findings 6 and 7).
UMBC should comply with the corporate purchasing card requirements and
the related procurement policies and procedures and also establish appropriate
controls over disbursement transactions.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) is a comprehensive
public research institution of the University System of Maryland and operates
under the jurisdiction of the System’s Board of Regents. UMBC offers a broad
range of baccalaureate, graduate, and doctoral programs in the liberal arts,
sciences, and engineering disciplines. Student enrollment for the Fall 2015
semester totaled 13,839, including 11,243 undergraduate students and 2,596
graduate students. UMBC’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as
tuition and fees and a State general fund appropriation, as well as restricted
revenues, such as federal grants and contracts. According to the State’s
accounting records, UMBC’s revenues for fiscal year 2015 totaled approximately
$404 million, which included a State general fund appropriation of approximately
$103 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 8, 2012. We determined that UMBC
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Residency
Finding 1
Controls over changes to student residency status were not sufficient.
Analysis
The University System of Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, Baltimore
County (UMBC) did not establish sufficient controls over changes to the student
residency status (in-state or out-of-state) recorded in student accounts. Accurate
student residency determinations are critical because of the significant differences
between in-state and out-of-state student tuition rates. For example, the
undergraduate tuition for Maryland residents was $5,192 for the Spring 2015
semester, whereas the undergraduate tuition rate for out-of-state students was
$11,341.
 Although output reports of student residency changes were available for
supervisory review and approval, these reports were not used to verify the
propriety of changes made by all departments. Specifically, only changes
made by the Registrar’s Office were reviewed for propriety. Consequently,
UMBC lacked assurance that all student residency changes made were
appropriate. According to a report prepared by UMBC at our request, there
were 7,149 changes made from out-of-state to in-state residency status during
our audit period, of which 6,862 were made in departments for which the
verification process had not been performed. Our testing did not disclose any
improper residency status changes.
 UMBC did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on the financial
management systems were adequately restricted to prevent improper student
residency transactions. For example, 44 users could record changes to a
student’s residency status even though the users did not require that capability
to perform their job duties.
USM’s Board of Regents’ Policy on Student Classification for Admission and
Tuition Purposes states that a student requesting a change in residency status must
submit a USM Petition for Change in Classification for Tuition along with
supporting evidence that provides clear and convincing evidence of his or her
residency status, such as a valid Maryland driver’s license. Additionally, the
UMBC policy requires that changes to a student’s residency status be subject to
the review and approval of UMBC officials.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMBC
a. review the output reports for student residency changes made by all
departments, at least on a test basis;
b. document these reviews; and
c. restrict user access capabilities to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their job duties, and remove the aforementioned
unnecessary access capabilities.
Payroll
Finding 2
UMBC did not ensure that employees on multiple State payrolls were
adequately investigated.
Analysis
UMBC did not ensure that employees appearing on quarterly reports received
from the Comptroller of Maryland’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) of employees
simultaneously on multiple State payrolls (for example, worked for both UMBC
and another State agency) were adequately investigated. These investigations
should review the propriety of the payroll payments for simultaneous periods
worked. Although UMBC’s Payroll Department reviewed the reports, identified
the departments in which such employees worked, and directed those departments
to investigate the propriety of the dual employment and return a verification form
to certify the departments’ completion of the investigations, the Payroll
Department did not monitor the departments to ensure verification forms were
returned. In addition, the Payroll Department did not include for investigation
employees who appeared on the reports, but were terminated at the time the
reports were reviewed. Consequently, the propriety of payroll payments to these
former employees during the time of their employment was not investigated.
The CPB report for the fourth quarter of calendar year 2014 included 123 UMBC
employees identified as working at UMBC and another State agency. As of April
2015, 85 of these employees, including 18 terminated employees, had not been
fully investigated by UMBC to ensure that the employees were not receiving
payment twice for the same work hours. Based on the State’s records, during
calendar year 2014, 154 UMBC employees received payments totaling
approximately $2.9 million from UMBC and other State agencies during the same
pay periods. The appearance of these employees does not necessarily indicate a
problem since there may not have been overlapping hours reported to have been
worked at UMBC and the other State agencies.
10

--- Page 13 ---
CPB has directed State agencies to investigate all employees appearing on the
quarterly reports to ensure that they were not claiming hours for multiple jobs
during the same time periods. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year
2014, UMBC’s payroll expenditures totaled approximately $216 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMBC
a. monitor departments to ensure that investigations of employees on
multiple payrolls are completed in a timely manner,
b. retain documentation to support these monitoring efforts, and
c. include in the investigations employees who had been terminated.
Finding 3
UMBC did not ensure that human resource and payroll capabilities assigned
to individuals on the financial management systems were adequately
restricted.
Analysis
UMBC did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on the financial
management systems were adequately restricted to prevent improper payroll
transactions. Our review of 7 critical functions related to human resources and
payroll determined that 19 system users were assigned unnecessary access to one
or more of the critical functions. For example, 15 users could enter leave balance
adjustments even though the users did not require this access for their job duties.
USM’s IT Security Standards specify that institutions are responsible for ensuring
that access rights reflect employee status, including changes in employee status.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMBC restrict user access capabilities for critical
functions to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their
assigned job duties, and remove the aforementioned unnecessary access
capabilities.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
UMBC’s Division of Information Technology (DOIT) manages the development,
maintenance, and support of UMBC’s information technology infrastructure
including support for academic teaching and research, networking, and business
information systems. DOIT maintains a campus-wide network that supports both
administrative and academic operations. The network includes internet
connectivity, email, and various administrative systems and servers. DOIT
maintains critical campus-wide applications, including financial, student
administration, and human resources applications.
Finding 4
The UMBC network was not sufficiently secured.
Analysis
The UMBC network was not sufficiently secured.
 Although the network-based intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS)
used by UMBC had the capability to decrypt and analyze encrypted network
traffic received, this feature was not enabled. Furthermore, we determined
that host-based intrusion protection systems (HIPS) were not in use on
UMBC’s servers that processed encrypted traffic. The absence of IDPS
coverage for such encrypted traffic created a network security risk as such
traffic could contain malicious exploits which would not be detected.
Complete IDPS coverage includes the use of a properly-configured, network-
based IDPS that analyzes encrypted traffic, and/or the use of a HIPS on
critical servers, to aid significantly in the detection and prevention of, and
response to, potential network security breaches and attacks.
 A shared administrator account, to which four employees had access, was
used to administer several critical UMBC firewalls and the device hosting
these firewalls. Allowing multiple employees to share the same account
precludes accountability for administrative actions performed on the device
and its hosted firewalls and is prohibited by the USM IT Security Standards.
 Password controls over administrative user access to the aforementioned
firewalls and the device hosting these firewalls were inadequate. Our review
disclosed that password requirements for length, complexity, age, and history
were not implemented although the device hosting these firewalls had that
capability. The USM IT Security Standards establish requirements for
password length, complexity, age, and history.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 Access control rules on a network device allowed unnecessary connections to
a network segment hosting numerous critical servers, thereby placing these
servers at risk. The USM IT Security Standards state that firewalls should be
configured to block all services not required and disable unused ports.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMBC
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks from encrypted network traffic and identify how IDPS and/or HIPS
coverage should be best applied to its network and implement this
coverage;
b. discontinue the use of shared accounts to administer its firewalls and
devices and create and use individual accounts for administrators;
c. implement password control settings for these firewalls and the device
hosting these firewalls so that, at a minimum, they comply with the
aforementioned USM IT Security Standards’ requirements, and
d. configure its network control devices to limit access to only required
servers over necessary ports.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 5
UMBC did not ensure the propriety of financial aid transactions posted to
student accounts.
Analysis
Adequate controls had not been established to ensure the propriety of financial aid
transactions posted to student accounts.
 UMBC did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on the financial
management systems were adequately restricted to prevent improper financial
aid transactions. Our review of 20 critical functions related to student
financial aid determined that 14 system users were assigned unnecessary
access to one or more of the critical functions or were assigned incompatible
capabilities. For example, 13 users could add financial aid awards to the
system and disburse the awards to students.
 For athletic and honors scholarships, the initial award amounts posted to
student accounts were not independently reviewed for propriety since the
13

--- Page 16 ---
employees responsible for performing these reviews could also post and
change award amounts.
 For federal direct loans, the employee responsible for reviewing the propriety
of flags posted to and removed from student accounts and for certifying
verification audits required by the United States Department of Education
(DOE) was not independent since the employee could also record and remove
flags, and was responsible for conducting the DOE required reviews of
student eligibility. UMBC places flags on student accounts in certain
circumstances, such as failure to maintain satisfactory academic progress, to
prevent additional financial aid from being posted to the student’s account.
Also, at the direction of DOE, UMBC completes, on a test basis, verification
audits of selected federal financial aid application data submitted by students
to ensure students meet eligibility requirements. These verification audits are
an integral part of the process to ensure the propriety of financial aid awards
made.
According to UMBC’s records, during academic year 2014, financial aid awarded
to students totaled approximately $93.0 million, including athletic and honors
scholarships totaling $18.4 million and federal direct loans totaling $47.7 million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMBC
a. restrict user access capabilities to perform critical financial aid functions
to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their
assigned job duties, in a manner that ensures the proper segregation of
duties;
b. ensure that supervisory personnel independent of the financial aid award
process verify, at least on a test basis, the propriety of athletic and honors
financial aid awards posted to student accounts;
c. ensure that such verifications are documented; and
d. ensure that the employee responsible for reviewing the propriety of flags
posted to and removed from student accounts and for certifying the
review of DOE verification audits cannot also record or remove flags or
conduct the reviews.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 6
UMBC did not always comply with corporate purchasing card requirements
and related procurement policies and procedures.
Analysis
UMBC did not always comply with corporate purchasing card (CPC)
requirements and related procurement policies and procedures. According to the
issuing bank’s records, as of March 2015, corporate purchasing cards had been
issued to 269 employees, and the related expenditures totaled approximately
$15.8 million during fiscal year 2014.
 Our review disclosed that, during our audit period, UMBC repeatedly
procured chemicals from one vendor, totaling approximately $520,000,
without consolidating and soliciting competitive bids and entering into a
written contract as required. In this regard, most of these purchases were
made by employees in various UMBC science and engineering departments
who repeatedly purchased chemicals from this vendor using corporate
purchasing cards. Although the individual purchases were valued at $5,000 or
less (the level requiring bids), combined purchases to this vendor for these
chemicals significantly exceeded this level. Also, since the purchases were
not consolidated, UMBC’s leverage as a high-volume purchaser may not have
been maximized.
 CPC bank statements were not always approved as required. Our review of
11 monthly bank statements during fiscal year 2015, with purchases totaling
approximately $399,000, disclosed that 4 of the bank statements, with
purchases totaling approximately $168,000, were not properly signed by both
the cardholder’s immediate supervisor and the cardholder. A documented
review of bank statements and the corresponding documentation of
expenditures incurred is critical because UMBC obtained an exemption from
the Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division from requiring
its fiscal officer to review the monthly cardholder activity logs, which would
have provided a secondary review of the CPC transactions. That exemption
was granted, in part, because of control procedures that were purportedly in
place, including the review of the bank statements.
The USM Procurement Policies and Procedures requires that contracts for goods
or services of $5,000 or more be awarded based on competitive bidding. The
corporate purchase card program is not intended to replace current State
procurement regulations or internal agency policies. In addition, the Comptroller
15

--- Page 18 ---
of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures
Manual and UMBC’s Purchasing Card Program Policies and Procedures require
that supervisory personnel examine supporting documentation for expenditures
made to ensure that they are appropriate, and document that review by signing,
along with the cardholder, the related bank statements.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMBC
a. consolidate procurements of similar goods to maximize buying power,
when possible, and ensure that these procurements comply with the USM
Procurement Policies and Procedures; and
b. ensure that bank statements are reviewed and signed by both the
cardholder’s immediate supervisor and the cardholder, as required.
Disbursements
Finding 7
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of
disbursement transactions.
Analysis
UMBC did not adequately restrict user access capabilities and establish necessary
safeguards to prevent unauthorized disbursement transactions from being
processed. Specifically, three employees responsible for reviewing and approving
disbursement batches, generating and approving the related disbursement
transmittal lists, and releasing those batches to the Comptroller of Maryland’s
General Accounting Division (GAD) for payment, could also add or modify
vendors in the system and alter the transmittal file (posted transactions) prior to
releasing the batches to GAD. As a result, unauthorized disbursements could be
processed without detection. According to the State’s accounting records, UMBC
processed disbursements totaling approximately $94.2 million during fiscal year
2014. Our test of invoice payments processed did not disclose any inappropriate
or erroneous transactions.
According to industry best practices, as described by the State of Maryland
Information Security Policy, State agencies are responsible for ensuring
separation of duties and assigning appropriate system permissions and
responsibilities for agency system users.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMBC ensure that the employees responsible for
approving and releasing disbursement transactions for payment be denied
the capability to alter those transactions, including modifications to the
related vendors.
17

--- Page 20 ---
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) for the
period beginning July 1, 2011 and ending March 18, 2015. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMBC’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements related to UMBC’s
operations, student accounts receivable, cash receipts, payroll, contracts and
grants, information security over UMBC computer applications, and student
financial aid. We also determined the status of the findings included in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMBC by the USM
Office. These support services (such as bond financing) are included within the
scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of UMBC’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including the components of the USM.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
UMBC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the items were selected.
19

--- Page 22 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from UMBC’s financial systems for the
purpose of testing certain areas, such as student accounts receivable and financial
aid. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
UMBC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMBC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMBC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMBC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
20

--- Page 23 ---
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
21

--- Page 25 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY
JULY 1, 2011 TO MARCH 18, 2015
Student Residency
Finding 1
Controls over changes to student residency status were not sufficient.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMBC
a. review the output reports for student residency changes made by all
departments, at least on a test basis;
b. document these reviews; and
c. restrict user access capabilities to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their job duties, and remove the aforementioned
unnecessary access capabilities.
University response
We concur and effective immediately, we have taken the following action:
a. Reviewed, on a test basis, the output reports for student residence changes
made by all departments;
b. documented these reviews; and,
c. restricted user access capabilities to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their job duties, and remove unnecessary access
capabilities.
Payroll
Finding 2
UMBC did not ensure that employees on multiple State payrolls were
adequately investigated.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMBC
a. monitor departments to ensure that investigations of employees on
multiple payrolls are completed in a timely manner,
b. retain documentation to support these monitoring efforts, and
c. include in the investigations employees who had been terminated.

--- Page 26 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY
JULY 1, 2011 TO MARCH 18, 2015
University response
We partially concur.
The University System of Maryland (USM) recently distributed guidance
detailing system-wide procedures and protocols for dual-employment situations.
Based on this guidance, faculty (including lecturers & adjuncts) appearing on
more than one state agency payroll listings of all categories, are to be excluded
from the investigation requirement. In addition, this guidance provides that
employees who are terminated as of the date the report is received are excluded
from further investigation
Excluding faculty and separated employees significantly decreases the number of
employees to be investigated. With this guidance, the UMBC employees
identified on the cited CPB report would be reduced from 123 to 40. Out of those
remaining 40, we were able to successfully investigate and verify 21.
Going forward, we will proceed as follows:
a. Monitor the departments to ensure the investigations are completed in a timely
manner per the USM guidance;
b. Retain documentation to support these monitoring efforts; and
c. In accordance with USM guidance, we will investigate terminated employees
unless a terminated or separated employee has previously appeared on the
dual-employment reports during the current year, and were successfully
investigated, that employee need not be investigated again.
Finding 3
UMBC did not ensure that human resources and payroll capabilities
assigned to individuals on the financial management systems were
adequately restricted.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMBC restrict user access capabilities for critical
functions to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their
assigned job duties, and remove the aforementioned unnecessary access
capabilities.

--- Page 27 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY
JULY 1, 2011 TO MARCH 18, 2015
University response
We concur.
We have (i) restricted user access capabilities for critical functions to those who
require such capabilities to perform their duties and (ii) removed the unnecessary
access capabilities.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
The UMBC network was not sufficiently secured.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMBC
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks from encrypted network traffic and identify how IDPS and/or HIPS
coverage should be best applied to its network and implement this
coverage;
b. discontinue the use of shared accounts to administer its firewalls and
devices and create and use individual accounts for administrators;
c. implement password control settings for these firewalls and the device
hosting these firewalls so that, at a minimum, they comply with the
aforementioned USM IT Security Standards’ requirements, and
d. configure its network control devices to limit access to only required
servers over necessary ports.
University response
We concur and have taken the following action:
a. Performed a document review and assessment of network security risks
from encrypted network traffic and implemented SSL inspections through
our IDPS to address these risks.
b. Discontinued the use of shared accounts and assigned individual accounts
to all individuals who are authorized to make administrative changes on
our firewalls;
c. Enabled the vendor password complexity feature on our firewalls to
ensure our passwords meet USM requirements, and
d. Reviewed and updated our network access controls to limit access to only
required servers over necessary ports.

--- Page 28 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY
JULY 1, 2011 TO MARCH 18, 2015
Student Financial Aid
Finding 5
UMBC did not ensure the propriety of financial aid transactions posted to
student accounts.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMBC
a. restrict user access capabilities to perform critical financial aid
functions to those employees who require such capabilities to perform
their assigned job duties, in a manner that ensures the proper
segregation of duties;
b. ensure that supervisory personnel independent of the financial aid
award process verify, at least on a test basis, the propriety of athletic
and honors financial aid awards posted to student accounts;
c. ensure that such verifications are documented; and
d. ensure that the employee responsible for reviewing the propriety of
flags posted to and removed from student accounts and for certifying
the review of DOE verification audits cannot also record or remove
flags or conduct the reviews.
University response
We concur and have taken the following action:
a. User access capabilities for critical functions have been restricted to those
employees who require such capabilities to perform their assigned job duties
and in a manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties.
b. Supervisory personnel independent of the financial aid award process are
verifying, at least on a test basis, the propriety of initial financial aid awards
posted to student accounts.
c. The above verifications are being documented; and
d. The employee responsible for reviewing the propriety of flags posted to
student accounts and for certifying the review of DOE verification audits
cannot also record flags and conduct the reviews.

--- Page 29 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY
JULY 1, 2011 TO MARCH 18, 2015
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 6
UMBC did not always comply with corporate purchasing card requirements
and related procurement policies and procedures.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMBC
a. consolidate procurements of similar goods to maximize buying power,
when possible, and ensure that these procurements comply with the USM
Procurement Policies and Procedures; and
b. ensure that bank statements are reviewed and signed by both the
cardholder’s immediate supervisor and the cardholder, as required.
University response
a. We concur. We conducted a competitive procurement and issued the contract
for the purchase of chemicals that maximizes our buying power and complies
with the USM Procurement Policies & Procedures.
b. We concur. While the 4 activity logs cited were signed by both the
cardholder’s immediate supervisor and the cardholder, we will re-emphasize
that the bank statements must also be signed in our P-Card holder and
supervisor training as well as during our new cardholder reviews.
Disbursements
Finding 7
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of
disbursement transactions.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMBC ensure that the employees responsible for
approving and releasing disbursement transactions for payment be denied
the capability to alter those transactions, including modifications to the
related vendors.

--- Page 30 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY
JULY 1, 2011 TO MARCH 18, 2015
University response
We concur. By the start of the Fall 2016 semester, the function of approving and
releasing disbursement transactions for payment will be transitioned to an
independent alternative area. The individuals responsible for approving and
releasing disbursements will not have the capability to alter those transactions,
including modifications to the related vendors.

--- Page 31 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
John F. Nogel, CPA, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Steven A. Crocker
Mindy R. Garrett
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors
Robert H. Dean
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditors