Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center and Joseph D. Brandenburg Center
Date: 12/17/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d72456067440e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:45:37.081397
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center and
Joseph D. Brandenburg Center
December 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 17, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center and the Joseph D. Brandenburg
Center for the period beginning June 1, 2005 and ending June 30, 2008. Both centers
provide mental health services to adults residing in Allegany, Frederick, Garrett,
Montgomery, and Washington Counties.
Our audit disclosed that the Centers did not always follow State Procurement
Regulations when procuring goods and services. For example, the Centers did not
obtain approval from the Board of Public Works, as required, for a contract
modification of approximately $300,000 and appeared to have artificially divided
numerous procurements to avoid Department of Budget and Management approval.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response, on behalf of the Centers, to
this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by the Centers.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center, located in Cumberland, Maryland,
provides mental health services to adults of Allegany, Frederick, Garrett,
Montgomery, and Washington Counties. The Center also provided mental health
services for adolescents from these counties (in addition to Carroll and Howard
Counties) until September 2007, at which time the adolescents were transferred to
other State operated treatment facilities or to privately operated treatment
facilities. The Joseph D. Brandenburg Center, located on the grounds of the
Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center, provides residential care, treatment, and
support to citizens who are developmentally disabled. With regard to the Centers’
organizational structures, the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Mental
Health Administration is responsible for the administrative functions and mental
health programs and the Department’s Developmental Disabilities Administration
is responsible for the services to the developmentally disabled.
The Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center and the Joseph D. Brandenburg Center
have licensed capacities of 119 and 25 resident patients, respectively. During
fiscal year 2008, the Thomas B. Finan Center had an average daily population of
78 patients and was budgeted for an average daily population of 80 residents; the
Joseph D. Brandenburg Center had an average daily population of 18 patients and
was budgeted for an average daily population of 20 residents. According to the
State’s records, expenditures of the Thomas B. Finan Center and the Joseph D.
Brandenburg Center during fiscal year 2008 totaled approximately $17.7 million
and $4.5 million, respectively. The Thomas B. Finan Center provides various
support services (for example, payroll, purchasing, and maintenance of
accounting records) for the Joseph D. Brandenburg Center.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated September 2, 2005. We determined that the Centers
satisfactorily addressed this item.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement of Goods and Services
Finding 1
The Centers did not always procure goods and services in accordance with
State Procurement Regulations.
Analysis
The Centers did not always follow State Procurement Regulations when procuring
goods and services. Specifically, our review of selected procurement
expenditures disclosed the following deficiencies:
• The Centers did not prepare a contract modification nor obtain approval from
the Board of Public Works (BPW) for the modification, as required.
Specifically, during fiscal years 2004 through 2008, the Centers made
payments to the dietary service contractor totaling approximately $5 million,
which exceeded the contract amount by approximately $300,000, without
obtaining required approval from the BPW.
• State Procurement Regulations specify the procurement methods (such as,
competitive sealed proposals for procurements over $25,000) to be used to
procure human services (such as, physician services). However, the Centers
did not adhere to these regulations. Rather, during fiscal years 2007 and 2008,
the Centers issued 25 separate purchase orders totaling approximately
$603,500 to three temporary employment agencies for these services.
Additionally, the procurement of these services appeared to have been
artifically divided into numerous smaller procurements of $25,000 or less to
avoid required approval of the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM). In this regard, 23 of the aforementioned 25 purchase orders were for
$24,999 each.
• Our test disclosed that 7 payments totaling approximately $108,000 lacked
adequate documentation of the procurement process. Specifically, although
we were advised by Center management personnel that these procurements
were either competitively bid or were awarded as sole source procurements,
documentation of competitive bids received and sole source justifications
were not on file to substantiate this claim. Each of the seven procurements
was between $2,501 and $25,000.
4

--- Page 7 ---
State Procurement Regulations require that agencies obtain BPW approval for
contract modifications that change the contract amount by more than $50,000, and
for procurements in excess of $200,000. In addition, these regulations further
require DBM approval of human services contracts greater than $25,000. The
regulations also generally require that competitive bids be obtained for all
procurements over $2,500, and that the reasons for sole source procurements be
documented in writing.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Centers comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the State Procurement Regulations. Specifically, we
recommend that, in the future, all contracts and contract modifications be
submitted for approval, as required, and that the Centers not artificially
divide procurements to avoid required approvals. We also recommend that
the Centers forward the aforementioned contract modification to the BPW
for approval. We further recommend that the Centers procure goods and
services utilizing competitive bidding as required, and that documentation of
competitive bids and sole source award justifications be maintained.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Thomas B. Finan Hospital Center and the Joseph D.
Brandenburg Center of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for the
period beginning June 1, 2005 and ending June 30, 2008. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Centers’
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Centers’ operations. We also tested
5

--- Page 8 ---
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit scope was limited with respect to the Centers’ cash transactions because
the Office of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the State’s main bank
accounts during a portion of the audit period. Due to this condition, we were
unable to determine, with reasonable assurance, that all of the Centers’ cash
transactions prior to July 1, 2005 were accounted for and properly recorded on the
related State accounting records as well as the banks’ records.
The Centers’ managements are responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
Our audit disclosed conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Centers’
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This report also
includes conditions regarding a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant finding was
communicated to the Centers that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response, on behalf of the
Centers, to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results
of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement of Goods and Services
Finding 1
The Centers did not always procure goods and services in accordance with
State Procurement Regulations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Centers comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the State Procurement Regulations. Specifically, we
recommend that, in the future, all contracts and contract modifications be
submitted for approval, as required, and that the Centers not artificially
divide procurements to avoid required approvals. We also recommend that
the Centers forward the aforementioned contract modification to the BPW
for approval. We further recommend that the Centers procure goods and
services utilizing competitive bidding as required, and that documentation of
competitive bids and sole source award justifications be maintained.
Centers’ Response:
The Center concurs with the recommendations. The Centers will have all future
contracts and contract modifications approved according to State Procurement
Regulations. Specifically:
• The Finan Center will process a dietary contract modification for the
amount exceeding the approved contract amount by the Board of Public
Works for the contract period ending June 30, 2008. The Finan Center
will process this modification in January 2009 and obtain the Board of
Public Works approval in February 2009. The Centers are currently
utilizing an approved dietary contract that began on July 1, 2008.
• The Finan Center has processed an emergency contract for psychiatry
services to run from December 1, 2008 thru June 30, 2009.
• The Finan Center will process a multi-vendor contract for psychiatrists to
begin July 1, 2009.
• The Centers will document all competitive bidding and sole source awards
immediately.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark A. Ermer, CPA
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Chiaka N. Opara
Staff Auditor