Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Division of Unemployment Insurance
Date: 02/27/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d724560674716
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:54:33.345533
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Unemployment Insurance
February 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternative formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Automated Match Procedures
* Finding 1 – Certain Targeted Matches Were Not Always Performed 5
Timely and Match Results Were Not Always Fully Investigated
Benefit Overpayments
Finding 2 – Certain Delinquent Benefit Overpayment Accounts 7
Were Not Always Referred to the State’s Central Collection Unit
Information System Security and Control
Finding 3 – DUI Stored Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information 7
Within a Database in Clear Text
Finding 4 – Controls Over a Database Were Not Sufficient to Protect 8
Sensitive Data
Reimbursable Employers
Finding 5 – Reimbursable Employer Accounts Were Not Always Fully 9
Collateralized and Delinquent Accounts Were Not Always Pursued
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
*Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) is a separate budgetary unit
within the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation. According to its
records, during calendar year 2013, DUI collected approximately $1.3 billion,
consisting of approximately $813.6 million in unemployment insurance taxes
from employers and approximately $482.2 million in reimbursements from
certain non-profit employers, other states, and the federal government.
Unemployment insurance benefits paid to approximately 207,000 claimants
during calendar year 2013 totaled approximately $1.2 billion, of which
approximately $378.4 million was funded by the federal government. As of July
2014, the maximum amount of benefits an individual could receive was $430 per
week for 26 weeks.
As of the end of calendar year 2013, the Maryland Unemployment Insurance
Trust Fund had a balance of approximately $872.9 million. According to the
State’s records, DUI’s fiscal year 2013 operating expenditures totaled
approximately $68.9 million.
DUI’s business information systems include the Maryland Unemployment
Insurance Tax System (UITAX), which is used to process employers’
unemployment insurance taxes owed and paid, and the Maryland Automated
Benefits System (MABS), which tracks payments to and amounts due from
unemployment insurance claimants.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 19, 2012. We determined that DUI
satisfactorily addressed three of the findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report and appear as one finding.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Automated Match Procedures
Finding 1
DUI did not appropriately perform and fully investigate the results of certain
targeted benefit payment matches in a timely manner.
Analysis
DUI did not appropriately perform its automated targeted matches of benefit
payments, as reflected in the Maryland Automated Benefits System, with relevant
information from other databases and investigate the results in an adequate and
timely manner. DUI performs these matches to help detect potential and actual
improper benefit payments.
 Our test of the results of five quarterly matches (September 2013, June 2013,
December 2012, June 2012, and September 2011) comparing individuals with
reported Maryland wages with individuals receiving unemployment benefit
payments disclosed that DUI had not performed a complete review of the
results for any of these matches as of May 2014. Generally, DUI selects up to
150 matches to review from each quarter based on predetermined criteria. For
example, for the June 2013 match results, of the 150 claimants selected for
review by DUI, there were 127 claimants that had not been reviewed or for
which the review was incomplete.
 DUI did not use wage data available through the National Directory of New
Hires (NDNH) to more effectively identify Maryland claimants potentially
receiving improper benefit payments while working in Maryland and other
states. DUI contracted with the federal Office of Child Support Enforcement
(OCSE), which operates the NDNH, to perform a weekly match of claimants
with the NDNH; however, DUI included only the claimants’ names and social
security numbers. DUI did not request OCSE to include the most recent
quarterly wage information for all employees in the match process. Including
the national wage information would provide more comprehensive results and
would help DUI prioritize its follow-up efforts by identifying claimants with a
higher likelihood of having received significant improper benefit payments,
such as claimants with both significant quarterly wages and benefits. During
calendar year 2013, the NDNH computer match conducted weekly for DUI
identified, in the aggregate, 19,779 instances in which a claimant’s social
security number and name matched an individual who was reported as being
newly hired.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 During the audit period, DUI did not routinely perform certain periodic
(monthly or quarterly) matches and did not adequately review the results
when matches were performed. These matches were conducted to identify
claimants receiving benefit payments while incarcerated, claimants with the
same address, and claimants with the same address or name of DLLR
employees. For example, as of March 2014, for eight quarters during the
period from March 2011 to December 2013, the matches between DLLR
employees and benefit payment records were not performed or the results
were not fully investigated. Furthermore, our test of seven individuals
identified through five monthly matches during the period from June 2012 to
December 2013 comparing incarceration records to individuals receiving
benefit payments identified four individuals receiving benefits totaling
approximately $17,700. As a result of our test, DUI performed additional
investigations of our test results and determined that overpayments totaling
$10,400 were made to three individuals.
 DUI’s quarterly matches to identify claimants with the same address or name
of DLLR employees excluded employees working within DLLR’s DUI and
Division of Administration. DUI was not aware of this until we brought it to
its attention. According to State payroll records during fiscal year 2013, these
two divisions represent approximately 47 percent of DLLR’s more than 1,900
authorized positions.
Similar conditions regarding fully investigating the results of targeted matches
and requesting OCSE to incorporate national wage information into its NDNH
matching procedures were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DUI
a. fully and timely investigate the results of all matches performed,
including the aforementioned results, and take appropriate action, such
as the recovery of benefit overpayments (repeat);
b. request OCSE to incorporate national wage information into its NDNH
matching procedures (repeat);
c. perform the targeted matches within the established time frames, such as
quarterly; and
d. include all DLLR employees in the aforementioned quarterly payroll
match.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Benefit Overpayments
Finding 2
DUI did not always refer certain delinquent benefit overpayment accounts to
the State’s Central Collection Unit.
Analysis
DUI did not always refer certain delinquent overpayment accounts to the State’s
Central Collection Unit (CCU). State law allows DUI to recover benefits paid to
claimants who are subsequently found to be ineligible, and to assess penalties and
interest on overpayments made to claimants who either made a false statement or
failed to disclose a material fact in order to obtain the benefits. According to DUI
records as of December 31, 2013, the benefit overpayment accounts receivable
balance totaled approximately $170.3 million, including $118.6 million that was
more than a year old. Approximately $36.9 million in overpayments was
recovered during calendar year 2013. During calendar year 2013, DUI referred
approximately 3,600 accounts totaling $8.8 million to CCU.
Our test of 10 delinquent overpayment accounts totaling approximately $249,000
disclosed that 7 accounts totaling approximately $196,000 were not referred to
CCU that should have been referred. As of July 10, 2014, these accounts
qualified for referral to CCU for at least one year. DUI’s collection policy states
that claimants with no pending legal issues qualify for referral to CCU when the
overpayment is 90 days past due. Consistent with State law, CCU has agreed to
accept the referral of delinquent accounts from DUI which otherwise are excluded
from CCU’s collection assistance.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DUI refer applicable delinquent benefit overpayment
accounts to CCU.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3
DUI stored sensitive personally identifiable information within a database in
clear text.
Analysis
DUI stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) within a database in
clear text. Specifically, we determined that DUI stored PII including full names
7

--- Page 10 ---
and social security numbers in clear text in a database used to assist staff in
resolving unemployment insurance issues.
As of September 10, 2014, based on our inquiry, DUI determined that this
database contained 646,577 unique social security numbers of unemployment
insurance claimants in clear text along with names. This database was maintained
on a local database server. This sensitive PII, which is commonly sought by
criminals for use in identity theft, should be protected by appropriate information
system security controls. The Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Information Security Policy requires each agency to protect confidential data
using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DUI encrypt all database tables containing sensitive PII.
Finding 4
Access, account, and password controls over a database were not sufficient to
protect sensitive data.
Analysis
Access, account, and password controls over a database containing sensitive
personally identifiable information were not sufficient to protect such data.
 A default administrative database account unnecessarily had full access to this
database. Since this account includes local server administrators by default,
all local administrators on the database server had full administrative access to
this database which should only be provided to database administrators. Also,
anyone able to achieve local administrator privileges would automatically
have full administrative access to this database and could perform
unauthorized modifications to critical data.
 Account and password controls over this database and the server used to host
this database were not in compliance with the requirements of the DoIT
Information Security Policy. For example, passwords for 16 accounts on the
database server were stored in clear text in each account’s description field.
In addition, the database system account’s password had not been changed
since December 2, 2008 and password lifetime, length, and complexity
requirements were not enforced for this account.
The DoIT Information Security Policy states that each agency must establish an
authorization process which specifically grants access to information ensuring
8

--- Page 11 ---
that access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of “least
possible privileges” and “need-to-know.” This policy also requires that
passwords must not be stored in clear text, must be changed at regular intervals,
be a minimum of eight characters, and meet complexity requirements.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DUI
a. limit access to all critical databases to personnel whose job duties require
such access, and
b. ensure that all databases and host servers comply with the DoIT
Information Security Policy account and password requirements.
Reimbursable Employers
Finding 5
DUI did not always ensure reimbursable employers provided sufficient
collateral and did not perform timely collection efforts to obtain
reimbursements for benefits paid.
Analysis
DUI did not exercise sufficient control over reimbursable employer accounts.
According to State law, certain not-for-profit organizations and government
agencies may elect to be classified as reimbursable employers. This election
allows these entities to reimburse DUI for unemployment insurance benefits paid
to their former employees rather than make quarterly unemployment insurance tax
payments. Reimbursable employers are required to provide DUI with collateral
as security in the event the employers default on these reimbursements. DUI is
allowed to terminate an employer’s reimbursable status if the required amount of
collateral is not submitted within 120 days or the employer is delinquent on
reimbursable payments.
DUI did not always ensure reimbursable employers provided sufficient collateral
which is generally based on the employer’s taxable wages for the previous year.
According to DUI records, which we determined were reliable for our purposes,
additional collateral totaling $2.8 million was needed for 88 employer accounts to
be fully collateralized as of July 16, 2014. Although DUI was aware of such
accounts, because of recent staff turnover, it did not contact the employers to
obtain additional collateral. Subsequent to our review, we were advised that DUI
had begun to take corrective actions on these accounts.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Additionally, our test of eight reimbursable employer accounts with delinquent
balances totaling approximately $504,300 disclosed that, although DUI had made
three unsuccessful attempts to collect the amounts due, for six of these accounts
with balances totaling $470,600, it did not take certain additional actions. For
example, DUI did not terminate the reimbursable status for four accounts and
convert these accounts to contributory accounts (requiring quarterly
unemployment insurance tax payments). DUI also did not redeem available
collateral for three accounts, including one account for which the reimbursable
status was not converted. According to DUI procedures, after three unsuccessful
attempts to collect the accounts, available collateral on the accounts was to be
redeemed and, in some cases, the reimbursable status was to be terminated. As of
June 24, 2014, the balances on these six accounts had increased to approximately
$775,600 because additional benefits had been paid (including accrued interest
and penalties) and had been delinquent for periods ranging from one to four years.
According to DUI records, as of July 16, 2014, 1,278 reimbursable accounts were
required to have collateral totaling approximately $117.3 million. Additionally,
as of June 30, 2014, the receivable balance for reimbursable employer accounts
totaled approximately $1.9 million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DUI
a. ensure reimbursable accounts are fully collateralized, and
b. timely pursue delinquent reimbursable accounts (including the
aforementioned accounts) by offsetting delinquent balances with
available collateral and terminating the reimbursable status on accounts
after unsuccessful attempts to satisfy the debts.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Labor,
Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) – Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI)
for the period beginning February 1, 2011 and ending February 23, 2014. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DUI’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included employer unemployment contributions,
reimbursements from government agencies and certain non-profit organizations,
benefit claims and payments, and recovery of benefit overpayments. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DUI’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also extracted data from the
Maryland Automated Benefits System, the Maryland Unemployment Insurance
Tax System, and state employee payroll data from the Central Payroll Bureau for
the purpose of testing transactions. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DUI by the DLLR –
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audits of the Office of the Secretary. In addition, our audit
did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of DUI’s compliance with federal laws and
11

--- Page 14 ---
regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland engages
an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including DUI.
DUI’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DUI’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DUI that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DLLR’s response, on behalf of DUI, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DLLR regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Automated Match Procedures
Finding 1
DUI did not appropriately perform and fully investigate the results of certain
targeted benefit payment matches in a timely manner.
Response – DUI agrees with the findings:
a. Multiple claimant address crossmatch and employee/claimant crossmatch
reports
1) As of August 2014, DUI is utilizing the Department of Corrections’
(DOC) website and two contacts in DOC to verify the results of the
crossmatch and detect overpayments.
2) In September 2014, new employees were hired to ensure the
investigation of all accounts detected in the Maryland and National
Directory of New Hire, and the claimant address crossmatch.
b. The Office of Child Support Enforcement has incorporated national wage
information into its NDNH matching procedures as of October 2014.
c. As of October 2014, reports of targeted matches have been modified to ensure
timeliness and consistency. All matches are being investigated.
d. As of January 2015, all DLLR employees are included in the quarterly
payroll match.

--- Page 17 ---
Benefit Overpayments
Finding 2
DUI did not always refer certain delinquent benefit overpayment accounts to
the State’s Central Collection Unit.
Response – DUI agrees with the finding:
DLLR is currently reviewing and modifying internal guidelines for referral of
debts to the Central Collections Unit (CCU) for collection. The modifications will
clarify which cases are suitable for referral to CCU.
All automated and administrative changes will be complete in May 2015.
DLLR anticipates these improvements will result in a significant increase in the
number of referrals to CCU.
Since January 2015, DLLR has increased the number of suitable cases
manually transferred to CCU.

--- Page 18 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3
DUI stored sensitive personally identifiable information within a database in
clear text.
Response – DUI agrees with the finding:
DLLR accepts the recommendation. OIT plans to upgrade the database software
and implement available options that will encrypt the data. OIT plans to complete
this by end of October 2015.

--- Page 19 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
Access, account, and password controls over a database were not sufficient to
protect sensitive data.
Response – DUI agrees with the finding:
a. DLLR accepts this recommendation and as part of the database software
upgrade process will limit the access to personnel that require such access.
OIT plans to complete this by end of October 2015.
b. DLLR accepts this recommendation and has already implemented part of the
recommendation. The passwords have been erased from the description and
will implement complex password policy as part of the database software
upgrade process. OIT plans to complete this by end of October 2015.

--- Page 20 ---
Reimbursable Employers
Finding 5
DUI did not always ensure reimbursable employers provided sufficient
collateral and did not perform timely collection efforts to obtain
reimbursements for benefits paid.
Response – DUI agrees with the finding:
a. As of the end of January 2015 the Reimbursable Employers Unit has
reviewed all outstanding accounts that were not fully collateralized. Those
accounts that have failed to meet the collateral requirements have had their
reimbursable status terminated and converted to contributory accounts. As of
December 2014 the Reimbursable Employers Unit has deployed a new
collateral application that will provide a monthly listing of accounts that are
not fully collateralized. The new system will provide an aging of accounts that
are not fully collateralized so that a determination can be made to close or
change to contributing.
b. As of the end of December 2014 the Reimbursable Employers Unit had
reviewed all accounts that were delinquent and have either secured payment
or had the available collateral applied to the delinquent balance and
terminated the reimbursable status. Going forward the Reimbursable
Employers Unit will send dunning notices at 30 and 60 days. A final notice
will be sent at 90 days advising the employer their option to reimburse has
been terminated and any available collateral will be redeemed. A monthly
aging report will be generated each month and reviewed for collection efforts.

--- Page 21 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Julia M. King
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Daniel J. Caldwell
Lauren E. McLain, CPA
Olajide S. Mustapha
James J. Podhorniak, CPA
Staff Auditors