Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 08/08/2007
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d724560674442
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:52:20.208218
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
February 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Organizational Changes 7
Federal Audit Disallowance for Personal Care Services 8
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Medicaid Enterprise Restructuring Project (MERP)
Finding 1 – Potential Risks of the MERP Project and Key Aspects of the 11
Procurement Process Were Not Formally Disclosed to BPW
Long Term Supports and Services (LTSS) Tracking System
Finding 2 – The LTSS Project Was Not Adequately Planned, Initially 15
Subject to DoIT Oversight, Nor Competitively Procured
Office of Inspector General
Finding 3 – Written Policies Were Not Established for Conducting Grant 18
Audits Timely and in Accordance With Professional Standards
Finding 4 – Grantee Compliance with Sub-Vendor Audit and Oversight 19
Requirements Were Not Verified During Grant Audits as Required
Division of Cost Accounting and Reimbursements (DCAR)
Finding 5 – Records for Open Patient Financial Investigations Were Not 20
Properly Maintained and Investigations Were Not Always Timely
Conducted and Reviewed
* Finding 6 – Delinquent Accounts Receivable Were Not Adequately 21
Pursued and Denied Insurance and Medicare Claims Were Not
Timely Resolved
Finding 7 – DCAR Lacked Appropriate Procedures to Ensure All Cash 22
Receipts Were Deposited
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 8 – Supervisory Oversight of Federal Fund Reimbursement 23
Requests Was Not Always Effective
Corporate Purchasing Cards (CPC)
Finding 9 – CPC Transactions Were Not Thoroughly Reviewed and 23
Supported, Which Allowed Certain Improper Purchases to Go
Undetected
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 10 – Intrusion Detection Prevention System Coverage and 25
Controls for the DHMH Network Were Insufficient
* Finding 11 – Network Access to Critical Internal Network Devices 26
Was Not Properly Restricted and Monitoring of Certain Security
Events Was Not Adequate
Finding 12 – Malware Protection on DHMH Workstations and 27
Servers Needs Improvement
* Finding 13 – Controls Over the National Electronic Disease 28
Surveillance System Database and the Hospital Management
Information System Application Were Not Sufficient
Capital Grant Project Checks
Finding 14 – Proper Controls Were Not Established Over the Processing 29
of Settlement Checks Issued for Capital Grant Projects
Equipment
Finding 15 – Record Keeping and Physical Inventory Procedures 30
Were Not in Compliance with Certain DGS Requirements
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 33
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH)
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
February 2015
 DHMH had not formally communicated to the Board of Public Works
(BPW) certain aspects of the Medicaid Enterprise Restructuring Project
(MERP) procurement process, including the potential risks regarding the
award decision, when it sought BPW’s approval of the contract. For
example, evidence was lacking that the BPW was apprised that the
successful bidder had past performance issues, such as significant cost
overruns and project implementation delays, on similar projects in other
states. The MERP contract, awarded in January 2012, is a five-year,
$171 million contract to replace the current system used to process
Medicaid payments. In August 2014, the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) and DHMH suspended development work on the
project (Finding 1).
DHMH should, in the future, ensure that all pertinent circumstances regarding
significant procurement award decisions, including potential risks, are clearly
documented and conveyed to the BPW for consideration when seeking
contract approval.
 DHMH did not adequately plan the development of the Long Term
Supports and Services (LTSS) tracking system nor was DoIT approval
obtained when the project was initiated. Additionally, the use of an
arrangement with a State university resulted in the project not being
subject to a competitive procurement as would normally be required by
State procurement regulations had the services of the information
technology (IT) contractor used on the project been obtained directly by
DHMH. Over a three-year period, the cost of the project increased to
more than $20 million (Finding 2).
DHMH should ensure that all significant IT projects are adequately planned
and approved by DoIT as appropriate. Additionally, DHMH should evaluate
arrangements with State agencies to ensure required services should not
otherwise be obtained through a competitive procurement process.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 DHMH had not established formal written policies for conducting local
health department (LHD) and certain provider grant audits to ensure
completion in a timely manner and in accordance with established
professional standards (Finding 3). In addition, DHMH did not
adequately verify that LHDs and private providers complied with sub-
vendor audit and oversight requirements (Finding 4).
DHMH should establish formal written policies for conducting grant audits,
complete the audits in a timely and professional manner, and ensure the LHDs
and private providers comply with the sub-vendor audit and oversight
requirements.
 Sufficient controls were not established over the reimbursements sought
and received for the cost of care provided to patients admitted to State
hospitals. Records for patient financial investigations were not properly
maintained and approved (Finding 5), delinquent accounts were not
properly pursued (Finding 6), and deposit verification procedures were
inadequate (Finding 7).
DHMH should take the recommended actions to ensure that the records
related to cost recoveries for patients admitted to State hospitals are properly
maintained, delinquent accounts are properly pursued, and the deposit of
collections is properly verified.
 DHMH had not established sufficient security and controls over its
information systems (Findings 10 - 13). For example, intrusion detection
prevention system coverage and controls over the network were not
sufficient, and network access to critical internal network devices was not
properly restricted.
DHMH should take the recommended actions to ensure that proper security
and controls are established over its information systems.
 Effective controls were not established over federal funds, corporate
purchasing cards, grant settlement checks, and equipment (Findings 8, 9,
14, and 15).
DHMH should ensure appropriate controls are established and followed.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) is responsible for
promoting the health of the public and for strengthening partnerships between
State and local governments, the business community, and all health care
providers in Maryland regarding health care. This audit report includes the
operations of the following five units:
Office of the Secretary
Deputy Secretary for Operations
Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services (excluding Vital Statistics
Administration)
Deputy Secretary for Behavioral Health and Disabilities
Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing
These units provide an administrative infrastructure and oversight to DHMH and
other health providers throughout the State. Additionally, the units are
responsible for policy formulation and program implementation and for providing
executive oversight to certain DHMH administrations including the Maryland
Medicaid program. As part of the administrative support provided by the units,
certain support services (for example, payroll processing, maintenance of
accounting records, and purchasing) are provided by DHMH’s Office of the
Secretary and Deputy Secretary for Operations to the other units of DHMH.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014, expenditures for these
five units totaled approximately $53.6 million.
Organizational Changes
Effective July 1, 2011, certain duties and responsibilities within DHMH were
reorganized. Specifically, the Vital Statistics Administration was transferred via
budget amendment from the Deputy Secretary for Operations to the Deputy
Secretary for Public Health Services. The Vital Statistics Administration (VSA)
issues certified copies of birth, death, and marriage certificates. The activities of
VSA through October 14, 2009 were included in our preceding audit report on
DHMH – Office of the Secretary, dated August 9, 2011. The subsequent
activities of VSA were addressed in a separate audit report dated May 27, 2014.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Federal Audit Disallowance for Personal Care Services
The United States Department of Health and Human Services issued an audit
report in April 2013 that disallowed Medicaid expenditures totaling $10.9 million.
The audit reviewed personal care and nurse monitoring services costs claimed
under Maryland’s Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services Waiver for
Older Adults from July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2010. The audit identified 20
unallowable personal care service claims where documentation did not meet State
and federal requirements.
Maryland’s Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services Waiver for Older
Adults authorizes services for individuals with low incomes who are aged 50 or
older and who need the level of care provided by a nursing facility. The waiver
provides for personal care services and other services that help participants avoid
institutionalization. In Maryland, DHMH is the State agency that administers the
Medicaid program. During the period covered by the audit, the Maryland
Department of Aging administered the waiver program through an interagency
agreement with DHMH.
DHMH agreed with the federal audit report findings and repaid the disallowed
expenditures in May 2013 with State general funds. DHMH also agreed to
improve controls over claims for personal care services provided under the waiver
to ensure compliance with federal and State requirements.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of seven of the ten findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 9, 2011, the other three
findings related to VSA which, as previously mentioned, were addressed in a
separate report. We determined that DHMH satisfactorily addressed four of the
seven findings reviewed. The remaining three findings are repeated in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Medicaid Enterprise Restructuring Project
Background and Project Status
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) is the single State
agency responsible for administering the Medicaid Program in the State of
Maryland. The Program provides medical services to eligible recipients under
Title XIX (Medicaid) of the Social Security Act through enrolled providers. The
State reimburses providers for the medical services provided to eligible recipients.
The services are provided through a combination of fee-for-service and prepaid
arrangements with a variety of medical and managed care providers. Claims for
payment received from medical providers are processed, adjudicated, and paid
through a federally certified Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS).
DHMH has begun the process of replacing its existing MMIS (MMIS II) with a
modernized MMIS called the Medicaid Enterprise Restructuring Project (MERP).
DHMH worked with the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) to
develop the MERP request for proposals (RFP) for MMIS replacement and full
fiscal agent (claims processing) services. With the approval of the federal Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the responsibilities of being the
developing contractor and the subsequent fiscal agent (FA) were combined into
this one RFP. This approach has reportedly been taken by the majority of other
states that have replaced their MMIS within the last 10 years. The RFP for MERP
was issued May 20, 2010 and proposals were due September 7, 2010.
DHMH awarded a five-year contract in January 2012 totaling approximately $171
million for the period from March 1, 2012 to February 28, 2017, with three two-
year renewal options. The contractor is to design, develop, implement, and
operate MERP and also provide FA services. The federal funding participation
percentage for the MMIS development costs is 90 percent and for the FA
operating costs is 75 percent.
The MERP project has encountered certain development problems, including
disagreements with the contractor over the scope of work and the inability of the
contractor to submit certain acceptable deliverables. As a result, the contractor
was unable to meet the original projected completion date of MERP (September
29, 2014) and the actual date that MERP may be completed is uncertain. MERP
has not yet progressed beyond the design phase, and DHMH has continued to use
MMIS II to process its Medicaid claims.
9

--- Page 12 ---
There were a number of disagreements between DHMH and the contractor
regarding the scope of the work included under the terms of the contract. In
September 2013, the contractor submitted a contract claim for approximately $62
million in relation to alleged delays on the part of DHMH and work the contractor
claims falls outside the original scope of the contract. The contractor
subsequently reduced its contract claim to approximately $34 million. DHMH
rejected the claim in April 2014, and the contractor filed an appeal with the Board
of Contract Appeals on May 28, 2014, which as of December 11, 2014 had not
yet been ruled upon.
Due to the lack of completed deliverables, DHMH issued a directive letter, or
cure notice, on January 31, 2014 detailing certain specific actions that needed to
be corrected for the project to move forward. The notice required the contractor
to cure its failure to submit an acceptable project schedule as obligated under the
contract or show cause why the contract should not be terminated for default.
DHMH found that the existing project schedule and related documents contained
pervasive logical errors and factual inaccuracies. For example, tasks were marked
as completed on the project schedule that had not been completed according to
other project documents. Further, the contractor had made numerous unexplained
and unapproved changes to project schedules without notifying DHMH which,
according to DHMH, created a shifting and fundamentally unreliable account of
the progress of the project. DHMH further clarified that the contractor’s other
performance failures would not be addressed in this cure notice, but in future
correspondence.
On March 14, 2014, DHMH issued a second cure notice to the contractor. The
notice set forth the major deficiencies in work submitted after a previous
corrective action plan (CAP) was put in place and describes the required steps the
contractor needed to take. Although the CAP was submitted in May 2013,
according to the second cure notice, the quality of the contractor’s deliverables
continued to be deficient and the CAP has proved to be “an ineffective tool for
remediating the problematic performance.” Additionally, DHMH identified a
lack of attention to and commitment from the contractor’s FA operations unit as
one major root cause of multiple problems, including a stalled design process and
significant delays. According to the second cure notice, this lack of participation
constituted a significant departure from contractually required industry best
practices and it continued to be a major barrier to completing the system design.
DoIT reported to the General Assembly that, as of August 15, 2014, the contractor
had failed to submit a satisfactory response to either cure notice, and DHMH has
been working with the contractor to find a suitable path forward without success.
According to DoIT, the project remained high-risk and, on August 22, 2014, with
10

--- Page 13 ---
the support of DoIT, DHMH suspended development work on the project for a
period of 90 days to resolve outstanding issues and to develop an acceptable path
forward to continue MERP. We were advised that the work stop order was
subsequently extended indefinitely. While the contractor had been paid $27.4
million (net of $3.0 million retainage) for 50 approved deliverables, as of
September 8, 2014, there were 17 deliverables with a contract value totaling $10.9
million that were 9 to 15 months past due. It is unlikely that MERP will meet its
revised completion date of December 15, 2015 due to the suspension of work on
the project. If an acceptable resolution cannot be agreed upon, DHMH advised it
will evaluate other available remedies.
Finding 1
DHMH did not formally communicate certain pertinent aspects of the MERP
procurement process and the potential risks regarding the award decision
when it sought Board of Public Works (BPW) approval of the contract.
Analysis
DHMH did not formally communicate certain pertinent aspects of the MERP
procurement process and potential risks regarding the award decision when it
sought BPW approval of the contract. There was a lack of evidence that the BPW
or its staff were fully apprised that the RFP qualifications were changed to obtain
bidders, that the successful bidder had past performance issues involving similar
projects, and that a change was made to the contractor liability provisions after the
successful bidder was notified of the award. According to the results of its bid
evaluation process, DHMH selected the contractor with the best technical
evaluation and lowest price; however, the evaluation committee’s results did not
include a complete assessment of the potential risks involving its selection. We
believe that in view of the project’s complexity, cost, and significance to State
operations, all pertinent aspects of the procurement process and potential risks
should have been clearly identified and conveyed to the BPW for its
consideration.
Although eight contractors expressed interest in the procurement, some of the
contractors had questioned the prior experience qualifications established in the
RFP. Consequently, the first addendum (ultimately there were eight addendums)
to the May 20, 2010 RFP was issued on June 7, 2010 (prior to the bid submission
date) to change the experience requirements. Initially, the RFP required bidders
to have fiscal agent and MMIS implementation experience for a state MMIS
certified by CMS within the last 5 years. The first addendum changed the
qualifications so that the experience of a bidder’s subcontractor would also be
considered, and the period for prior system certification was extended to 10 years.
After this addendum, DHMH determined that two interested contractors, which
11

--- Page 14 ---
subsequently submitted bids, were potentially qualified with respect to the prior
experience requirements. As noted later, it is questionable as to whether one of
these contractors, who was the losing bidder, had actually met the revised
qualifications.
The June 2011 contract award recommendation memorandum from DHMH’s
eight-member bid evaluation committee did not provide a complete and objective
assessment of the proposals, including a description of the potential risks
involving its selection of the successful bidder. The memorandum included
overall technical and financial rankings that indicated the bidder recommended
for the award had received an overall technical proposal rating of excellent as
compared to the other bidder whose proposal was determined to be poor. Also,
the selected bidder’s proposed cost was considerably lower. While the
memorandum commented upon many of the strengths identified by the committee
based on its evaluation of the selected bidder’s technical proposal, it did not
comment on any weaknesses pertaining to past performance issues that would
have provided a more complete disclosure of the possible risks.
For example, one of the “key strengths” identified in the memorandum was that
the selected bidder’s subcontractor had developed an MMIS in two other states
that were awaiting federal certification. (CMS certifications were subsequently
obtained for both systems.) However, the memorandum did not mention that both
of these systems had taken considerably longer (up to three years) than originally
planned and had significant cost overruns (up to 300 percent) beyond the original
projects’ budgets. There was also no mention that this same subcontractor also
had MMIS development contracts cancelled in two other states due to disputes
arising from significant cost increases and numerous work defects. For example,
according to public sources, the subcontractor was hired in June 2008 to develop
an MMIS in one of these states, but two years later, after reportedly being paid
$50 million, the work was halted due to disputes over cost overruns. As of
August 2013, the situation had not been resolved, and the project was on hold for
more than three years. Several of these issues were noted in some of the
individual committee members’ bid evaluation documents, but were not disclosed
in the contract award recommendation memorandum.
DHMH pointed out to us that under its technical evaluation scoring methodology,
a bidder’s past experience only constituted eight percent of the total score; this
seems to suggest that even if evaluators had been more critical of the successful
bidder’s experience or if more weight was given to this category, the award
outcome would not have changed given the disparity in the two bidders’ total
technical evaluation scores. While we acknowledge this likelihood, we
nevertheless believe that past performance on similar work can be indicative of
12

--- Page 15 ---
future experience and risks and, at a minimum, the award recommendation
memorandum should have provided a more complete and objective assessment of
the bidder’s experience and performance.
After DHMH notified the successful bidder in July 2011 that it had been selected
for award, but prior to signing the contract, the contractor requested that DHMH
change, what was at the time of the original RFP, standard State information
technology contract language providing unlimited liability for breach of contract.
According to DHMH, the contractor requested a $20 million cap on its liability.
At this stage, DHMH believed it had two options – either cancel the current
procurement and pursue an entirely new procurement or change the liability
clause and ask both bidders to submit a last Best and Final Offer (BAFO). It
should be noted that in June 2011, the DHMH evaluation committee had
discussed the risks of not awarding or rebidding the procurement. The committee
concluded that the result of a new procurement would likely be the same, but the
State would expend significant time and fiscal and operational resources, delay
the contract award for one and one-half years, and potentially lose key State
subject matter experts due to attrition.
DHMH chose to change the liability clause and ask the two bidders to submit a
last BAFO. This decision was based on legal advice that concluded that State
regulations prohibited an agency from making a significant contract change after
selection of the successful contractor, but that RFP terms could be amended if the
agency allowed all qualified bidders to revise their proposals based on the
amended terms. Consequently, after consulting with DoIT, DHMH issued an
eighth and final RFP addendum in October 2011 that reduced the contractor
liability requirements from “unlimited” to “three times the value of the contract”
(which is currently the standard liability provision for State information
technology contracts) and requested both bidders to submit a last BAFO. The
course of action taken by DHMH provided a way to address the successful
bidder’s late concern for its contract liability without jeopardizing the
procurement award decision.
However, at this late stage of the procurement process, we question whether there
should have been any realistic expectation of receiving a viable BAFO proposal
from the second bidder. Specifically, the second bidder had previously been
notified by DHMH (in July 2011) that it had not been selected for award, and it
had been advised by DHMH in an August 2011 debriefing meeting that it was not
selected, in part, because it lacked fiscal agent experience and had no recent
MMIS implementation experience – two key RFP requirements. (Considering the
second bidder’s lack of MMIS experience, it is questionable whether the
contractor met the revised RFP qualifications and should have been considered a
13

--- Page 16 ---
qualified bidder.) Ultimately, this bidder, in a November 2011 letter, informed
DHMH that it declined to submit a last BAFO. In that letter, the bidder stated that
its original proposal had been based on the assumption that standard State contract
clauses were not subject to negotiation.
When the contract was submitted to BPW for its approval in February 2012,
evidence was lacking that all pertinent considerations pertaining to DHMH’s
award decision had been formally communicated. Specifically, neither DHMH’s
formal presentation materials for the BPW meeting when the contract was
presented for approval nor the pre-meeting briefing held with various State
officials identified the significant risks associated with this project. There was no
mention of the changes to the experience qualification to allow for potentially
qualified bidders, the prior negative system development experiences of the
successful bidder and its subcontractor, and the late change in the contractor
breach of contract provision.
We were advised by a number of individuals who attended the pre-meeting
briefing that there was a discussion of topics beyond those contained in the formal
presentation material. However, other than the issue involving the change in
contractor liability, the actual topics discussed could not be recalled with clarity
due to the age of the event and the fact that no formal notes were taken.
In our opinion, given the project’s complexity, cost, and significance to State
operations, DHMH should have clearly conveyed all pertinent matters and risks
involving the MERP procurement and selection process to BPW for its
consideration.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that, in the future, DHMH ensure that all pertinent
circumstances regarding significant procurement award decisions, including
potential risks, are clearly documented and conveyed to BPW for its
consideration of contracts submitted for approval.
Long Term Supports and Services Tracking System
Background
After the passage of the federal Affordable Care Act in June 2010, DHMH
decided to modify its web-based tracking system for services provided to the
elderly. These services are provided through Medicaid’s Home and Community-
Based Services Waiver programs and are coordinated with a number of State
agencies. The revised tracking system would fully integrate with other agencies’
14

--- Page 17 ---
existing waiver tracking systems and become a single Long Term Supports and
Services (LTSS) tracking system with new added functions and capabilities,
including linking with the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange.
Since 1994, DHMH has entered into memorandums of understanding (MOU)
with a unit of a State university to perform research and analysis on the Medicaid
program as requested by DHMH. For example, the university develops capitation
payment rates for managed care providers, provides program status reports, and
provides consultation on issues such as federal health care reform. Provisions for
developing and implementing the LTSS tracking system were initially included in
the fiscal year 2011 MOU.
Finding 2
The LTSS information technology (IT) project was not adequately planned
nor was DoIT approval obtained when the project was initiated. The use of
the MOU resulted in the project work not being subject to competitive
procurement as would normally be required by State procurement
regulations.
Analysis
The LTSS IT project was not adequately planned nor was the required DoIT
approval obtained when the project was initiated. Furthermore, DHMH’s use of
the MOU resulted in the project not being subject to a competitive procurement as
would normally be required by State procurement regulations had the services of
the IT contractor used on the project been obtained directly by DHMH. Over a
three-year period, the cost of the project increased to $20.1 million as of October
31, 2013.
DHMH did not establish a comprehensive plan for the development and
implementation of the LTSS tracking system project, as it did not identify all user
needs, the timeline for implementation, and estimated costs prior to the start of the
project. Rather, the scope of work was determined as the system developed, and
funding authorization under the MOU was obtained, as needed, as the work was
completed. The project was assigned to the university which had previously
performed tracking system development under the provisions of the MOUs
between the entities. However, given the extent of the LTSS project, the
university did not desire to take primary responsibility for its development but,
rather, subcontracted the majority of the work to an IT company without a
competitive solicitation.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Only limited funds for LTSS tracking system development ($188,000 each year)
were included in the budgets for the fiscal year 2011 and 2012 MOUs. However,
the fiscal year 2012 MOU, as well as the fiscal year 2013 MOU, were modified a
number of times, increasing the project budget by an additional $8.8 million,
bringing the total project award to $9.2 million through fiscal year 2013. The
deliverables were somewhat broad in scope, and the due date for the completion
of the system (originally July 2012) was repeatedly extended (to January 2014) as
the MOUs were modified.
Since services provided between State agencies are not subject to the State
procurement regulations, DHMH’s use of the MOU arrangement allowed for the
LTSS subcontractor to be selected without a competitive solicitation process. If
DHMH had sought to obtain the services directly from a vendor, the State
procurement regulations would have applied and a competitive solicitation
process would have been required. Without competition, DHMH lacked
assurance that these services were received at the best value to the State. The
university paid $7.4 million to its subcontractor during fiscal years 2012 and
2013.
DHMH never formally approved the selection of the subcontractor as required by
the fiscal year 2012 MOU (as modified), although the subcontractor was named in
a modification of the 2013 MOU that DHMH approved in January 2013. The
fiscal year 2012 MOU modifications stipulated that DHMH review and approve
all subcontracts related to the work described in the modification prior to
implementation. The university executed its agreement with its subcontractor in
October 2011.
After development had begun, DHMH realized that the LTSS project met the $1
million criteria for a Major Information Technology Development Project and, in
January 2013, submitted an out-of-budget-cycle information technology project
request for the LTSS project to DoIT. DHMH explained in its request that the
original scope of the work was smaller but, after the project scope expanded,
DHMH realized it required DoIT oversight and approval. DoIT advised DHMH
that it should have been involved from the start of the project.
In accordance with fiscal year 2014 budget law language, the project was
designated as a Major Information Technology Development Project subject to
DoIT oversight. On July 24, 2013, BPW approved, as an emergency
procurement, a contract between DHMH and the university’s former LTSS
subcontractor for an additional $8.4 million to complete the LTSS project. The
contract extended the project through June 30, 2014, with a one-year operations
and maintenance option for $2.5 million. In total, $20.1 million has been awarded
16

--- Page 19 ---
for the LTSS project ($9.2 million awarded to the university under MOUs plus a
total of $10.9 million under the contract awarded to the former university
subcontractor). As of October 31, 2014 DHMH had paid a total of $16.3 million
on the project, which was subject to federal funding of 50 percent. We were
advised by DHMH personnel that the LTSS tracking system had been
implemented and was functioning at that time.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHMH ensure that, in the future,
a. all information technology projects are properly planned, with their full
scope and anticipated funding needs identified prior to implementation;
b. all qualifying projects are submitted to DoIT for review and oversight
prior to their initiation;
c. formal arrangements with state agencies are closely evaluated to ensure
that the required services should not otherwise be obtained through a
competitive procurement process; and
d. all MOU provisions requiring the review and approval of significant
subcontracts are complied with.
Office of Inspector General
Background
The DHMH Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) Division of Audits (DOA)
performs audits of state grant funds paid to Local Health Departments (LHDs)
and private non-profit providers who are reimbursed for the cost of care for
eligible individuals. State law requires DHMH to examine the grant accounts of
LHDs and these providers, determine the amount of allowable costs, and collect
any excess reimbursements or pay any unreimbursed costs. DHMH has also
established regulations and policy manuals to govern the use of these grants.
There are 24 LHDs and 68 private non-profit providers that received grant awards
subject to audit totaling $1.8 billion and $891 million, respectively, during fiscal
years 2008 to 2013. The grant audits performed by the DOA are the primary
mechanism for ensuring the propriety of the use of these funds and recovering
unallowable expenditures.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 3
The OIG had not established formal written policies for conducting provider
grant audits in a timely manner and in accordance with established
professional standards.
Analysis
The OIG had not established a formal written policy governing the timely
completion of grant audits nor was there a policy to ensure the audits were
conducted in accordance with established professional standards. We were
advised by the management employee responsible for grant audits that the DOA
still followed the policy established by the Fiscal Service Administration when it
was responsible for these audits. (DOA assumed this function in December
2007.) The policy required each provider to be audited on a four-year cycle
(based on the date since the last audit).
At the time of our review, we noted that 9 of the 24 LHDs and 36 of the 68
private providers had not been audited for at least five years. The LHDs and
private non-profit providers that had not been audited received qualifying grant
awards totaling $217.6 million and $83.7 million, respectively, during fiscal years
2008 and 2009. The untimely review of these grants results in the risk that the
grants may not be able to be audited since State regulations do not require
grantees to retain grant records beyond five years following the close of the fiscal
year. We were advised by OIG management that it had sent letters to the
providers in question requesting that they retain the records until audited,
although such a request is not provided for in the aforementioned regulations.
Additionally, the OIG had not established a formal policy requiring grant audits to
be performed in accordance with established professional auditing standards and
did not always conduct the audits in accordance with such standards. For
example, our review of the work papers supporting three audits disclosed that no
written audit plans were prepared and that audit work papers and programs were
generally not initialed by supervisory personnel to document their supervision of
audit staff; these procedures are generally required by professional auditing
standards.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the OIG
a. establish a written policy to govern the timely completion of its grant
audits,
b. complete its grant audits on a timely basis, and
c. establish a formal policy requiring LHD and private non-profit provider
grant audits to be conducted in accordance with professional standards.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 4
The OIG did not adequately verify LHD and private non-profit provider
compliance with sub-vendor audit and oversight requirements.
Analysis
The OIG did not adequately verify LHD and private non-profit provider
compliance with sub-vendor audit and oversight requirements. Our review of the
grant audits for three LHDs disclosed that, for one LHD, the DOA had not
verified adequate controls and monitoring procedures had been established over
its sub-vendors, or that the LHD had conducted or contracted for audits of
significant sub-vendors. For the other two LHDs, a listing of all sub-vendors was
not obtained by DOA to enable it to conduct audit procedures to verify that the
LHDs were properly monitoring their sub-vendors.
In accordance with applicable State laws and regulations, DHMH has established
standards for LHDs and private non-profit providers that receive DHMH awards
and then award all or a portion of those awards to sub-vendors to provide services
to third parties. At a minimum, LHDs and private non-profit providers are
required to have adequate controls and monitoring procedures over their sub-
vendors and are responsible for conducting or contracting for regular audits of
sub-vendors who receive funds of $100,000 or more. The OIG, in turn, is
required to oversee implementation of these standards by the LHDs and private
non-profit providers and verify compliance as part of its regular audits of these
entities.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the OIG properly verify LHD and private non-profit
provider compliance with sub-vendor audit and oversight requirements
during its audits of these entities in accordance with established DHMH
standards.
Division of Cost Accounting and Reimbursements
Background
In accordance with State law, DHMH’s Division of Cost Accounting and
Reimbursements (DCAR) conducts financial investigations of all patients
admitted to the State’s mental health, intellectual disability, and chronic disease
facilities to determine their ability to pay for the cost of care and/or to identify
other liable parties (such as Medicaid, Medicare, third party insurers, or other
legally responsible persons). DHMH policy requires DCAR’s financial agents at
the various State facilities to complete these investigations within six months after
19

--- Page 22 ---
the first date of service, in part, because State regulations generally only allow
DHMH to bill certain parties for services retroactively for six months.
Based on the completed financial investigations, DCAR establishes an accounts
receivable on the DHMH Hospital Management Information System (HMIS) and
bills and collects the amounts due. According to DCAR’s records, cost recoveries
for fiscal year 2012 totaled approximately $66 million and consisted primarily of
Medicaid and Medicare collections, with $4.1 million being collected from
patients, legally responsible persons, and private insurers. For the same period,
DCAR determined that services valued at $227.7 million were provided to
recipients for which the related costs were not recoverable from any source and
consequently were paid by the State. During fiscal year 2012, 1,923 patients were
admitted to the State’s mental health, intellectual disability, and chronic disease
facilities.
Finding 5
Records for open patient financial investigations were not properly
maintained and monitored. In addition, investigations were not always
timely conducted and reviewed by supervisory personnel.
Analysis
Records for open patient financial investigations were not properly maintained
and monitored. In addition, investigations were not always timely conducted and
reviewed by supervisory personnel. According to a March 31, 2013 report on the
status of open investigations provided by DCAR management, there were 185
patient accounts for which DCAR had not determined the amount due and/or had
not billed for the services provided that were more than six months old (including
107 over a year old). Our review of 10 of these accounts, as of May 30, 2013,
disclosed the following conditions:
 For 8 accounts, including 4 listed as being more than 3 and one-half years old,
the accounts had been investigated timely and did not belong on the open
investigations report. As a result of the report including accounts that actually
had been investigated, the report was not entirely reliable and its effectiveness
as a monitoring tool was diminished.
 For 2 accounts, DCAR had not completed a financial investigation 12 and 18
months after the patient had been admitted, respectively. As a result, a
financially responsible party was not identified and any potential recoveries
could be in jeopardy.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHMH ensure that
a. open patient financial investigation records are properly maintained and
monitored, and
b. financial investigations are timely conducted.
Finding 6
DHMH did not adequately pursue collection of delinquent DCAR accounts
receivables. Furthermore, denied insurance and Medicare claims were not
timely resolved.
Analysis
Delinquent accounts receivable were not always adequately pursued for collection
and/or transferred to the Department of Budget and Management’s Central
Collection Unit (CCU), as required. Furthermore, claims which were originally
denied by an insurance company or Medicare were not researched and timely
resolved to determine if the insurance company or Medicare should pay the claim.
Our test of 10 accounts totaling $3.5 million that were outstanding for more than
120 days disclosed that the collection efforts for 9 accounts totaling $3.2 million
were not sufficient. Four accounts with outstanding claims that were owed by
either the patient or another individual totaling $2.1 million were delinquent from
8 to 18 months. DCAR generally sent CCU referral warning letters to the patient
or other responsible individuals, but did not refer these accounts to CCU as
required. No account collection actions had been made on these accounts for 9
months to 3 years. In addition, DCAR had not sufficiently followed up on 5
outstanding accounts for which Medicare or insurance companies had denied
claims totaling $1.1 million from 6 months to over 5 years earlier. For example,
for the 3 claims denied by Medicare, 2 of the claims had not been corrected and
resubmitted 18 months after their denial. The other claim had been corrected and
resubmitted, but no follow-up actions had been taken for 7 months after
resubmission. Medicare claims are not accepted by CCU for collection. Similar
conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
According to DHMH accounts receivable records as of March 31, 2013, there
were 1,615 outstanding accounts totaling approximately $22 million, of which
1,072 accounts totaling approximately $16 million were outstanding for more
than 120 days. CCU regulations, as amended for DHMH, provide that delinquent
balances be referred 120 days after the first billing except estate and insurance
accounts; insurance accounts should be referred, regardless of age, when the
claim is valid and once the insurer denies DHMH’s initial request for payment.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHMH ensure
a. delinquent accounts receivable are adequately pursued for collection and
transferred to CCU as required (repeat); and
b. denied insurance and Medicare claims are timely resolved.
Finding 7
DCAR lacked appropriate procedures to ensure all cash receipts were
deposited.
Analysis
DCAR lacked appropriate procedures to ensure all cash receipts were deposited.
Specifically, the cash receipts procedures provided that the initial recordation
documents be routed to several employees without ensuring that a copy was
forwarded directly to and retained by the employee responsible for verifying
collections to deposit. Additionally, the employee responsible for the deposit
verification also had access to the related collections. Under these conditions, the
daily collection records are subject to possible manipulation and receipts could be
lost or misappropriated without detection.
According to DCAR’s records, collections received during fiscal year 2013
totaled approximately $3.3 million. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires that an employee independent of the cash receipts
function ensure that all collections were subsequently deposited.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHMH ensure that
a. the employee who prepares the initial record of collections forwards a
copy of that record directly to the employee responsible for the deposit
verification, and
b. the employee performing the deposit verification not have access to the
related cash receipts.
We advised DHMH on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 8
Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursement requests was not
always effective.
Analysis
Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursement requests could be improved.
Specifically, although supervisory reviews of reimbursement requests were
performed, the reviews were not always effective as the accuracy of supporting
schedules and memorandums were not always thoroughly verified, resulting in
certain errors that were either not detected or not detected timely. For example,
expenditures totaling $20.4 million that could have been submitted for
reimbursement in February 2012 were included on a drawdown that was
processed in May 2013. As a result of the delay in processing the reimbursement
request, the State lost interest income of approximately $233,000.
During fiscal year 2013, DHMH processed federal fund reimbursement requests
totaling approximately $4.6 billion.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHMH ensure that federal fund reimbursement
requests are properly reviewed, along with supporting schedules and
documents, and the reviews are documented.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 9
Corporate purchasing card transactions were not always thoroughly
reviewed and supported, which allowed certain improper purchases to go
undetected.
Analysis
Corporate purchasing card (CPC) transactions were not always thoroughly
reviewed and supported, which allowed improper purchases totaling $45,640 to
go undetected. According to the issuing bank’s records, as of February 2013,
corporate purchasing cards had been issued to 325 DHMH employees, and the
related expenditures totaled approximately $22 million during fiscal year 2012.
Our test of 169 credit card purchases totaling approximately $122,000 made
during our audit period disclosed the following conditions:
23

--- Page 26 ---
 For 18 of the purchases tested totaling approximately $15,000, there were no
itemized receipts to support the transactions. The five monthly activity logs
that included the unsupported purchases had all been approved by the
employees’ supervisor and fiscal officer. As a result of the missing receipts,
there was a lack of assurance that the expenditures were properly reviewed
and represented legitimate purchases. In addition, monthly purchasing
cardholder statements from the bank were not always approved as required.
We noted that 7 of the 20 monthly statements tested were not signed by the
cardholder’s immediate supervisor. These seven logs included purchases
totaling approximately $44,000. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual requires a receipt
showing the price of the item purchased. The Manual also requires the
monthly activity log and monthly cardholder statement be approved by the
cardholder’s supervisor.
 Supervisory personnel did not always perform a documented review of
available Level-3 purchasing card data to help determine the propriety of CPC
transactions. Level-3 data, which are provided by certain merchants, provide
detailed descriptions of items purchased. Specifically, for 11 logs tested
where Level-3 data were available for certain purchases, there was no
evidence that the data were reviewed for transactions on 8 of the logs. The
review of the Level-3 data would help supervisors readily detect questionable
purchases. For example, as previously disclosed in our March 26, 2014
performance audit report on the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program,
using Level-3 data, we identified inappropriate purchases (such as guitars and
guitar accessories) totaling $45,640 made by one cardholder at a LHD
between January 2008 and February 2012. The cardholder indicated on the
CPC activity logs that these purchases were for legitimate items and provided
corresponding fictitious computer-generated receipts to avoid detection. In
response to this performance audit, we were advised by DHMH management
that it implemented a monthly OIG CPC Level-3 review procedure.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure that all corporate card purchases are supported by appropriate
documentation and thoroughly reviewed by supervisory personnel,
b. ensure that purchasing card activity logs and the related monthly
cardholder statements are signed as required, and
c. incorporate and document the use of Level-3 purchasing card data in the
supervisory review of the activity logs to help ensure the propriety of
CPC activity.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
DHMH’s Office of Information Technology (which is under the Deputy Secretary
for Operations) is responsible for the overall management and direction of
DHMH information systems. These systems include, but are not limited to, the
Hospital Management Information System (HMIS – which is used to record
information for patients of State hospitals such as admissions, billings, and
collections), the National Electronic Disease Surveillance System (NEDSS –
which is used to track and transmit sensitive information related to certain
infectious diseases), and the mainframe-based MMIS. These systems, and many
more, are supported by DHMH’s network infrastructure. DHMH operates a wide
area network with approximately 9,000 user connections across the State. This
wide area network has connections to local health departments, State hospitals,
health clinics, DHMH headquarters facility, the Statewide Government Intranet,
and the Internet.
Finding 10
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage and controls for the DHMH
network were not sufficient.
Analysis
Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage and controls for the
DHMH network were not sufficient.
 Although DHMH used both a network-based IDPS and protective software
installed directly on servers, based on our inquiry, DHMH determined that
130 servers within DHMH’s neutral network zone were not protected by
network or server based IDPS. The servers without any form of IDPS
protection are at a greater risk of being compromised than servers with IDPS
protection. Furthermore, any of the servers that are compromised could be
used to launch attacks against other servers in the internal network.
 Administrative access to the device providing network-based IDPS was not
adequately controlled. Over 500 addresses had network-level administrative
access to this device; however, only three network addresses required such
access. Furthermore, certain password and account controls over accounts
which could administer this device were not enabled. Specifically, password
complexity, password history, and account lockout were not enabled.
Accordingly, these password and account controls were not in accordance
with the requirements specified by DoIT’s Information Security Policy.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Complete IDPS coverage includes use of properly configured network-based
IDPS to aid significantly in the detection/prevention of and response to potential
network security breaches and attacks.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DHMH
a. provide adequate IDPS coverage for all servers in the aforementioned
neutral network zone,
b. limit network-level administrative access to the network-based IDPS
device to only those users requiring such access, and
c. ensure that password and account controls over the network-based IDPS
device comply with DoIT requirements.
Finding 11
Network access to critical internal network devices was not properly
restricted and monitoring of security events over a critical firewall was not
adequate.
Analysis
Network access to critical internal network devices was not properly restricted
and monitoring of security events over a critical firewall was not adequate.
 Numerous rules on several DHMH’s firewalls allowed unnecessary access to
critical devices on the internal network. Specifically, rules on the firewalls
protecting NEDSS and the firewalls protecting the internal network from the
Internet and DHMH’s disaster recovery alternate site allowed numerous
unnecessary connections to internal network devices. In addition, many
outdated rules existed on these firewalls. Similar conditions were commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
 The device used to aggregate security logs from numerous DHMH network
devices for review and analysis was not configured to report security-related
activities on the Internet firewall. Specifically, firewall activities such as
firewall configuration changes and failed login attempts were not reported for
review and analysis. As a result, unnecessary or unauthorized changes could
be made to this firewall without detection by management.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DHMH
a. configure its firewalls to properly protect all critical network devices;
(repeat)
26

--- Page 29 ---
b. configure the aggregation device to include Internet firewall security-
related activities such as configuration changes and failed logon attempts;
and
c. review and analyze the reports of Internet firewall activity from this
aggregation device, document these reviews, and retain the
documentation for future reference.
Finding 12
Malware protection on DHMH workstations and servers needs
improvement.
Analysis
Malware protection on DHMH workstations and servers needs improvement.
 Our test of 10 computers disclosed that sufficient protection for malware was
not established. Specifically, the anti-malware software used to protect
DHMH computers was not properly configured to limit users’ capabilities. In
this regard, settings on 6 computers tested allowed users to exclude any files
or folders from malware scans and to disable the anti-malware features
rendering the software unable to protect against attacks. Additionally, 9 of the
10 computers were running an outdated version of the installed anti-malware
software, and the remaining computer did not have anti-malware software
protection enabled. The anti-malware vendor updated its software on a
regular basis to fix operating problems identified with the software and to
introduce new features.
 Certain workstations were configured with users having administrator rights.
Administrator rights represent the highest permission level that can be granted
to users and allow users to install software and change configuration settings.
Our testing of seven workstations disclosed that, for five of the workstations,
employees’ user accounts were defined with administrator rights rather than
with user rights and did not need these administrative rights. As a result, if
these workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run with
administrative rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of
compromise than if the employees’ user accounts operated with only user
rights.
 The computers we tested had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security software related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, DHMH had not
27

--- Page 30 ---
updated its workstations for these patches. For example, 7 of 10 computers
tested for one of these software products were running older versions of this
software.
Best practice guidance from the DoIT Information Security Policy, states that
agencies should configure security settings of information technology products to
the most restrictive mode consistent with operational requirements.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that DHMH
a. disable the settings which allow users to exclude files from malware scans
and override and modify default security controls established by
management,
b. automatically update all computers for the latest versions of the anti-
malware software and verify that the anti-malware software is enabled on
all computers,
c. limit administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel who
require such rights for their job duties, and
d. ensure that all computers are kept current for all critical security-related
updates to potentially vulnerable installed software.
Finding 13
Controls over the NEDSS database and the HMIS application were not
sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over the NEDSS database and HMIS application were not sufficient.
 The NEDSS database was not configured to log any database security activity.
Examples of database activities which should be logged and analyzed include,
but are not limited to, direct changes to critical data tables, changes to
database security settings, and use of certain critical privileges. This
condition could result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities (affecting the
integrity of the production database information) going undetected by
management.
 Passwords for 11 NEDSS database system, user, and application accounts had
no requirements with respect to length or complexity. Furthermore, two
active default accounts still used their default passwords which were widely
known. The DoIT Information Security Policy requires passwords to be a
28

--- Page 31 ---
minimum of eight characters and meet certain complexity requirements and
further requires that all default system passwords be changed.
 Several critical security-related reports for the HMIS system either were not
reviewed or were only reviewed for certain types of events (for example
account deletions) but not for more significant changes, such as account
additions and modifications. Accordingly, errors or unauthorized changes
affecting HMIS data (such as patient hospital billings and receivables) could
occur without detection by management. A similar condition has been
commented upon in our three preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that DHMH
a. configure the NEDSS database to log all critical database security
activity;
b. ensure that NEDSS database passwords comply with the DoIT
Information Security Policy requirements with respect to length,
complexity, and default values; and
c. review on a regular basis, all HMIS critical security-related reports for
all significant security events (repeat).
Capital Grant Project Checks
Finding 14
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing and
handling of settlement checks issued for capital grant projects.
Analysis
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing and handling of
settlement checks issued for capital grant projects. One Office of Capital Projects
(OCP) employee had unilateral control over the disbursement process, and OCP
did not perform an independent verification to ensure the proper disposition of
these checks.
Specifically, the same employee submitted the payment request documentation,
which was not approved by the OCP Director or any other supervisory personnel
before submission; picked up the applicable check from the Comptroller of
Maryland’s General Accounting Division; and distributed the check to the grantee
at settlement. Furthermore, OCP did not perform an independent verification of
the disposition of each check requested to ensure that a settlement actually
occurred and that the grantee acknowledged receipt of the check. Finally, this
29

--- Page 32 ---
employee was also responsible for reconciling the project grant expenditures to
the State’s accounting records. As a result, there is a lack of assurance as to the
proper disposition of capital project grant settlement checks returned to DHMH
for distribution.
Grants provide funding to eligible counties, municipalities, and nonprofit agencies
for the acquisition, design, construction, renovation, and equipping of approved
facilities that provide direct care services to certain individuals. OCP is
responsible for the oversight of these capital project grant programs and the grant
settlement process. During fiscal years 2012 and 2013, grants awarded totaled
$13.6 million and grant settlement checks returned for distribution totaled $2.6
million.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that DHMH establish adequate internal controls over capital
project checks issued for grant projects. Specifically, we recommend that
a. grant payment requests submitted for processing be properly authorized
by independent supervisory personnel,
b. the proper disposition of the checks be verified by independent personnel
by sighting the grantee acknowledgment of receipt of the check at
settlement, and
c. grant expenditures be reconciled to State records by personnel
independent of the check processing functions.
Equipment
Finding 15
DHMH record keeping and physical inventory procedures were not in
compliance with certain DGS requirements.
Analysis
DHMH record keeping and physical inventory procedures were not in compliance
with certain provisions of the Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory
Control Manual. DHMH’s Office of the Secretary provides various support
services to certain units of DHMH, including the maintenance of equipment
records. According to DHMH’s records, as of June 23, 2013, the value of the
equipment for these units totaled approximately $45.8 million.
 Equipment items purchased by DHMH were not always recorded in the detail
equipment records and tagged as required. Specifically, our test of 76
equipment items purchased during fiscal years 2012 and 2013, totaling $1.1
30

--- Page 33 ---
million, disclosed that 62 items costing a total of $791,000 were not properly
recorded in the detail records as of July 1, 2013, and 60 of those 62 items did
not have property tags affixed.
 Physical inventories at three DHMH units, with equipment totaling $4.3
million, were not certified in writing by the property officer who completed
them, as required. In addition, as of July 15, 2013, the required annual
physical inventory for one of the units, with $1.9 million of sensitive
inventory, had not been performed in three years.
DGS’ Inventory Control Manual requires the recordation of all capital equipment
items in the detail records for identification and control purposes and that proper
identification be placed on each equipment item. In addition, the Manual requires
that periodic physical inventories be conducted (annually for sensitive inventory),
that variances be investigated and resolved, and that related documentation,
including a certification in writing regarding the accuracy of the physical
inventory, be retained for audit and verification purposes.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that DHMH comply with the requirements of the
Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual.
31

--- Page 34 ---
32

--- Page 35 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary and
other units of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the
period beginning October 15, 2009 to February 26, 2013. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHMH’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal funds, audits of local health departments
and private providers, grants, procurement and disbursement activities, corporate
purchasing cards, cash receipts, payroll, financial investigations and related
accounts receivable records for patients in State facilities, information system
security, and equipment. We also determined the status of the findings contained
in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DHMH’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from various key DHMH internal systems, such as the Hospital
Management Information System for the purpose of testing accounts receivable
for patients in State facilities. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
33

--- Page 36 ---
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit included a review of certain support services (for example, payroll,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided by DHMH’s Office of the Secretary and related units to the other units
of DHMH.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of DHMH’s compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including DHMH.
DHMH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect DHMH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our
report also includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to DHMH that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DHMH’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHMH regarding the
results of our review of its response.
34

--- Page 38 ---
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Office of the Secretary
Finding 1
DHMH did not formally communicate certain pertinent aspects of the MERP procurement
process and the potential risks regarding the award decision when it sought Board of
Public Works (BPW) approval of the contract.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that, in the future, DHMH ensure that all pertinent circumstances
regarding significant procurement award decisions, including potential risks, are clearly
documented and conveyed to BPW for its consideration of contracts submitted for
approval.
Administration’s Response
The Administration does not concur with the finding. The procurement was fully compliant with
State law and regulations, and DHMH identified and explained to BPW and other staff the legal
issue that arose at the end of the procurement. On February 15, 2012, prior to the meeting of the
BPW in which the contract was approved, DHMH made a presentation to all key BPW staff
concerning the legal issue. Counsel to DHMH later sent to BPW’s legal counsel the cases that
support DHMH’s position on the issue.1
Finding 2
The LTSS information technology (IT) project was not adequately planned nor was DoIT
approval obtained when the project was initiated. The use of the MOU resulted in the
project work not being subject to competitive procurement as would normally be required
by State procurement regulations.
1Auditor’s Comment: DHMH’s response indicates that it does not agree with the finding because the MERP
procurement was fully compliant with State laws and regulations. Our report did not state that any State laws or
regulations were violated. Rather, the report stated that DHMH did not formally communicate certain matters to the
BPW or its staff. Specifically, there was a lack of evidence that the BPW or its staff were apprised that RFP
qualifications were changed to obtain bidders, that the successful bidder had past performance issues involving
similar projects, and that a change was made to the contractor liability provisions after the successful bidder was
notified of the award. DHMH stated in its response that the contractor liability issue was explained at a pre-meeting
to BPW staff, which we noted in the audit report. However, other than this issue, the actual topics discussed could
not be recalled by a number of individuals who attended the pre-meeting. Furthermore, there was no evidence that
this issue, as well as the other matters pertaining to this contract, were clearly identified and conveyed to the BPW at
its meeting when contract approval was being sought.
Page | 1

--- Page 39 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHMH ensure that, in the future,
a. all information technology projects are properly planned, with their full scope and
anticipated funding needs identified prior to implementation;
b. all qualifying projects are submitted to DoIT for review and oversight prior to their
initiation;
c. formal arrangements with state agencies are closely evaluated to ensure that the
required services should not otherwise be obtained through a competitive procurement
process; and
d. all MOU provisions requiring the review and approval of significant subcontracts are
complied with.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs and every effort will be made to ensure all information
technology projects are planned, with the full scope and funding needs identified prior to
implementation. We note however, that this goal may not always be possible to attain, as
some information technology projects change after they are started. When this occurs, the
Department will disclose the change and follow the appropriate procedure, as it did in this
case.2
b. The Administration concurs and will make every effort to ensure all qualifying projects are
submitted to DoIT for review and oversight prior to initiation. We note however, some
projects start when they are not qualifying as a Major IT Project, as in this case. In
December 2012, DHMH voluntarily and immediately sought DoIT oversight when it
recognized that the expansion of the Hilltop-led LTSS project had caused that project to
become a “major IT development project” for purposes of the law requiring DoIT oversight.2
c. The Administration concurs and will ensure that formal arrangements with state agencies are
closely evaluated to ensure that the required services should not otherwise be obtained
through a competitive procurement process.
d. The Administration concurs and will ensure that all MOU provisions requiring the review
and approval of significant subcontracts are complied with.
2
Auditor’s Comment: While DHMH agrees with the recommendations, its response indicates that it may not
always be able to plan the full scope and funding needs of all IT projects and submit major projects to DoIT prior to
implementation. Specifically, DHMH states that some projects may change after they are started and may not
initially qualify as a major IT project. However, comprehensive project planning and oversight, as discussed in the
finding, would minimize such instances and would provide DHMH with the opportunity to readily identify major IT
projects so that the full benefits of DoIT oversight could be obtained. In addition, DoIT advised DHMH that it
should have been involved from the start of the project.
Page | 2

--- Page 40 ---
Finding 3
The OIG had not established formal written policies for conducting provider grant audits
in a timely manner and in accordance with established professional standards.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the OIG
a. establish a written policy to govern the timely completion of its grant audits,
b. complete its grant audits on a timely basis, and
c. establish a formal policy requiring LHD and private non-profit provider grant audits to
be conducted in accordance with professional standards.
Administration’s Response
a. We concur in part. While it is our intention to develop a written policy to govern the timely
completion of its grant audits, the division does not concur with the finding that audits be
completed within an “established 4 year audit cycle.” The Fiscal Services Administration,
(FSA), policy requiring a 4 year grant audit cycle plan was in effect when the Division was
under the control of the FSA. Subsequent to the Division being moved to the Office of
Inspector General (OIG), the policy was not considered to be in effect. In addition, the FSA
policy was not mandated by regulation or statute. Once the Division was placed under the
OIG, and after reviewing the deficiencies in the previous audit reports, a new audit chief was
hired to re-engineer the audit process in effect at the time. Thus, the division is currently in
the process of working to eliminate the audit “backlog”, at which time a specific policy
governing the timely completion of the grant audits will be implemented.
b. We concur. An audit plan will be developed in conjunction with the recent hiring of a new
audit chief. It is our objective to establish and annually update the audit schedule based upon
funding levels and risk assessments which will also take into consideration expiring record
retention periods. The plan and any updates will also take into account the exigent needs for
investigations, as the Department is often asked to review and investigate various issues
requiring the OIG to prioritize audits and investigations accordingly.
c. We concur. The Division’s goal is for every audit to meet generally accepted auditing and
government auditing standards. Within the last several years, the Division has increased the
quality of its audits with improvements to the following areas:
- Audit Planning
- Internal Controls and Risk Assessment
- Testing Procedures
- Supervisory Oversight
Page | 3

--- Page 41 ---
Finding 4
The OIG did not adequately verify LHD and private non-profit provider compliance with
sub-vendor audit and oversight requirements.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the OIG properly verify LHD and private non-profit provider
compliance with sub-vendor audit and oversight requirements during its audits of these
entities in accordance with established DHMH standards.
Administration’s Response
We concur with the recommendation. As a result of recent improvements in the audit process,
the Audit Division’s Internal Control Questionnaire, audit programs and testing procedures now
address the issues noted.
Finding 5
Records for open patient financial investigations were not properly maintained and
monitored. In addition, investigations were not always timely conducted and reviewed by
supervisory personnel.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHMH ensure that
a. open patient financial investigation records are properly maintained and monitored,
and
b. financial investigations are timely conducted.
Administration’s Response
a. We concur that the open patient financial investigation records were not properly maintained
and monitored.
The Division will be working with the HMIS project team to review current protocols and
determine a more effective way to ensure all completed investigations are sent to the HMIS
team are successfully cleared from the report.
Additionally, the staff at the field offices will continue to review the report monthly to
determine which accounts need to be removed due to completion and which accounts need
further investigation before completion. The Financial Agent Supervisor at each office will
now be advised that they must review, on a monthly basis, all open investigations with each
Page | 4

--- Page 42 ---
agent in an attempt to expedite the completion of the investigations. For more effective
controls, each Financial Agent Supervisor will be advised that he/she must forward the
completed report each month to the Financial Agent Operations Chief for review.
b. We concur that the financial investigations should be timely conducted.
The Financial Agent Supervisor and the Field Chief will conduct monthly reviews of all open
investigations with all of their subordinate agents to determine why investigations are in
incomplete and what can be done to expedite the completion of the investigation in a timely
manner. There are many valid reasons that an investigation may be incomplete and ongoing
and more aggressive monitoring of each of these categories will be included in the
supervisory responsibilities. All accounts without a valid reason to be open will continue to
be pursued and investigated until resolved and rated for billing. If the account cannot be
rated due to the failure on the part of the patient or their family to provide the required
financial information, the account will be rated at the full per diem cost in accordance with
regulations, billed for the required number of billings, and then transferred to CCU for
action. Again, administrative action with our HMIS team will be taken to remove all
accounts that have been completed and rated but remain on the open accounts list.
Finding 6
DHMH did not adequately pursue collection of delinquent DCAR accounts receivables.
Furthermore, denied insurance and Medicare claims were not timely resolved.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHMH ensure
a. delinquent accounts receivable are adequately pursued for collection and transferred
to CCU as required (repeat); and
b. denied insurance and Medicare claims are timely resolved.
Administration’s Response
a. We concur with the recommendation and will ensure delinquent account receivables are
adequately pursued for collection and transferred to CCU as required.
In addition to the supervisory controls instituted as a result of the prior audit
recommendation, DCAR will implement another level of supervisor review. For delinquent
accounts determined by the financial agent offices, the Chief for Field Operations will
conduct a monthly review of accounts to determine which accounts to transfer to CCU within
the 120 day statute. In addition, procedures are being instituted for each Financial Agent
Supervisor to review and complete the private pay aging report and the unrated aging report
Page | 5

--- Page 43 ---
at the 90 day period to ensure proper review in advance of the 120 day statutory limit. These
reports will be forwarded to the Financial Agent Operations Chief each month for review.
For Insurance accounts, the Fiscal Services Manager will perform a review of all accounts
that remain denied by the insurer after all claim appeals, and transfer subject accounts to
CCU. DCAR will be exploring the feasibility of developing tools to automate some of the
manual steps required in this process.
b. We concur that denied insurance and Medicare claims were not timely resolved.
Denied insurance will be addressed upon denial and corrected or referred to the hospital for
medical care response where appropriate. Late filing and coding errors pertaining to
Medicare claims were due to the improper training of staff. The Division has had to rebuild
its Medicare billing unit as a result of retirements of its senior Medicare supervisors. The
remaining staff had not been trained properly to resolve denied claims in the timeliest
manner. In FY 2013 new staff were hired and properly trained in Medicare billing and
claims resolution. As a result of the hiring and training, there has been a significant decrease
in Medicare claim errors and the denied claims are being addressed upon denial. As a result
of the new staff, Medicare denials have decreased and revenues increased.
Finding 7
DCAR lacked appropriate procedures to ensure all cash receipts were deposited.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHMH ensure that
a. the employee who prepares the initial record of collections forwards a copy of that
record directly to the employee responsible for the deposit verification, and
b. the employee performing the deposit verification not have access to the related cash
receipts.
We advised DHMH on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Administration’s Response
We concur that the deposit verification procedures were inadequate.
a. We concur with the recommendation. However, due to the limited number of staff at the
time, it was necessary to utilize the DCAR’s former Auditor to deposit the collections in a
timely manner. That issue has been resolved because the former Auditor is no longer
Page | 6

--- Page 44 ---
employed at DCAR and the hiring of additional staff has helped with appropriately assigning
these functions to different staff.
b. We concur with the recommendation to separate the duties of processing receipts and
deposit. As a result, DCAR has implemented the following procedure in accordance to the
Auditor’s recommendation as of July 28, 2013:
 The Office Secretary opens and date stamps all mail.
 The Office Secretary runs 2 tapes; photocopies the tapes, and the checks.
 The checks and 1 tape are given to the Cashier.
 The Office Secretary files one original tape in a binder along with the check copies and
gives the other tape to the DCAR Auditor for reconciliation.
 The Cashier performs regular deposit duties.
Through these changes, the current DCAR Auditor does not handle the checks, nor does he
have HMIS access.
Additionally the Division will be testing scanning equipment to improve this process. We
anticipate this equipment will allow for the scanning of checks for direct deposit. After
testing, a determination will be made regarding any additional policies, training and
resources needed to implement this new process.
Finding 8
Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursement requests was not always effective.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHMH ensure that federal fund reimbursement requests are properly
reviewed, along with supporting schedules and documents, and the reviews are
documented.
Administration’s Response
We concur with the auditor’s recommendation.
Effective August 2014, as a federal draw request is received from an agency, Fiscal Services
personnel ensures that two signatures/initials (requestor and supervisor) are present. In turn,
before Fiscal Services submits a federal drawdown request to the State Treasurer, it will be
signed / initialed by preparer and a supervisor.
Page | 7

--- Page 45 ---
Finding 9
Corporate purchasing card transactions were not always thoroughly reviewed and
supported, which allowed certain improper purchases to go undetected.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure that all corporate card purchases are supported by appropriate documentation
and thoroughly reviewed by supervisory personnel,
b. ensure that purchasing card activity logs and the related monthly cardholder
statements are signed as required, and
c. incorporate and document the use of Level-3 purchasing card data in the supervisory
review of the activity logs to help ensure the propriety of CPC activity.
Administration’s Response
We concur with the auditor’s recommendation.
a.,b. Due to DHMH’s size, assurance that certain corporate credit card program requirements (i.e.
supervisory review to ensure adequate supporting documentation for purchases, presence of
required signatures, etc.) is decentralized. However, both Fiscal Services Administration and
the Office of the Inspector General perform monthly audits of select CPC transactions and
documentation. In addition, each month the Purchasing Card Program’s designated fiscal
officers and administrators certify that the aforementioned has been performed. CPC fiscal
officers are responsible for maintaining corporate purchasing card documentation for audit.
Therefore, Fiscal Services Administration will send them a monthly reminder that they must
ensure that all transactions are supported by adequate documentation and forms/statements
are properly signed.
c. On a monthly basis, Fiscal Services Administration sends Level 3 purchasing card data to the
Office of the Inspector General, each agency’s Chief Fiscal Officer, along with their
designated fiscal officer and administrator for the Corporate Purchasing Card Program. To
comply with auditors’ recommendation, when Fiscal Services sends Level 3 data, fiscal
officers are instructed that they are required to review and share the Level 3 data with all of
their reviewers (Authorized Reviewer Agreement - Exhibit H). In addition, we have added
Level 3 review requirements to the certification statement at the bottom of the Activity Log
which reads: “… The authorized reviewer per the cardholder’s Exhibit H must review the
Activity Log and bank statement, along with documentation (original invoices and electronic
Level 3 report) detailing each charge/credit to ensure their propriety. To document the
above, the cardholder and authorized reviewer must sign and date all pages of the Activity
Log and the monthly bank statement…”
Page | 8

--- Page 46 ---
Additionally, DHMH believes that based on the monthly reviews performed by the Office of
Inspector General, a performance best practice is in effect as it relates to Level 3 data.
Finding 10
Intrusion detection prevention system coverage and controls for the DHMH network were
not sufficient.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DHMH
a. provide adequate IDPS coverage for all servers in the aforementioned neutral network
zone,
b. limit network-level administrative access to the network-based IDPS device to only
those users requiring such access, and
c. ensure that password and account controls over the network-based IDPS device comply
with DoIT requirements.
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs with the findings and we have already implemented the
recommendations in March 2014. We have therefore:
a. implemented IDPS coverage for the specified zones,
b. limited sources for administrative access as recommended, and
c. configured IDPS authentication to appropriately comply with DoIT requirements.
Finding 11
Network access to critical internal network devices was not properly restricted and
monitoring of security events over a critical firewall was not adequate.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DHMH
a. configure its firewalls to properly protect all critical network devices; (repeat)
b. configure the aggregation device to include Internet firewall security-related activities
such as configuration changes and failed logon attempts; and
c. review and analyze the reports of Internet firewall activity from this aggregation
device, document these reviews, and retain the documentation for future reference.
Page | 9

--- Page 47 ---
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs with the findings and we have already implemented the
recommendations in March 2014. We have therefore:
a. configured firewalls to protect critical network devices and established a semi-annual rule
review process by security staff,
b. configured the aggregation device to include the recommended security related activities, and
c. established procedures for daily log review and documentation which is archived for future
reference.
Finding 12
Malware protection on DHMH workstations and servers needs improvement.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that DHMH
a. disable the settings which allow users to exclude files from malware scans and override
and modify default security controls established by management,
b. automatically update all computers for the latest versions of the anti-malware software
and verify that the anti-malware software is enabled on all computers,
c. limit administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel who require such
rights for their job duties, and
d. ensure that all computers are kept current for all critical security-related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software.
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs with the findings and we have already implemented the
recommendations in March 2014. We have therefore:
a. automated the recommended settings via a centralized management server,
b. likewise automated the recommended settings via a centralized management server,
c. established procedures for identifying and authorizing users for administrative workstation
access, and implemented controls to limit access,
d. automated critical security-related updates to computers via a centralized management
platform.
Page | 10

--- Page 48 ---
Finding 13
Controls over the NEDSS database and the HMIS application were not sufficient.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that DHMH
a. configure the NEDSS database to log all critical database security activity;
b. ensure that NEDSS database passwords comply with the DoIT Information Security
Policy requirements with respect to length, complexity, and default values; and
c. review on a regular basis, all HMIS critical security-related reports for all significant
security events (repeat).
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs with this finding and recommendation. The NEDSS database
has been configured to log all critical database security activity. Logs will be reviewed on a
weekly basis by a third party who has been trained on what to search for.
b. The Administration concurs with this finding and recommendation. Database passwords
strengthening are being worked on with CDC contractor. The solution is currently being
tested on the NEDSS test system. It is expected that by March 2015 the evaluation and
testing will be completed and the new solution will be implemented on the production and
failover servers.
 Passwords implemented on test and eventually production servers are required to have at
least 1 or more capital letters, at least 1 or more special characters, at least 1 or more
numbers and at least 8 characters in length.
 Default accounts have been disabled on all servers.
c. The Administration concurs with this finding and recommendation. The HMIS security work
flow has been updated to include the review of all HMIS critical security-related reports on a
regular basis. As of early October 2014, all reviews are being documented. The HMIS
Security Policy & Procedures manual has been revised to clarify this audit control
responsibility. Similarly, report reviewing guidelines have been updated.
Finding 14
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing and handling of
settlement checks issued for capital grant projects.
Page | 11

--- Page 49 ---
Recommendation 14
We recommend that DHMH establish adequate internal controls over capital project
checks issued for grant projects. Specifically, we recommend that
a. grant payment requests submitted for processing be properly authorized by
independent supervisory personnel,
b. the proper disposition of the checks be verified by independent personnel by sighting
the grantee acknowledgment of receipt of the check at settlement, and
c. grant expenditures be reconciled to State records by personnel independent of the
check processing functions.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs that the internal controls over the processing and handling of
capital project grant checks returned for distribution at settlement were inadequate and has
established adequate internal controls over its Capital Project check disbursements.
Specifically, OCPBES has implemented processes that require grant payment requests
submitted to DGA to be properly authorized by independent management personnel. Once
the BPW approves the project:
 The Payment Request form is completed and electronically sent by the OCPBES to
the grantee for signature.
 After the responsible person for the grantee signs the Payment Request it is returned
electronically to OCPBES.
 The Payment Request Form, Payment Block Form and the General Accounting
Memo are prepared. The General Accounting Memo is signed by independent
management personnel for proper authorization. The forms are sent to General
Accounting for processing.
 The check, once ready, is picked up from the Comptroller’s Office and signed for by
an authorized person from OCPBES
 In the OCPBES a copy of the check is made and signed by a supervisor and the
person picking up the check indicating the date the check was received in OCPBES.
 The check is deposited in the General Accounting safe until settlement date.
 Independent management personnel signature indicating the removal of the check
from the safe on the day of settlement to be delivered to Grantee.
b. The Administration concurs. Effective immediately, proper disposition of the checks will be
verified by independent personnel by sighting the “right of recovery” form signed by the
vendor at settlement acknowledging receipt of the check. OCPBES utilizes a tracking log to
verify proper disposition of checks consisting of the following information:
 Grantees Name
Page | 12

--- Page 50 ---
 Property Address
 Settlement date
 Check number
 Amount of the check
 Signature of the OCPBES representative delivering the check to Settlement.
 Signature and title of the responsible Grantee/representative receiving the check at
settlement.
 Signature of OCPBES representative at settlement indicating the Right of Recovery
(ROR) was received at Settlement.
 Supervisor’s review and signature for Disposition of Check and Right of Recovery.
 The check tracking log and the copy of the check are put in a folder for record
keeping.
c. The Administration concurs. We are currently performing the independent invoice
verification process but we will strengthen our procedures by adding a signature sheet for
documenting the independent personnel that performs the reconciliation process.
Finding 15
DHMH record keeping and physical inventory procedures were not in compliance with
certain DGS requirements.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that DHMH comply with the requirements of the Department of General
Services’ Inventory Control Manual.
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs. The majority of the items identified in the audit was a part of the
OPR equipment inventory and have been since added to the inventory records. Also, the
Department performs an audit of the corporate credit purchases to ensure that required items are
added to the physical records and properly tagged. All future equipment will be properly
certified in writing by the Department’s Property Accountable Officers.
In FY13, OPR took steps to secure the services of a vendor to assist us in conducting a complete
inventory of items purchased through the federal grant programs that OPR administers. The
vendor was initially secured for our Health and Medical Regions 1 and 2 in Western Maryland as
a phase I test. That process was completed and through a larger contract, a vendor was secured to
complete a similar inventory process in the other three Health and Medical Regions. The process
should be completed by the end of this calendar year having accounted for every health and
Page | 13

--- Page 51 ---
medical region in the state- all 24 local jurisdictions. While the current process is a physical
inventory to ensure that reportable items are accounted for and appropriately tagged, it will also
encompass the OPR sensitive audit requirements. In addition, OPR met with the DHMH Central
Services Division to clarify the inventory accounting requirements, establish procedures for
accountability of items that may be directly shipped to the end user and clarify procedures and
documentation for the transfer of items to the appropriate administration, agency, or healthcare
facility inventory. OPR will meet again with the DHMH Central Services Division when the
physical inventory is completed to review the results and ensure that the documentation is
complete. OPR should then be prepared to meet all the requirements of the sensitive audit and
the physical audit going forward.
Page | 14

--- Page 52 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Raymond G. Burton, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Daniel R. Brann
Timothy S. Rice
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditor