Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Holly Center
Date: 10/23/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d724560674454
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:54:26.819047
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Holly Center
March 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401· 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously through the Office’s website, by a toll-free call to 1-877-
FRAUD-11, or by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department's
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Holly Center, which is located in Salisbury, Maryland, provides comprehensive
services for persons of all ages who are developmentally disabled and reside in
the nine counties of Maryland’s Eastern Shore. Additionally, the Center provides
certain outpatient services, and coordination and support services to day programs
and group homes for the developmentally disabled. As of June 30, 2014, the
Center had a licensed capacity of 150 inpatient residents. During fiscal year
2014, the Center had an average daily population of 73 residents. According to
the State’s records, total Center expenditures totaled approximately $17.5 million
during fiscal year 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 26, 2011. We determined that the
Center satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Pharmacy Contract
Finding 1
The Center paid pharmaceutical invoices without verification of the items
received and the costs charged.
Analysis
Billings from the Center’s pharmaceutical contractor were not verified prior to
payment. The Center’s contract required the vendor to obtain and deliver
pharmaceuticals on a routine basis. The Center was to reimburse the vendor for
the actual cost of the pharmaceuticals and pay the vendor a monthly
administrative fee. However, the Center did not verify the items billed to
documentation of the type and quantity of pharmaceuticals actually received and
did not obtain documentation from the vendor to substantiate the unit costs
charged, as permitted by the contract.
The Center has contracted with this vendor since July 2008. The current contract,
for approximately $540,000, covers the period from March 2014 through
3

--- Page 6 ---
February 2019. According to the State’s records, the Center paid the vendor
approximately $39,000 during fiscal year 2014.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center
a. verify that pharmaceutical items billed were actually received; and
b. obtain documentation, such as copies of invoices paid by the vendor, to
verify the accuracy of invoiced costs, at least on a test basis.
Equipment
Finding 2
Physical inventories of equipment were not documented by the Center and
reconciliations of equipment records were not performed in a timely manner.
Analysis
Physical inventory and record keeping procedures were not in compliance with
certain requirements of the Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory
Control Manual. The Center’s equipment balance reported to DGS as of June 30,
2014 totaled approximately $2.2 million.
 The Center lacked documentation that complete physical inventories of
sensitive and non-sensitive equipment were conducted during our audit
period. Although the Center’s detail equipment records indicated dates
throughout our audit period on which certain equipment items were last
inventoried, the Center did not maintain documentation, such as count sheets,
to support that these inventory counts had been conducted and reconciled to
the detailed equipment records.
 Reconciliations of the equipment control account with the detail records were
not performed in a timely manner. As of July 2014, the Center had not
performed reconciliations since October 2013.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. The DGS
Inventory Control Manual requires a documented physical inventory of sensitive
equipment every year and of non-sensitive equipment every three years.
Additionally, the Manual requires that a control account be maintained and that
the aggregate balance of the related detail records be periodically reconciled with
the control account balance.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Center comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the DGS Inventory Control Manual (repeat).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Holly Center of the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period beginning
May 5, 2011 and ending June 30, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included resident funds, procurements and disbursements,
cash receipts, equipment, corporate purchasing cards, and payroll. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Center’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll
Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering the State’s
Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Center’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also
includes a finding regarding a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant finding was
communicated to the Center that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DHMH’s response, on behalf of the Center, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
The Center paid pharmaceutical invoices without verification of the items
received and the costs charged.
Auditor’s Recommendation:
We recommend that the Center
a. verify that pharmaceutical items billed were actually received; and
b. obtain documentation, such as copies of invoices paid by the vendor, to
verify the accuracy of invoiced costs, at least on a test basis.
Administration’s Response:
a. Administration concurs with the recommendation. Holly Center will ensure
that pharmaceutical items billed were actually received. This concern was
immediately addressed during the audit by the implementation of nurse
verification upon pharmacy delivery of non-unit dose items included in the
delivery as well as the maintenance of those packaging invoices for one year.
b. Administration concurs with the recommendation that documentation should
be obtained from the pharmaceutical vendor to verify the accuracy of invoiced
costs. This concern was immediately addressed during the audit by the
implementation of a 10% monthly random monitoring sample which includes
cost lists. As of February 1, 2015, documentation of the review process will
be completed and maintained by the Center.
Finding 2
Physical inventories of equipment were not documented by the Center and
reconciliations of equipment records were not performed in a timely manner.
Auditor’s Recommendation:
We recommend that the Center comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the DGS Inventory Control Manual (repeat).
Administration’s Response:
Administration concurs that the Center should comply with the requirements of
the DGS Inventory Control Manual. The agency previously attempted to correct
this finding by utilization of the A-Track System (electronic tracking device);
however, formal documentation of the inventory was not maintained. Effective
January 4, 2015, formal documentation, i.e., a count sheet, was subsequently
utilized during physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive equipment.
Both the Chief Financial Officer and the Chief Operating Officer will review and

--- Page 11 ---
verify the form is completed appropriately per the DGS Inventory Control
Manual. This documentation will be maintained by the agency.
Administration concurs that reconciliations of the equipment control account with
the detail records were not performed in a timely manner. Reconciliations, in
arrears, were completed by March 9, 2015, and reviewed and verified by the
Chief Operating Officer. In the future, reconciliations will be completed by the
Chief Financial Officer on a monthly basis, and will be reviewed and verified by
the Chief Operating Officer.

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker
Staff Auditor