Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Baltimore City
Date: 06/03/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ccc9d7245606742ea
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:47:00.320350
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Baltimore City, Maryland
May 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Financial Information 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Criminal Court Fees
* Finding 1 – Collection Efforts, and Related Recordkeeping, Were Not 7
Sufficient to Ensure Compliance With State Regulations
Civil Court Fees
* Finding 2 – The Office Had Not Established Adequate Accountability 8
and Control Over Civil Court Fee Collections
Jury Fund
* Finding 3 – The Office Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Disbursements 9
to Jurors
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Baltimore City and others, and subsequently distributes the funds collected to
the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2013 revenues
totaled $19,282,844. These revenues were distributed in the following manner:
 $2,035,641 was distributed to Baltimore City,
 $537,814 was distributed to others, and
 $16,709,389 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The Office’s fiscal year 2013 operating expenses, which were paid primarily from a
general fund appropriation, totaled $18,749,304.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust and special purpose funds that,
according to its records, had balances totaling $3,940,618 as of September 30, 2013.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated June 3, 2011. We determined that the Office
satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The remaining three findings are
repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Criminal Court Fees
Background
State law provides for the assessment of court fees of up to $205 on individuals found
guilty of a crime unless a waiver is granted by the judge. The courts may also assess
fines and penalties on individuals based on the nature of the crime. As allowed by
State law and pursuant to a memorandum of understanding, the Baltimore City
Sheriff’s Office (BCSO) maintains criminal court fee detailed accounts receivable
records, prepares the related dunning notices, and processes any collections and
distributes them to the appropriate State and local entities as required by law. The
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Baltimore City retained responsibility for
issuing the initial billings, maintaining the accounts receivable control account,
mailing the aforementioned dunning notices, and forwarding delinquent accounts to
the Department of Budget and Management’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) based
on information received from the BCSO.
According to the records maintained by the Office and BCSO, criminal fee
collections during fiscal year 2013 totaled approximately $87,400 and, as of June 30,
2013, the outstanding accounts receivable balance totaled approximately $12.1
million.
Finding 1
Collection efforts for certain accounts, and related recordkeeping, were not
sufficient to ensure compliance with State regulations.
Analysis
Collection efforts for certain accounts, and related recordkeeping, were not sufficient
to ensure compliance with State regulations.
 The Office did not issue dunning notices or forward certain accounts to CCU as
required. As of December 23, 2013, there were 31,169 accounts totaling
approximately $7.8 million, due prior to January 2009, that were not subject to
collection efforts (such as dunning notices and CCU referrals). A similar
condition has been commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Furthermore, our test of certain accounts due between December 2012 and July
2013 disclosed that not all accounts had been forwarded to CCU as required or
had been forwarded late.
 The Office did not pursue collection of any receivables for which a judge ordered
that the due date be deferred. For example, if a judge specified that court fees
were due within 30 days of a defendant’s release, BCSO did not record a due date
7

--- Page 10 ---
on the accounts receivable system since the defendant’s release date was
unknown. In April 2013, BCSO created a report that identified 10,390 open
accounts totaling $3.2 million with no due date recorded in the accounts
receivable system. As of December 5, 2013, the Office had not updated the
accounts receivable records, and no collections efforts had been performed for
any listed accounts. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
CCU regulations generally require that three written demands for payment be made
on accounts at 30-day intervals and, if no payments are received, the accounts be
considered delinquent and immediately referred to CCU for collection assistance.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. pursue collections via dunning notices, including the aforementioned $7.8
million and receivables for deferred court fees, and forward delinquent
accounts to CCU (repeat); and
b. maintain accounts receivable records which properly account for deferred
court fees (repeat).
Civil Court Fees
Finding 2
Adequate accountability and control had not been established over civil court fee
collections.
Analysis
The Office lacked adequate accountability and control over civil court fee collections,
which totaled $1.2 million during fiscal year 2013.
 The Office did not review employee access capabilities to perform critical
functions on its automated cash register system. We were advised by Office
management that a report identifying the system functions that each user could
perform had not been generated during our audit period. Upon our request, Office
personnel generated a report that indicated that over 800 individuals (including
individuals employed by other State agencies) had been granted access to this
system, as of November 4, 2013. Our test of 30 employees who were assigned
critical capabilities disclosed that 7 employees could perform incompatible
functions. Specifically, these employees could both process civil court fee
receipts and void the related transactions. In addition, 2 of these employees could
process accounts receivable transactions including non-cash credits. A similar
condition has been commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
8

--- Page 11 ---
 Civil court fees received by mail were not restrictively endorsed immediately
upon receipt. Rather, collections were processed by at least two employees before
being restrictively endorsed. As a result, receipts could be misappropriated
without detection.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. periodically review employee access capabilities for the automated cash
register system and ensure duties are properly separated (repeat),
b. take immediate action to address the specific access deficiencies noted above
and restrict the assignment of critical system functions to employees who
require such capabilities to perform their job duties (repeat), and
c. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt.
Jury Fund
Finding 3
The Office’s procedures did not sufficiently ensure the propriety of
disbursements to jurors.
Analysis
The Office did not sufficiently ensure the propriety of disbursements to jurors. As a
result, jury fund disbursements could be misappropriated without detection.
According to Office records, juror disbursements totaled approximately $835,000
during fiscal year 2013.
 The supervisor who reviewed the daily cash disbursements for Petit Jury jurors,
which totaled $760,000 during fiscal year 2013, did not verify the disbursements
to independent attendance records, such as to the check-in clerk’s manual
attendance log. Instead, the supervisor used an attendance report generated by the
jury management system. This report may not be a sufficiently reliable source.
Specifically, our review of access privileges to the system disclosed that all 18
employees, with system access, had the capability to both record attendance and
issue related juror payments. We were advised by Office management that all 18
employees needed these capabilities, due to the limited number of personnel.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to ensure the propriety of jury fund
disbursements have been commented upon in our four preceding audit reports
dating back to April 2002.
 The Office did not adequately segregate duties related to disbursements to Grand
Jury jurors, which totaled $75,000 during fiscal year 2013. Specifically, one
employee was responsible for collecting attendance data, entering the related
9

--- Page 12 ---
payee (juror) information in the jury management system, and submitting
information to the Baltimore City Finance Office for payment without
independent review and approval.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. use juror attendance records maintained by the check-in clerk to verify the
propriety of Petit Jury disbursements (repeat); and
b. separate responsibilities for collecting Grand Jury attendance data and for
processing and submitting information for payment, and ensure related
disbursements are verified by an independent employee.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Baltimore City,
Maryland for the period beginning September 13, 2010 and ending October 9, 2013.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related areas
of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas addressed by
the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected for real estate
transactions), accounts receivable, and bank accounts. Our audit procedures included
inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and
observations of the Office’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
Our audit included certain support services (such as cash deposits and payment of
operating expenses) provided by the Office to the Office of the Trust Clerk for
Baltimore City. However, our audit did not include certain support services provided
to the Office by the Administrative Office of Courts. These support services (such as
payroll, invoice processing, and maintenance of budgetary accounting records) are
included within the scope of our audits of the Judiciary.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may nevertheless
occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of internal control to
11

--- Page 14 ---
future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may change or compliance with
policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising its
legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Office’s ability
to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes a
finding regarding a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules,
or regulations.
The Judiciary’s response, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Staff Auditor