Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Central Region


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization which established three regions within the State, including the Central Region. The financial activities of the Baltimore City Detention Center (BCDC) and the Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center (BCBIC), as well as certain activities of the Chesapeake Detention Facility, were reorganized under the newly created Central Region. The activities of BCDC and BCBIC were previously audited during the audit of the DPSCS - Division of Pretrial Detention and Services, which ceased to exist as a separate budgetary unit due to this reorganization.
Date: 05/01/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d7245606745a0
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:25:34.864245
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Region
May 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
The Central Region of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) consists of the following correctional facilities (located primarily in
Baltimore City) that house sentenced inmates as well as the community
supervision offices for offenders serving terms of probation or parole in Baltimore
City and Baltimore County:
• Metropolitan Transition Center
• Maryland Reception, Diagnostic and Classification Center
• Baltimore Pre-Release Unit
• Baltimore City Correctional Center
• Central Maryland Correctional Facility
It also includes the three detention facilities in Baltimore City:
• Baltimore City Detention Center
• Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center
• Chesapeake Detention Facility (formerly known as the Maryland
Correctional Adjustment Center)
Effective July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization which
established three regions within the State (North, Central, and South). The
reorganization created a regional approach to providing inmate-related functions,
including incarceration, probation, parole, and reentry into society. This report
represents the results of our first fiscal compliance audit of the Central Region.
Our audit of the Central Region included the financial activities of the Baltimore
City Detention Center (BCDC) and the Baltimore Central Booking and Intake
Center (BCBIC), as well as certain activities of the Chesapeake Detention Facility
(CDF). The activities of BCDC and BCBIC were previously audited during our
audit of the DPSCS – Division of Pretrial Detention and Services, which ceased to
exist as a separate budgetary unit due to the reorganization. The activities of CDF
were previously audited under the DPSCS – Central Region Finance Office. The
Central Region Finance Office activities have since been absorbed by the South
Region as a result of the reorganization.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Our audit of the Central Region did not include the financial activities of the
correctional facilities located in the Central Region and certain financial activities
of CDF (maintenance of inmate fund records and processing federal
reimbursement requests). These financial support services are provided to the
Central Region by the DPSCS – South Region and are included within the scope
of that audit.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014, the expenditures for
BCDC, BCBIC, and CDF totaled $165 million. In addition, these detention
facilities housed 3,440 detainees as of June 30, 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report of DPSCS – Division of Pretrial Detention
and Services dated April 1, 2011. We determined that the Region satisfactorily
addressed these seven findings. As previously mentioned, the activities of BCDC
and BCBIC were previously audited during our audit of the DPSCS – Division of
Pretrial Detention and Services, which ceased to exist as a separate budgetary unit
due to the reorganization.
Our preceding audit report dated August 6, 2012 on DPSCS – Central Region
Finance Office included no findings directly related to CDF. As previously
mentioned, the activities of CDF (formerly known as the Maryland Correctional
Adjustment Center) were previously audited under the DPSCS – Central Region
Finance Office.
Findings and Recommendations
Inmate Funds
Finding 1
The Central Region had not fully reconciled its inmate fund records with the
corresponding records maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland.
Analysis
The Central Region had not fully reconciled the aggregate balance of its inmate
personal fund accounts for the Baltimore City Detention Center (BCDC) and
Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center (BCBIC), as recorded on its
Maryland Offender Banking System (MOBS), with the corresponding records
4

--- Page 7 ---
maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland. As of January 2015, the most recent
reconciliation was performed for June 2014 activity and that reconciliation
included an unresolved difference. Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services (DPSCS) management advised us that it has been unable to provide the
reports needed by the individual regions to perform reconciliations since the
Office of the Secretary implemented the Maryland Offender Banking System II
(MOBSII) in August 2014.
The June 2014 reconciliation indicated that the MOBS balance ($254,578)
exceeded the corresponding Comptroller balance ($243,342) by $11,236. The
Region had not resolved this difference which has been included as a reconciling
item on the monthly reconciliations since April 2014. Our review, however,
disclosed that $9,000 of this difference was caused by a mathematical error.
Nevertheless, this difference indicates that inmate funds on deposit with the
Comptroller may not be sufficient to cover the balance of inmate accounts in
MOBS.
Inmate accounts include funds earned by or received on behalf of inmates. These
funds, which are deposited with the State Treasurer, can be saved or inmates can
direct the Region to pay these funds to third parties.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Region perform the aforementioned reconciliations
on a periodic basis, investigate differences noted, and take appropriate
corrective action, including working with the DPSCS Office of the Secretary
to obtain the needed reports from MOBSII.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
The Region did not adequately verify that certain cash receipts were
deposited.
Analysis
The Region lacked adequate procedures to ensure that cash receipts, which
primarily related to inmate funds for BCDC and BCBIC, were deposited.
Specifically, the documents on which collections were initially recorded were not
forwarded directly to the employee who verified that recorded collections were
deposited. Instead, the documents, along with the related collections, were first
given to another employee who prepared the deposit. Consequently, the initial
source of recordation could be altered to conceal misappropriations. In addition,
5

--- Page 8 ---
prior to April 2014, the employee responsible for the deposit verification also had
access to the cash receipts. According to State records, cash receipts for BCDC
and BCBIC totaled approximately $2.7 million for calendar year 2013.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the employee who prepares the initial record of
collections forward this record directly to the independent employee who
performs the deposit verifications.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – Central Region. Because of a departmental
reorganization (which is explained on page 3 of this report), our audit of the
Central Region included the activities of the following DPSCS units for these
periods:
Central Region – July 1, 2012 to June 30, 2014
Division of Pretrial Detention and Services – April 16, 2010 to June 30, 2012
This audit included the financial activities of the Baltimore City Detention Center,
the Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center, and certain activities of the
Chesapeake Detention Facility.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included disbursements, cash receipts, payroll, inmate
funds, and equipment. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
6

--- Page 9 ---
our preceding audit report of the DPSCS – Division of Pretrial Detention and
Services.
Our audit did not include the financial activities (such as payroll processing,
purchasing, maintaining inmate fund records, processing federal reimbursement
requests, maintaining accounting records, and conducting related fiscal functions)
of the Region’s correctional facilities and certain financial activities of the
Chesapeake Detention Facility (maintenance of inmate fund records and
processing federal reimbursement requests). These financial activities are
provided by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – South
Region and are included within the scope of our audit of the South Region.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Region’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background
or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Central Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Region’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Region that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of the Region, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 14 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Ryan A. Myles
Staff Auditors