Title: Department of Human Services - Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Date: 09/12/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d724560674460
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:56:11.949072
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Services
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
September 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities 5
Organizational Change 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Information Technology Contract
Finding 1 – The Department of Human Services (DHS) did not effectively 6
administer contract terms and task order activity to ensure the
reasonableness of vendor proposed services and costs. Task orders
totaling $8.4 million were issued in excess of the amount authorized,
without a contract modification, resulting in unfunded liabilities.
Finding 2 – DHS cancelled an information system modernization 8
project after paying approximately $10.1 million, including
approximately $4.8 million that was paid unnecessarily.
Maryland Legal Services Program
Finding 3 – DHS guaranteed a minimum compensation to two of the 10
eight legal firms awarded emergency contracts, resulting in payments
of approximately $616,000 more than if the firms were paid a
per-case fee.
* Finding 4 – DHS did not have adequate procedures to ensure that 11
payments to legal services firms were proper, and did not follow
up on deficiencies with the services provided that were noted during
annual site visits.
Grant Management
* Finding 5 – DHS lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over 12
certain grants.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Purchasing and Disbursements
Finding 6 – DHS did not adequately monitor Department-wide user 14
access to critical functions on the State’s Financial Management
Information System and did not establish adequate online
controls over purchase orders.
Finding 7 – DHS paid $300,000 to a State university for services that 15
were not provided.
Federal Funds
Finding 8 – DHS did not modify its payment rates for residential 15
rehabilitation services, resulting in the use of State funds to cover
the cost of services that are potentially eligible for federal
reimbursement.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 9 – Sensitive personally identifiable information was 17
not properly protected by DHS.
* Finding 10 – Monitoring controls over critical databases were not 18
sufficient to properly protect these databases.
Finding 11 – Malware protection for DHS computers and Intrusion 19
Detection Prevention System coverage for the DHS network was
not sufficient to properly protect DHS computers and network.
Electronic Benefits Transfer System
* Finding 12 – DHS lacked assurance that the Electronic Benefit Transfer 21
System service provider was properly secured against operational
and security risks.
Payroll
Finding 13 – DHS did not adequately investigate payments to employees 22
on multiple State payrolls.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 24
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 205, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective July 1, 2017, changed the name
of the Department of Human Resources to the Department of Human Services
(DHS).
DHS provides intervention services to stabilize families and vulnerable adults,
encourages financial independence by providing temporary support and transition
services, and provides for the welfare of children at risk. To deliver these
services, DHS is organized into seven budgetary units. This audit included the
operations of the Office of the Secretary, which provides overall direction and
coordination for all DHS programs and activities; the Operations Office, which
provides core administrative services to DHS units; and the Office of Technology
for Human Services, which is responsible for the overall management and
direction of DHS’ information systems. The remaining four units of DHS are
audited and reported upon separately.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2016, expenditures for all of DHS’
seven budgetary units totaled approximately $2.5 billion, of which the majority
was for assistance programs such as the Food Supplement Program. For the three
units included in this audit, the expenditures totaled approximately $126.6 million
during this period.
Organizational Change
Effective July 1, 2015, the grants management duties and responsibilities within
DHS were reorganized consistent with State budget law. Specifically, prior to
July 1, 2015, the Office of Grants Management (OGM) was budgeted within
DHS’ Office of the Secretary and, subsequently, OGM was budgeted within
DHS’ Family Investment Administration (FIA). The activities of OGM through
June 30, 2015 were included in this audit. The subsequent activities of OGM will
be included in a separate audit of FIA.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 24, 2014. We determined that DHS
satisfactorily addressed five of these findings. The remaining four findings are
repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Technology Contract
Background
The Department of Human Services (DHS) contracted with a vendor for the
period from June 2010 through December 2015 at a total cost of approximately
$125.4 million to provide computer applications services (such as enhancements
and changes) to existing DHS information technology systems and programs.
The contract allowed for two renewal options, the first of which was exercised at
a cost of approximately $51.5 million through December 2017. The original
contract and renewal options included two levels of service:
 Level 1 services were for projects expected to take fewer than 500 hours to
complete. These services were included in the monthly fixed cost paid to the
vendor. Payments for Level 1 services during the audit period totaled
approximately $47 million according to DHS’ records.
 Level 2 services were for projects expected to take more than 500 hours to
complete. For these services, DHS solicited a technical proposal from the
vendor for each task order, including the number of anticipated hours and cost
to complete each task. Payments for Level 2 services during the audit period
totaled approximately $30 million according to DHS’ records.
Finding 1
DHS did not effectively administer contract terms and task order activity to
ensure the reasonableness of vendor proposed services and costs. DHS also
issued $8.4 million in task orders in excess of the amount authorized for fiscal
year 2015 without a contract modification; the resulting expenditures created
unfunded liabilities at year-end totaling $4.5 million.
Analysis
DHS did not effectively administer contract terms and task order activity
associated with Level 2 services, resulting in a lack of assurance that services and
costs proposed by the vendor were reasonable. Furthermore, DHS issued and
paid for task orders during fiscal year 2015 in excess of the amount authorized
under the contract without processing a contract modification. The resulting
excess expenditures for these task orders could not be paid during that year
because of the lack of an available appropriation, creating unfunded liabilities that
were not reported during budgetary closeout.
6

--- Page 9 ---
The Reasonableness of Task Order Hours and Costs Were Not Assessed
DHS did not have formal procedures to verify the reasonableness of the employee
hours and related costs proposed by the vendor to complete each task order. For
example, in its May 2014 task order to develop a system for DHS consumers to
use to apply for eligibility benefits and to manage their accounts online, the
vendor estimated that it would take 12,840 hours at a total cost of $1,551,414
(average of $121 per hour). This task order and the related contract also included
the number of proposed personnel, estimated number of hours by labor category
and project phase, and the maximum labor rates for various positions. DHS
management personnel advised us that, for this and other task orders, it reviewed
the task order proposals for reasonableness; however, there was no documentation
of these reviews nor could DHS explain the methodology used to determine the
reasonableness of the proposed costs.
Furthermore, although there was no requirement for the vendor to provide the
actual hours worked on approved task orders, nor would that information affect
amounts paid on approved task orders, DHS did not attempt to obtain this
information to help assess the reasonableness of future task order proposals.
Vendor Billings Were Not Consistent with Contract Terms
In March 2012, DHS formally adopted a change in the billing process for level 2
services, from a deliverables basis to a fixed-price installment basis, that had no
relationship to the contract deliverables. That is, the total cost of the task order
was divided into equal monthly payments to be paid by DHS throughout the term
of the task order, coinciding with DHS’ budgeted funds. This was inconsistent
with the contract, which required that task orders be billed on a deliverables basis
so that the vendor was paid when specified deliverables were received and
accepted. While DHS received weekly status reports detailing the deliverables
received, the receipt of deliverables did not affect the payments even if
deliverables were delayed. The failure to make vendor payments on a
deliverables basis contributed to the losses noted in Finding 2 when a task order
was cancelled.
Task Orders Authorized Were Not Monitored
DHS did not monitor task orders and related expenditures for level 2 services,
resulting in the issuance of, and payment for, approximately $8.4 million in task
orders beyond the $10 million authorized in the contract for fiscal year 2015.
While a maximum of $50 million was authorized for level 2 services in the
original contract, specific contract provisions limited the maximum for such
services to $10 million each year. DHS management was not aware that the task
orders issued had exceeded the amount authorized in the contract until we brought
this to its attention. Accordingly, DHS did not prepare a contract modification
7

--- Page 10 ---
nor did it obtain Board of Public Works approval as required by State
procurement regulations for contract modifications exceeding $50,000. The
resulting expenditures exceeded the DHS available fiscal year 2015 appropriation
by approximately $4.5 million, including an estimated $1.7 million in general
funds; DHS deferred these expenditures until fiscal year 2016 without disclosing
the unfunded liability to the Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting
Division (GAD) during the fiscal year 2015 budgetary closeout process, as
required.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHS
a. establish procedures to ensure hours and related rates proposed by the
vendor on task orders are reasonable,
b. attempt to obtain documentation of actual hours worked by each vendor
employee by task order and assess the reasonableness of the hours
worked in relation to the hours proposed to assist in future task order
reviews,
c. ensure that future payments for Level 2 services are made on a
deliverable basis consistent with contract terms,
d. monitor task orders authorized to ensure that contracted amounts are not
exceeded without first obtaining the necessary authorizations and
entering into contract modifications,
e. seek retroactive approval from BPW for the aforementioned contract
modification, and
f. report all unfunded year-end liabilities to GAD, as required.
Finding 2
DHS cancelled an information system modernization project after paying
approximately $10.1 million, including approximately $4.8 million that was
paid unnecessarily.
Analysis
DHS did not properly plan and administer task order projects, resulting in
payments totaling approximately $10.1 million towards a $27.6 million
information system modernization project that was subsequently cancelled. This
amount included approximately $4 million in payments in excess of the value of
the work performed because of the payment method used, and approximately
$781,000 that could have been avoided if the vendor had been timely notified of
the project cancellation. DHS management advised us that it does not anticipate
resuming the project; therefore, there is no evidence that the deliverables received
8

--- Page 11 ---
for the $10.1 million paid will provide any future benefits to the State. These
costs were generally shared equally with the federal government.
In December 2011, DHS issued two task orders valued at approximately $27.6
million for a project to modernize the Client Automated Resource and Eligibility
System (CARES), a project that was cancelled in October 2012. DHS
management advised that the project was cancelled due to the enactment of the
federal Affordable Care Act (ACA). We question DHS’ decision to initiate this
project since the ACA had been enacted in March 2010 and the procurement for
the new health benefit exchange system began in October 2011.
Furthermore, as noted in our preceding finding, the majority of the $10.1 million
paid to the vendor under these task orders was made on an installment basis. The
value of deliverables submitted by the vendor and accepted by DHS during this
period was approximately $6.1 million. Therefore, notwithstanding the
cancellation of the project and the questionable value of the deliverables received,
this installment payment method resulted in DHS paying approximately $4
million more than if the payments had been based on deliverables.
Finally, DHS did not formally cancel the project in a timely manner resulting in
additional costs for the cancelled project. Specifically, while we were informed
that DHS advised the vendor in October 2012 that the project was cancelled, DHS
continued to pay the vendor for invoices up to December 2012. In January 2013,
DHS formally notified the vendor of the cancellation in writing. DHS
subsequently questioned approximately $1.7 million in vendor payments made
during this three-month period, and ultimately agreed to allow the vendor to retain
approximately $781,000.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHS enhance its planning prior to the issuance of task
orders and take timely action to cancel tasks to avoid unnecessary costs.
Maryland Legal Services Program
Background
DHS’ Maryland Legal Services Program (MLSP) was created to ensure the
delivery of quality and effective legal representation in State court to children
who are victims of abuse or neglect. These legal services are referred to as Child
in Need of Assistance (CINA) proceedings and Termination of Parental Rights
(TPR) proceedings. MLSP also provides legal services to indigent adults
9

--- Page 12 ---
involved in adult guardianship proceedings. State regulations require DHS to
contract with legal firms to represent these children and indigent adults.
During the audit period, DHS attempted to procure a new contract with several
legal firms to provide these services. However, the procurement was not
approved by the Board of Public Works for a number of reasons, such as concerns
with the lack of continuity of care resulting from the procurement of new legal
firms. To ensure that there would not be a lapse in services, DHS entered into
emergency contracts with eight incumbent legal firms to represent CINA and TPR
cases for the period from September 2013 through August 2015 totaling
approximately $24.5 million.
Finding 3
DHR guaranteed a minimum compensation to two of the eight legal firms
awarded emergency contracts, resulting in payments of approximately
$616,000 more than if, like the other six firms, they were paid on a per-case
fee.
Analysis
DHS guaranteed a minimum compensation to two of the eight legal firms
awarded emergency legal services contracts, but did not attempt to maximize the
cases assigned to these two legal firms. Rather, we were advised by DHS
management that cases were assigned on a rotating basis to all legal firms in the
respective jurisdictions. As a result, based on our analysis, during the period from
September 1, 2013 through August 31, 2015, DHS paid these legal firms
approximately $616,000 more than if the legal firms were reimbursed on a per-
case fee, which was the reimbursement method used for the other six firms.
For example, during this period, one of these legal firms was assigned 2,708 cases
which, based on its per-case fee of $1,150, would have resulted in total
compensation of $3,114,200. However, this legal firm was paid $3,520,000
because of the guaranteed minimum, resulting in excess payments of
approximately $406,000. The guaranteed minimum compensation for the two-
year period for the other legal firm was $1,100,000, and we calculated the
associated excess payments to be $210,000.
The guaranteed minimum compensation provision for these two firms was not
included in previous contracts with these firms, and five of the eight firms were
not offered this provision. The sixth legal firm elected not to take the guaranteed
minimum compensation provision. DHS could not provide an explanation as to
why this provision was only offered to three of the firms. We were advised by
DHS management that the clause for a guaranteed minimum compensation was
10

--- Page 13 ---
negotiated by an executive management employee who is no longer employed by
DHS and that there was no documentation of these negotiations.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that in the future, DHS eliminate guaranteed minimums
from its legal services contracts.
Finding 4
DHS did not have adequate procedures to ensure that payments to legal
services firms were proper, and did not follow up on deficiencies with the
services provided by the legal firms that were noted during annual site visits.
Analysis
DHS did not have adequate procedures to ensure that payments to legal firms
were proper and did not follow up on deficiencies with the services provided by
the legal firms that were noted during annual site visits.
 DHS did not always obtain and review court orders to verify that it was
legally responsible to provide services for the individuals invoiced by the
legal firms. Similar conditions regarding DHS not ensuring the propriety of
payments to legal firms were noted in our two preceding audit reports. In
response to our prior report, DHS management advised us that it requested the
firms to provide court orders with their invoices. Subsequently, certain legal
firms challenged the legality of providing that information and did not comply
with the request.
Instead, for three larger jurisdictions, DHS obtained information directly from
the courts to verify it was legally responsible for providing the services for
these individuals. However, our test of 10 fiscal year 2014 and 2015 invoices,
totaling approximately $2.2 million, from legal firms which provided services
in these three jurisdictions, disclosed that, for 3 of the invoices totaling
approximately $329,000, the verifications were not signed and dated and DHS
could not document that it sighted the court records for all individuals on the
invoice. For example, one invoice included charges totaling $18,400 for
services provided to 16 individuals in one jurisdiction. However, our review
of the court records disclosed that one of these individuals had actually
received authorized legal services from the same firm in another jurisdiction.
For the remaining 21 jurisdictions, DHS only verified the propriety of a
limited selection of individuals invoiced by reviewing the court orders during
annual site visits to the legal firms. Subsequently, we were advised that DHS
11

--- Page 14 ---
modified its contracts to require the legal firms to submit documentation to
substantiate each individual receiving services.
 DHS did not follow up on deficiencies noted during annual site visits of each
legal firm. These visits were performed to ensure legal firms were providing
the required number of hours for each case, attorneys had a sufficient number
of contacts with the clients, the attorney/client ratio was reasonable, and the
overall quality of the services performed was adequate, as provided for by the
contract.
Our test of one site visit for each of the eight legal firms disclosed that three
legal firms did not respond to DHS’ requests for information to support that
services were provided, and DHR did not take any follow-up action. For
example, on one site visit, DHS noted that there were “significant
concerns/issues” including a lack of documentation that required client visits
were conducted. DHS requested evidence of the client visits, but did not
receive the requested information and did not take follow-up action to pursue
the missing information, such as by withholding payments. As a result, there
was a lack of assurance that the legal firms complied with contract
requirements.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that all payments made to legal firms are only for individuals for
whom DHS is responsible to provide legal services (repeat); and
b. follow up with the legal firms when deficiencies are identified during site
visits, including those noted above and, in consultation with the Office of
the Attorney General, take appropriate action such as by withholding
payments when firms do not comply with contract provisions.
Grants Management
Finding 5
DHS lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over certain grants.
Analysis
DHS lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over certain grants. DHS’
Office of Grants Management provides funding to a network of community and
faith-based organizations, local departments of social services, and State and local
agencies. According to State records, grant payments totaling approximately
12

--- Page 15 ---
$17.9 million were made to numerous grantees in various programs relating to
homelessness, hunger, and community initiatives during fiscal year 2015.
 DHS did not verify that certain grant funds were spent as intended. Our test
of 15 disbursements made during fiscal year 2015 totaling approximately $4.4
million related to 8 grantees under four grant programs (including Feeding
Maryland and Emergency Transitional Housing Services) disclosed that DHS
did not obtain sufficient supporting documentation for any of these
disbursements. Although the grant agreements required grantees to provide
expenditure reports on a regular basis, DHS did not require grantees to
provide supporting documentation, such as food and hotel receipts, so that the
reports could be verified.
 DHS did not recover Maryland Emergency Food Program (MEFP) grant
funds when grantees did not provide documentation that grant funds were
used as intended. MEFP grant payments totaled approximately $969,000
during fiscal year 2015. DHS conducted a review of a selection of grantees
and identified 12 MEFP grantees with fiscal year 2015 grant expenditures
totaling $36,000 that could not support the propriety of expenditures totaling
$28,900. As of February 24, 2016, DHS had not made any attempt to collect
the unsupported grant funds.
Since DHS did not review all grantees to identify unsupported grant funds,
additional grantees could have similar amounts due to the State. Our test of 7
other 2015 MEFP grants with grant awards totaling $99,000 disclosed that
DHS could not provide support for $31,400 in grant funds for 3 grantees. The
MEFP funds are advanced at the beginning of the fiscal year and grantees are
required to submit documentation to support the proper use of the funds (that
is, for the purchase of food) and return any unused funds to DHS.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to verify that grant funds were used as
intended were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHS
a. independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are spent as
intended (repeat); and
b. recover grant funds when the grantee does not provide documentation to
support that grant funds were used as intended, including those noted
above.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Purchasing and Disbursements
Finding 6
DHS did not adequately monitor Department-wide user access to critical
functions on the State’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS)
and did not establish adequate online controls over purchase orders.
Analysis
DHS did not adequately monitor user access to critical functions on the State’s
FMIS and did not establish adequate online controls over purchase orders.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2015, DHS used FMIS to process
approximately $409 million in expenditures (excluding $1.6 billion in grants that
were generally interfaced from CARES and would not be impacted by this
finding). DHS’ FMIS Support Unit (FSU) is responsible for monitoring the
Department-wide FMIS access capabilities of all DHS employees.
Our review disclosed that FSU did not follow up with DHS units who did not
respond to monthly confirmations of user access. FSU sent monthly reports of
FMIS users and their assigned access capabilities to each of DHS’ 50 FMIS units
for review. The units were required to respond to FSU indicating whether access
assigned to each of the employees listed on the report was appropriate based on
assigned job duties. Our test of these reports for six months between October
2014 and August 2015 disclosed that between 14 and 19 units did not respond
each month, including 16 units that did not respond to three or more monthly
requests and 8 units that did not respond to any monthly requests. FSU did not
follow up with any of these units to determine if the access was proper.
DHS also did not establish adequate online approval requirements over purchase
orders which, according to State accounting records, totaled approximately $210
million during fiscal year 2015. Specifically, four Office of the Secretary
employees could initiate and approve purchase orders without independent
approvals. While our review disclosed that these four employees did not use this
capability during fiscal year 2015, the possibility exists that unauthorized
purchases could be made without detection.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHS
a. follow up with units that do not respond to the monthly employee access
reports, and
b. use the available FMIS security features to establish independent online
approval requirements for all purchasing transactions.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 7
DHS paid $300,000 to a State university for services that were not provided.
Analysis
DHS paid a State university for services that were not provided. In July 2015,
DHS and a State university entered into an agreement for the university to
upgrade a power system at one of the university’s buildings that DHS used as an
emergency shelter. The agreement specified that the university would provide
DHS with detailed documentation to support labor and equipment costs, not to
exceed $300,000, and documentation of an inspection to ensure that the upgraded
system was in good working order. In August 2015, DHS paid the State
university’s invoice for the full $300,000 but, as of March 2017, the upgrades had
not been performed. DHS management could not explain why it paid the invoice
without ensuring the services were performed.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that the University provides the aforementioned power system
upgrades or recover the funds paid; and
b. in the future, obtain documentation to ensure services are performed
prior to payment.
Federal Funds
Finding 8
DHS did not modify its payment rates for residential rehabilitation services,
resulting in the use of State funds to cover the cost of services that are
potentially eligible for federal reimbursement.
Analysis
As a member of the State’s Rate Setting Reform Stakeholders Workgroup,1 DHS
did not revise its rates paid for residential rehabilitation services, as recommended
by a federal audit. This precluded federal reimbursement of those costs under
Medicaid, and resulted in the use of State funds for services that are potentially
eligible for federal reimbursement. According to State records, DHS received
federal fund reimbursements totaling approximately $20.7 million in fiscal year
1 The Workgroup was created under the State’s Interagency Rates Committee. The State’s
Interagency Rates Committee was established to improve the rate-setting process for residential
child care and comprises the Maryland Department of Health and the Departments of Human
Services, Juvenile Services, Budget and Management, and Education, as well as the Governor’s
Office of Children.
15

--- Page 18 ---
2015 under the Medical Assistance program (Medicaid) for residential
rehabilitation services.
In its August 2011 audit report on the State’s Medicaid claims, the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) concluded that the State’s use
of a flat per diem rate for Medicaid claims for all residential rehabilitation
services from October 1, 2005 through September 30, 2007, regardless of the
specific services received by each client, made it unclear whether such services
were eligible for Medicaid reimbursement. These Medicaid claims were for
residential rehabilitation services costs incurred by the Department of Human
Services and the Department of Juvenile Services. In response to the HHS audit
report recommendations, the Maryland Department of Health, which administers
the State’s Medicaid program, agreed to pursue changes to the State’s
methodology for setting per diem rates for residential rehabilitation services and
to ensure claims were properly documented in accordance with that methodology.
This issue was referred to the State’s Rate Setting Reform Stakeholders
Workgroup in the fall of 2011. The Workgroup determined that most services
included in the per diem rates, such as room and board and recreation, were not
Medicaid-covered services. Therefore, the Workgroup concluded that the small
portion of Medicaid-covered services (such as mental health counseling by a
licensed clinical social worker) should be recovered directly by the providers as
fee-for-service claims and a reduced State per diem rate should be established for
the non-Medicaid eligible services.
However, as of March 2017, DHS and the Workgroup had made limited progress
in determining a new reduced per diem rate for the non-Medicaid eligible
services. Effective July 1, 2015 DHS is no longer recovering any federal funds
for residential rehabilitation services and continues to pay providers using the
original per diem rate methodology. As a result, costs associated with these
services that are eligible for Medicaid reimbursement are now being funded solely
by the State’s General Fund. DHS was unable to provide us with an estimate of
the amounts that have not been recovered.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHS
a. as a member of the Rate Setting Reform Stakeholders Workgroup,
ensure that a methodology is established for a per diem residential
rehabilitation services rate that includes only non-Medicaid services, and
that Medicaid-eligible services are billed separately by the providers as
fee-for-service claims; and
16

--- Page 19 ---
b. determine the feasibility of identifying and recovering allowable
Medicaid-eligible services costs and pursue retroactive federal
reimbursement.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The DHS Office of Technology for Human Services (OTHS) is responsible for
the overall management and direction of DHS’ information systems. These
systems include critical applications such as the mainframe-based Clients’
Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES), the mainframe-based
Child Support Enforcement System (CSES), and the server-based Children’s
Electronic Social Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE).
These systems are used to provide eligible individuals public assistance, food
subsidies, child support payments, and foster care payments. Maintenance and
operation of these information systems are provided by a combination of
outsourced services and DHS personnel. OTHS operates both an internal network
at DHS’ headquarters and a wide area network which connects to DHS’ locations
throughout the state. Additionally, DHS obtains Internet and Statewide
Government Intranet connectivity from networkMaryland.
Finding 9
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was not properly protected
by DHS.
Analysis
Sensitive PII was not properly protected by DHS. Specifically, we noted that
sensitive PII was stored in several databases in clear text. For example, we noted
that as of August 10, 2016, a table in one of these databases contained sensitive
PII for 1,605,558 unique individuals in clear text. This included the individuals’
full names, social security numbers, and dates of birth. In addition, we
determined that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls. Finally, although DHS had generated an inventory of its PII, DHS
advised that it had not reviewed this inventory to identify and remove unnecessary
PII records.
This PII, which is commonly associated with identity theft, should be protected by
appropriate information system security controls. The State of Maryland
Information Security Policy requires each agency to protect confidential data
using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHS
a. review its inventory of PII and determine if it is necessary to retain the
PII and delete all unnecessary PII; and
b. for remaining PII, properly protect such PII by encryption or other
substantial mitigating controls.
Finding 10
Monitoring controls over the CARES, CSES, and CHESSIE databases were
not sufficient to properly protect these databases.
Analysis
Monitoring controls over the CARES, CSES, and CHESSIE databases were not
sufficient to properly protect these databases.
 Although direct modifications to numerous tables in the CARES and CSES
databases were logged, direct modifications to numerous tables in 17 separate
databases and direct modifications made by 15 individuals were not included
in a critical security report used to review such modifications.
 DHS had not logged any critical database security and audit events for the
CHESSIE database until September 2015. In addition, the logging initiated in
September 2015 did not include certain events such as those generated by
database administrators. Furthermore, DHS advised that it regularly
generated reports of these logged activities and performed reviews and
investigations of events recorded on these reports; however, there was no
documentation supporting these reviews and investigations. Similar
conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy states that information systems
must generate audit records for all security-relevant events and procedures must
be developed to routinely review audit records for indications of unusual
activities, suspicious activities, or suspected violations, and report findings to
appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DHS
a. include all direct modifications to CARES and CSES database tables in
the critical security report used to review such modifications; and
b. log all critical CHESSIE database security and audit events, generate
reports of these events, review these reports on a timely basis, and
18

--- Page 21 ---
document these reviews and any investigations with the documentation
retained for future reference (repeat).
Finding 11
Malware protection for DHS computers and Intrusion Detection Prevention
System (IDPS) coverage for the DHS network were not sufficient to properly
protect DHS computers and network.
Analysis
Malware protection for DHS computers and IDPS coverage for the DHS network
were not sufficient to properly protect DHS computers and network.
 DHS did not ensure, on an ongoing basis, that malware protection software
was installed, up-to-date, and operational on all of its computers. DHS
utilized an automated malware protection console to manage the malware
protection software installed on its computers. However, we identified 1,691
computers (out of 10,870 active DHS computers) that were not listed on the
console as of June 2016.
 Numerous workstations were configured with users having administrative
rights. Administrative rights should be provided only to network and system
administrators and select others since these rights are the highest permission
level that can be granted to users and allows users to install software and
change configuration settings. Our test of 78 workstations disclosed that 37
user accounts had been provided administrative rights on their workstation.
We were advised by central DHS IT staff that documentation was not readily
available for assessing the propriety of the assigned administrative rights for
these 37 workstations. As such, central DHS IT staff lacked assurance that
the assigned administrative rights were necessary. Accordingly, if these 37
workstations used by accounts with administrative rights were infected with
malware, the malware would run with administrative rights and expose these
workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user
accounts operated with only user rights. In addition, users with administrative
rights could disable the malware protection software on their workstations.
 Effectively there was no IDPS protection for the DHS network. Specifically,
we noted that the three network-based IDPS devices employed by DHS were
set to detect and report rather than block identified malicious traffic.
However, the potentially malicious traffic identified by two of these three
devices was never received by the appliance responsible for reporting such
traffic and the reports generated for the third device were of a summary nature
19

--- Page 22 ---
and did not contain the detailed information necessary to identify and
investigate potential network intrusions.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that malware protection software is installed and operational on
all of its computers;
b. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to
network and system administrators and other select users requiring such
rights with justification for assignment of such rights documented and
retained centrally for future reference;
c. configure its network-based IDPS devices to prevent high-risk,
potentially malicious traffic from entering the network and log and
report all lower-risk traffic; and
d. regularly generate detailed reports of logged IDPS security events, review
these reports, and investigate unusual or suspicious items on these
reports, with such reviews and investigations being documented and
retained for future reference.
Electronic Benefits Transfer System
Background
DHS contracted with a service provider to implement, operate, and maintain a
web-based Electronic Benefits Transfer System (EBTS) for the State of
Maryland’s Temporary Cash Assistance and Food Supplement Programs. The
EBTS provides cardholders with access (through a user ID and password) to their
cash benefits as well as to perform administrative functions such as report a card
lost or stolen, change a PIN, and request a replacement card. The most recent
contract that was executed with the incumbent vendor covered an initial period
from January 1, 2015 to June 30, 2019, with a cost not to exceed approximately
$12.3 million through June 2019. The contract included two optional renewal
periods (of two years each), which could extend the contract through June 30,
2023.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 12
DHS lacked assurance that the EBTS service provider was properly secured
against operational and security risks.
Analysis
DHS lacked assurance that the EBTS service provider was properly secured
against operational and security risks. Specifically, the only independent review
of controls obtained subsequent to our prior audit did not address key security
controls and no other reports were obtained to cover subsequent periods, even
though they were contractually required. The most recent contract between DHS
and the service provider required the provider to engage an independent auditing
firm to conduct Service Organization Controls (SOC) reviews (both a SOC 1 and
SOC 2 reviews) and report annually.
 The service provider procured an independent review over its EBTS service to
be performed in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants’ Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagement 16 and
received a SOC 1 Type 2 report dated August 31, 2015 for the period August
1, 2014 through June 30, 2015. However, this was the only independent
review of controls obtained subsequent to our prior audit. In addition, the
SOC 1 report did not address several key security controls necessary for the
EBTS service, which would have been addressed under a SOC 2 review. For
example, we noted that the SOC 1 report, which is generally used in
connection with financial statement reporting, did not state that vulnerability
scanning and patch management policies and procedures existed and had been
implemented or that intrusion detection, malware prevention, and antivirus
protection had been implemented. Furthermore, the SOC 1 report did not
stipulate that disaster recovery and business continuity policies, processes, and
procedures existed and had been regularly tested. Similar conditions related
to the SOC 1 report were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 As of December 13, 2016, the service provider had not obtained the
contractually required SOC 2 Type 2 review and report which could have
addressed the aforementioned security controls.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service providers. Based on this guidance, service
providers (like the aforementioned service provider) may contract for an
independent review of controls and resultant independent auditor’s report referred
to as a SOC report. There are several types of SOC reports, with varying scopes
and levels of review and auditor testing. A SOC 2 Type 2 report contains the
service organization’s description of its system and the results of the auditor’s
21

--- Page 24 ---
examination of the suitability of the system design, operating effectiveness for the
period under review, and any evaluation of system security, availability,
processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that the service provider complies with the contract and obtains
all required independent reviews, including a SOC 2 Type 2 review that
addresses all critical control provisions relating to security, availability,
and other concerns for the EBTS contract; and
b. review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports and determine if the related
independent reviews adequately address the aforementioned security
concerns over DHS’ use of EBTS services, ensure that the service
provider implements all critical recommendations made in the reports,
document these efforts, and retain the documentation for future reference
(repeat).
Payroll
Finding 13
DHS did not adequately investigate payments to employees on multiple State
payrolls.
Analysis
DHS did not investigate employees appearing on the Comptroller of Maryland –
Central Payroll Bureau’s (CPB) quarterly reports of employees on multiple State
payrolls (that is, employees who worked for both DHS and another State agency).
DHS management advised us that DHS did not review the quarterly CPB reports
and, instead, reviewed biweekly CPB reports of newly hired DHS employees with
possible secondary employment. Because the biweekly reports only included
newly hired employees, this review was not sufficient. Furthermore, DHS
management advised us that the reviews were only performed on a test basis and
were not documented.
An adequate review of dual employment of all employees ensures that employees
are not recording overlapping hours on their timesheets for both State agencies.
For example, it came to the attention of the DHS Office of the Inspector General
that an employee falsely recorded on the employee’s timesheet that the employee
was working for DHS when the employee was actually teaching a course at a
State university. This allegation did not result from DHS’ review of dual
employment reports. The DHS Office of the Inspector General estimated that the
22

--- Page 25 ---
employee received between $2,000 and $2,600 in pay from DHS during fiscal
year 2013 while teaching courses at the university. The employee was terminated
in 2014. Our review of four quarterly dual employment reports in fiscal year
2013 disclosed that this employee was listed as working at both DHS and the
university.
During fiscal year 2015, based on State records, 61 DHS employees received
payments totaling approximately $1.2 million from both DHS and other State
agencies (including other DHS units) during the same pay periods. The payments
to these employees do not necessarily indicate a problem since the employees
may not have recorded overlapping work hours at both agencies. In this regard,
our review of five employees for five pay periods with earnings totaling
approximately $17,000 did not identify any overlapping hours.
CPB has directed State agencies to investigate all employees appearing on the
quarterly reports to ensure that the employees were not claiming the same work
hours for multiple jobs during the same periods. According to the State’s records,
during fiscal year 2015, DHS’ payroll expenditures totaled approximately $493
million.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that DHS
a. use quarterly reports provided by CPB to investigate all employees on
multiple payrolls, and
b. retain documentation to support these investigative efforts.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services and related units (DHS) for the period beginning August 13, 2012 and
ending August 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included electronic benefit transfers, grants, federal funds,
legal services, purchases and disbursements, corporate purchasing cards,
information systems security and control, and payroll. Our audit included various
support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records,
and related fiscal functions) provided by DHS’ Office of the Secretary and related
units to the other units of DHS. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations pertaining to federal financial assistance programs
and as assessment of DHS’ compliance with those laws and regulations because
the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit
such programs administered by State agencies, including DHS.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DHS’ operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
24

--- Page 27 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DHS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DHS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DHS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 21224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
25

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 1
DHS did not effectively administer contract terms and task order activity to
ensure the reasonableness of vendor proposed services and costs. DHS also
issued $8.4 million in task orders in excess of the amount authorized for fiscal
year 2015 without a contract modification; the resulting expenditures created
unfunded liabilities at year-end totaling $4.5 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHS
a. establish procedures to ensure hours and related rates proposed by the
vendor on task orders are reasonable,
b. attempt to obtain documentation of actual hours worked by each vendor
employee by task order and assess the reasonableness of the hours
worked in relation to the hours proposed to assist in future task order
reviews,
c. ensure that future payments for Level 2 services are made on a
deliverable basis consistent with contract terms,
d. monitor task orders authorized to ensure that contracted amounts are not
exceeded without first obtaining the necessary authorizations and
entering into contract modifications,
e. seek retroactive approval from BPW for the aforementioned contract
modification, and
f. report all unfunded year-end liabilities to GAD, as required.
DHS concurs with these recommendations:
a. DHS has implemented a task order review process. In this process a vendor
will submit a formal time and cost estimate for requested scope of work.
An internal DHS Review Team is convened to review the estimate.
Historical project analysis along with subject matter knowledge
assessments are used to ensure that the estimate is reasonable and in sync
with the scope of work. The DHS internal review results are then compared
to the vendors through independent estimation process results for
commonality and alignment.
In addition, under the Agile Safe methodology time and costs estimates
have been replaced by user story estimating which is conducted by the Agile
teams. Accordingly, as projects are migrated into the Agile arena from
Waterfall, traditional time and cost estimates will no longer be pursued or
used by DHS. DHS will continue to reference and monitor time and cost
estimates for those Waterfall projects currently underway.
b. To further provide governance, monitoring and oversight over actual hours
worked by the vendor DHS is utilizing the project management tool,

--- Page 30 ---
Version One. Version One is used in conjunction with vendors to track all
hours against the actual work and task orders assigned. The hours for work
within Version One are reviewed and signed off for approval on a weekly
basis.
c. DHS understands and accepts that installment payments should no longer
be permitted on the Application Maintenance/Operations and Enhancement
Services Contract and will ensure that level 2 service payments for waterfall
projects are made on a deliverable basis. As previously stated, Agile
projects will be estimated via user stories by the Agile teams.
d. DHS tracks and monitors all authorized task orders. The DHS PMO
(Project Management Officer) review invoices on a monthly basis against
funding allocation. In certain instances, encumbered funds have also been
assessed to provide a comprehensive view of DHS available funds.
e. DHS concurs with this recommendation.
f. Any year-end liabilities will be reported to GAD.
Finding 2
DHS cancelled an information system modernization project after paying
approximately $10.1 million, including approximately $4.8 million that was
paid unnecessarily.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHS enhance its planning prior to the issuance of task
orders and take timely action to cancel tasks to avoid unnecessary costs.
DHS concurs with this recommendation:
DHS has taken steps to address this issue and therefore, concurs with this
recommendation. DHS tracks and monitors all costs associated with task orders.
DHS has incorporated a task order vetting process by way of the DHS IT Advisory
Council. The Council which is comprised of the DHS Deputy Secretaries and
various Program Executive Directors, meet monthly to review and approve
proposed task orders. In addition to this governing body, task orders are reviewed
by DHS internal teams along with the vendor on a weekly basis.

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 3
DHS guaranteed a minimum compensation to two of the eight legal firms
awarded emergency contracts, resulting in payments of approximately
$616,000 more than if, like the other six firms, they were paid on a per-case
fee.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that in the future, DHS eliminate guaranteed minimums
from its legal services contracts.
DHS disagrees with this finding:
After DHS failed to obtain the approval of the CINA contracts by the Board of
Public Works in August 2013, BPW directed the Department to enter into
emergency contracts. DHS senior management engaged in negotiations in order to
obtain the emergency contracts, which resulted in continuation of legal services for
children with no disruption in services. The two contractors provided legal services
for several thousand children under the emergency contracts.
Maintaining stability was of paramount importance to the Department and a failure
to reach an agreement with the seven vendors would have resulted in upheaval for
approximately 16,364 children and the risk of children losing statutorily mandated
counsel. Inevitably, cases would have to be delayed, in order for new attorneys to
be assigned. Continuity of representation was a priority of concern for the Board
of Public Works. DHS determined that providing stability and continuity of
representation for approximately 16,324 vulnerable children was priority and
engaged in negotiated contracts with the incumbent legal service providers.
Further, the Department determined that maintaining the calendar system, which
was created for the jurisdictions with multiple contractors in 2007, was appropriate,
as it had been established by the ranking of vendors which occurred in the 2007
contract awards.
DHS also believes that the OLA analysis is incorrect. The contract language relied
upon by OLA is as follows, “[P]ayment to the Contractor pursuant to this Contract
shall be at the rate provided in the Pricing Proposal of [amount] Dollars per case
per year or a guaranteed minimum of [amount] per Contract year. Any amount in
excess of the minimum dollar amount each year, shall be billed at the per-case rate.”
The contract required the contractor to elect to either select to invoice the
Department at the price per-case rate or select the guaranteed minimum dollar
amount. Two of the contractors elected to invoice the Department the fixed price
option (guaranteed minimum) and invoiced the Department for one twelfth of the
amount for each year of the two (2) year emergency contract. The two contractors

--- Page 32 ---
were paid only the guaranteed minimum amount provided in their respective
contracts. The two contractors provided legal services for three thousand four
hundred sixty six (3466) children in a total of five (5) jurisdictions during the 2 year
contract period. The average cost per case was $1459, which was not the highest
cost per case paid to all of the incumbent CINA contractors. The price per case
ranged from $700 to $1688 for all of the incumbent CINA contractors.
One contractor elected to invoice the Department using the price per case amount
and invoiced the Department at the per-case rate each month during the two (2)
year emergency contract. That contractor provided legal services for nine hundred
ninety five (995) children and was paid the agreed upon case rate for each child.
Thus, the contractors provided high quality representation for the children at a
reasonable rate.
It should be noted that DHS has subsequently completed a new procurement for
these services. The new contracts do not include any guaranteed minimums.
Auditor’s Comment: Although DHS contends that the report analysis is
incorrect, no information is provided in its response that contradicts the
audit report analysis. As stated in the finding, DHS guaranteed minimum
compensation to two firms providing legal services but did not maximize
cases assigned to them, resulting in higher payments to these two firms.
The remaining six firms were paid on a per-case basis, five of which were
not offered the guaranteed minimum compensation option. Nevertheless,
DHS states that the recommendation has been implemented.
Finding 4
DHS did not have adequate procedures to ensure that payments to legal
services firms were proper, and did not follow up on deficiencies with the
services provided by the legal firms that were noted during annual site visits.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that all payments made to legal firms are only for individuals for
whom DHS is responsible to provide legal services (repeat); and
b. follow up with the legal firms when deficiencies are identified during site
visits, including those noted above and, in consultation with the Office of
the Attorney General, take appropriate action such as by withholding
payments when firms do not comply with contract provisions.

--- Page 33 ---
a. DHS concurs with the recommendation, but disagrees with the repeat status
of this recommendation. Specifically, the prior audit recommendation
stated “verify that payments made to legal firms are only for individuals for
whom DHS is responsible to provide legal services (for example, require
legal firms to submit copies of the court orders appointing the firm as the
representative).
At the time of that earlier finding, the original contracts with the legal
services providers did not require the submission of the supporting
documentation as a part of the invoice submissions. However, MLSP
modified all contracts to include the submission of appointment orders and
documentation of billable events. As of September 1, 2016, all CINA/TPR
and Adult Guardianship contracts require the submission of an appointment
order and documentation that a billable event occurred, for each case that is
invoiced. Therefore, DHS has complied with this portion of the
recommendation.
Regarding the test of 11 invoices, MLSP informed OLA that two (2) MLSP
staff members were assigned to compare the invoices with the court issued
reports, the MLSP Director and the MLSP contract monitor. Furthermore,
in response to the prior audit, MLSP established a process to perform an in-
depth review of 20% of the invoices. The 20% invoice review represented
a risk based approach, as the review included the three largest multiple
vendor jurisdictions. The three jurisdictions generated approximately 50%
of all monies paid under the CINA contracts. The 20% review was also
based on verbal advice provided by OLA during the prior audit indicating
that a 20% audit of invoices would be sufficient to resolve the audit finding.
During this current (2012-2015) audit cycle, OLA management stated that
while there was no legal authority or best practice to determine the
percentage of invoices that should be reviewed, and therefore OLA would
not remove the audit finding unless DHS conducted 100% review of all
invoices, in a timely fashion. OLA management indicated that it would not
define a timeframe within which the review must occur to be considered
“timely”.
DHS has subsequently introduced new processes that will allow for a 100%
review of invoices, including appointment orders and court orders.
Auditor’s Comment: DHS contends that OLA provided advice
during the preceding audit that a 20 percent review of invoices
would be sufficient; however, OLA has no record of providing this
advice. Also, DHS contends that, during the current audit, OLA
management stated there is no legal requirement or best practice to
determine the percentage of invoices to review. The review of all

--- Page 34 ---
invoices prior to payment is a fundamental internal control practice
that should be implemented to mitigate the risk of improper
payments, which DHS has agreed to do.
b. DHS concurs with this recommendation. DHS/MLSP restructured the
contract monitoring process requiring timely follow to material/significant
deficiencies relative to contractual provisions. Additionally, MLSP
developed and implemented standard operating procedures specifically
with respect to obtaining appropriate supporting documentation and
maintaining concise and comprehensive reports.
Grants Management
Finding 5
DHS lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over certain grants.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHS
a. independently verify, at least on a test basis, that grant funds are spent as
intended (repeat); and
b. recover grant funds when the grantee does not provide documentation to
support that grant funds were used as intended, including those noted
above.
DHS concurs with this recommendation:
a. In Fiscal Year 2016, FIA developed comprehensive guidelines regarding
the use of MEFP funds, and instructions for submitting documentation to
verify that the funds were expended on allowable activities. The new
guidelines include instructions on how to submit quarterly activity reports,
proof of expenditures (receipts), and keeping record of expenses for audit
and monitoring purposes.
FIA uses smart sheets as a tracking tool to document the submission of
activity reports including proof of MEFP expenditures. This tool is also
used to schedule and track monitoring visits. OIG was given access to this
tool in April 2015.
Site Monitoring Visits are used to verify that grant funds are spent as
intended. These visits are conducted on an annual basis. As of this fiscal
year (FY18), the legislative requirement for visits was amended to include
annual visits for those Emergency Food Organizations that receive over

--- Page 35 ---
$6,000.00. Visits are also conducted for organizations that appear to be
having problems, new EFOs and those that have not received a visit in a
year or two.
In addition, grantees are required to submit quarterly reports that include
receipts to document purchases related to MEFP. FIA staff reviews these
records to ensure that MEFP funds were used for the intended purpose.
b. The FIA MEFP Coordinator reviews 100% of MEFP receipts submitted by
the grantees as part of the quarterly reports. If there are non-food items
identified on the receipts, the Coordinator notifies the grantee, in writing,
that such purchases will not be counted toward the allotted MEFP funds. If
a particular Grantee has not expended MEFP funds by the end of the state
fiscal year, FIA asks that the balance be returned to the State. Grantees that
fail to respond are referred to Central Collections. FIA tracks returned
funds.
Purchasing and Disbursements
Finding 6
DHS did not adequately monitor Department-wide user access to critical
functions on the State’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS)
and did not establish adequate online controls over purchase orders.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHS
a. follow up with units that do not respond to the monthly employee access
reports, and
b. use the available FMIS security features to establish independent online
approval requirements for all purchasing transactions.
DHS concurs with this recommendation:
The unit responsible for monitoring FMIS access will track responses from agency
managers who review monthly security reports.
Financial Management Information System (FMIS) security profiles for all of the
cited employees have been corrected. Agency managers review monthly FMIS
security reports, and training is being provided to assist managers with those
reviews. Also, supplemental ad hoc reports are being used by the FMIS Support
Unit to identify inappropriate system access.

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 7
DHS paid $300,000 to a State university for services that were not provided.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that the University provides the aforementioned power system
upgrades or recover the funds paid; and
b. in the future, obtain documentation to ensure services are performed
prior to payment.
DHS does not concur with the context this finding which regards this project as a
payment of $300,000.00 by DHS to a “vendor” for goods and/or services. This
transaction should be considered an intergovernmental transfer of funds pursuant
to a MOU between two State entities to assist with the installation of a standby
power system and better enabling the State to provide emergency services to
individuals and families who are victims of disasters or emergency situations,
within and outside the boarders of the State.
Auditor’s Comment: DHS contends that the agreement was an
intergovernmental transfer of funds, which should be viewed differently
than payments to vendors. We disagree since the payment method has no
bearing on the premise of our finding. As stated in the finding, the
agreement required payment to the university for the labor and equipment
costs for the power system upgrade. Payment should not have been made
prior to the installation and related inspection of the equipment.
DHS will continue to actively monitor this project through its 100% completion
(inclusive of any testing, adjustments or minor alteration activities). DHS will
continue to ensure that appropriate documentation is received, as well as monitor
the progress of the project against its proposed construction timeline; requesting
explanation for any deviations or project setbacks.
DHS’ Office of Emergency Operations participates in the aid and relief of the
distressed citizens of Maryland and those abroad during declared emergencies
which are a result of natural weather related disasters, civil unrest, mass care
sheltering, reunification efforts, etc… The installation of standby power systems
throughout the State for critical infrastructure was a priority for the former
Governor’s Office. This priority was articulated throughout the State Stat program.
The priority was also adopted as a strategic goal for DHS. As such, funding to pre-
wire and equip state disaster shelter facilities with backup power was included and
carried in departmental budget allocations for multiple fiscal years. An opportunity

--- Page 37 ---
to further carry out this strategic goal presented itself when Towson University
(TU) announced their plans to undergo a large-scale systematically phased multi-
million dollar renovation project with a construction timeline spanning through
2017.
TU is one of the institutions that DHS has partnered with to serve as an emergency
shelter during mass care sheltering events. Therefore, DHS has an obligation to
stage and equip the facility with emergency resources that are specifically put in
place for use when the facility is serving as a disaster shelter. Backup power is one
of the most critical resources to be installed in disaster shelter facilities.
As part of the aforementioned renovation project, DHS and TU entered into an
agreement by way of a fully executed (July 2015) memorandum of understanding
(MOU) which denotes that, TU is to install a Standby Power System at their
Burdick Hall facility with DHS’ pecuniary assistance.
Adhering to the agreement, DHS provided funding by way of a direct
intergovernmental transfer to another state entity (TU) to assist in the purchase of
equipment and supplies, for the renovation of the Burdick Hall; specifically to
enable it to provide back-up power during emergency mass care sheltering
operations. DHS has continued to monitor the progression of the TU renovation
project by requesting monthly updates (progress reports) and by performing site
visits with specific focus on the Burdick Hall component and the installation of the
standby/backup power system.
As late as August 9, 2017, TU progress reports, purchasing documents and
correspondence show that DHS’ funds have been exhausted and used to procure
wiring, paralleling switchgear, transfer switches, and other miscellaneous
equipment; all critical and necessary components of the standby/backup power
system. The aforementioned equipment has been received and is being
appropriately stored (with loss protection) until its systematic installation. It is
anticipated that the bulk of the installation of the standby/backup power system will
be completed in October of 2017; testing, adjustments and minor alterations to
occur thereafter. To date, the project has achieved an overall 75.3% completion.

--- Page 38 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 8
DHS did not modify its payment rates for residential rehabilitation services,
resulting in the use of State funds to cover the cost of services that are
potentially eligible for federal reimbursement.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHS
a. as a member of the Rate Setting Reform Stakeholders Workgroup,
ensure that a methodology is established for a per diem residential
rehabilitation services rate that includes only non-Medicaid services, and
that Medicaid-eligible services are billed separately by the providers as
fee-for-service claims; and
b. determine the feasibility of identifying and recovering allowable
Medicaid-eligible services costs and pursue retroactive federal
reimbursement.
DHS disagrees with these recommendations:
Rates for residential services are set by the Interagency Rates Committee (IRC) of
which DHS is one of six (6) State agencies. The IRC is maintained by the State
Department of Education. In addition, DHS is not the designated State agency
responsible for Medicaid. For this audit finding to be affixed to this Department is
inappropriate.
Auditor’s Comment: Although the rates are established by the
Interagency Rates Committee, DHS is a member of that group. Given the
financial impact on its budget, we continue to believe that DHS should use
its membership status to ensure a methodology is established to allow for
federal reimbursement of eligible costs.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 9
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was not properly protected
by DHS.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHS

--- Page 39 ---
a. review its inventory of PII and determine if it is necessary to retain the
PII and delete all unnecessary PII; and
b. for remaining PII, properly protect such PII by encryption or other
substantial mitigating controls.
a. DHS concurs with this recommendation.
b. DHS concurs with this recommendation and will implement additional
security controls to comply with cryptographic requirements.
Finding 10
Monitoring controls over the CARES, CSES, and CHESSIE databases were
not sufficient to properly protect these databases.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DHS
a. include all direct modifications to CARES and CSES database tables in
the critical security report used to review such modifications; and
b. log all critical CHESSIE database security and audit events, generate
reports of these events, review these reports on a timely basis, and
document these reviews and any investigations with the documentation
retained for future reference (repeat).
DHS concurs with these recommendations:
a. DHS has already corrected the issues described.
b. DHS implemented logging, and has made significant progress since the
previous audit period. Although the solution provided auditing of all
administrative commands, DHS is working to implement logging of all
database security and audit events. DHS will continue to conduct reviews
and will document all reviews and investigations for future reference.
Finding 11
Malware protection for DHS computers and Intrusion Detection Prevention
System (IDPS) coverage for the DHS network were not sufficient to properly
protect DHS computers and network.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that malware protection software is installed and operational on
all of its computers;

--- Page 40 ---
b. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to
network and system administrators and other select users requiring such
rights with justification for assignment of such rights documented and
retained centrally for future reference;
c. configure its network-based IDPS devices to prevent high-risk,
potentially malicious traffic from entering the network and log and
report all lower-risk traffic; and
d. regularly generate detailed reports of logged IDPS security events, review
these reports, and investigate unusual or suspicious items on these
reports, with such reviews and investigations being documented and
retained for future reference.
a. DHS disagrees with the number of computers that were identified as not
having malware protection software installed and up to date. As discussed,
these numbers were inaccurate due to technology refresh. However, DHS
concurs to develop a process for ensuring reconciliation of these numbers
to ensure that malware protection software is installed and operational on
all computers.
b. DHS concurs with this recommendation and will develop and enforce a
written policy related to the assignment of local administrative rights.
c. DHS concurs with this recommendation. Although DHS had its network-
based IDPS devices set to detect and send alerts, DHS will configure them
to prevent mode for high-risk traffic.
d. DHS concurs with this recommendation and will configure the logging
system to regularly generate detailed reports, and will review/investigate
unusual or suspicious items, document reviews, and retain for future
reference.
Electronic Benefits Transfer System
Finding 12
DHS lacked assurance that the EBTS service provider was properly secured
against operational and security risks.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that DHS
a. ensure that the service provider complies with the contract and obtains
all required independent reviews, including a SOC 2 Type 2 review that
addresses all critical control provisions relating to security, availability,
and other concerns for the EBTS contract; and

--- Page 41 ---
b. review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports and determine if the related
independent reviews adequately address the aforementioned security
concerns over DHS’ use of EBTS services, ensure that the service
provider implements all critical recommendations made in the reports,
document these efforts, and retain the documentation for future reference
(repeat).
a. DHS concurs with this recommendation.
b. DHS concurs with this recommendation.
Payroll
Finding 13
DHS did not adequately investigate payments to employees on multiple State
payrolls.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that DHS
a. use quarterly reports provided by CPB to investigate all employees on
multiple payrolls, and
b. retain documentation to support these investigative efforts.
DHS concurs with these recommendations:
The following actions have been taken to address this issue:
a. Contact was made with the Comptroller’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) to
update CPB's distribution list so that the Department's Payroll Unit receives
the quarterly reports of employees on multiple payrolls.
b. Department payroll staff has been re-trained in researching, documenting
and record retention of the dual employment reports.

--- Page 42 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
John F. Nogel, CPA, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds, IV, CPA
Amanda M. Jones
Joshua A. Naylor
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Staff Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Robert H. Dean
Information Systems Staff Auditors