Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Maryland Health Regulatory Commissions
Date: 11/06/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d72456067443a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:51:00.665539
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Maryland Health Regulatory Commissions
November 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 6, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Health Regulatory Commissions of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene for the period beginning September 26, 2005 and
ending April 30, 2008. These three independent commissions are responsible for
health-related functions, such as directing and administering the State’s health
planning functions, developing health care cost-containment strategies, reviewing
and approving hospital rates, and increasing health care access for low-income,
underinsured, and uninsured Marylanders.
Our audit disclosed that the Commissions had not resolved a finding from our two
preceding audits. Specifically, the Maryland Health Care Commission had not
recalculated its 2002 user fees, which were not determined in accordance with a
change in State law, resulting in an improper allocation of fees among regulated
health care industries and practitioners. We were advised that, as of July 2008,
this matter was under legal review.
State law requires that user fees assessed by two of the commissions be used to
cover the commissions’ actual costs. These fees and expenditures are recorded in
special non-lapsing funds. Similarly, the Maryland Trauma Physician Services
Fund—which is maintained by these two commissions and which was established
to reimburse trauma physicians and centers for certain costs—is funded by a
surcharge on Maryland vehicle registrations. As of June 30, 2007, the
commissions’ fund balances had accumulated to $4.6 million and the Maryland
Trauma Physician Services Fund balance had accumulated to $20.6 million.

--- Page 4 ---
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response to this audit, on behalf
of the Commissions, is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by the
Commissions.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Health Regulatory Commissions is a budgetary unit that comprises three
independent commissions established by law: the Maryland Health Care
Commission, the Health Services Cost Review Commission, and the Community
Health Resources Commission.
The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) is responsible for directing and
administering the State’s health planning functions, developing health care cost-
containment strategies, and maintaining a database on all non-hospital health care
services. The Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) is responsible
for reviewing and approving hospital rates, collecting data on hospital utilization,
and administering the Hospital Uncompensated Care Fund. The MHCC and
HSCRC are jointly responsible for administering the Maryland Trauma Physician
Services Fund. Chapter 280, Laws of Maryland 2005, effective October 1, 2005,
created the Community Health Resources Commission (CHRC). The CHRC is
responsible for increasing health care access for low-income, underinsured, and
uninsured Marylanders by providing support to community health resources.
According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2007 expenditures for the
Commissions totaled approximately $101 million, of which approximately $70
million was paid to hospitals from the Hospital Uncompensated Care Fund.
Fund Balances
State law requires user fees assessed by the MHCC and the HSCRC to be used to
cover the actual costs of fulfilling the statutory duties of these two commissions.
A special non-lapsing fund to record these user fees was established for each
commission. According to the Commissions’ records, MHCC had a fund balance
of approximately $3.5 million at June 30, 2007, representing 36 percent of its
fiscal year 2007 general administration appropriation. Similarly, HSCRC had a
fund balance of approximately $1.1 million, representing 34 percent of its fiscal
year 2007 general administration appropriation. These fund balances indicate that
the cumulative amount of user fees collected for these commissions have
exceeded the costs of their operations.
The Department of Legislative Services’ (DLS) analyses of the operating budgets
for the Commissions have included comments that the balances of the
aforementioned MHCC and HSCRC special non-lapsing funds exceeded the
target level of 10 percent of annual general administration appropriations, and
3

--- Page 6 ---
indicated that these commissions should reduce these fund balances accordingly.
This target level, which was intended to cover unanticipated costs or legislative
mandates, was recommended in Sunset reviews conducted by the DLS in
November 2000, and again in December 2005. Although the commissions took
certain measures to reduce the fund balances (such as reducing HSCRC fiscal
year 2007 user fee assessments by approximately 18 percent), the fund balances
continue to exceed the target level.
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund
Chapter 385, Laws of Maryland, 2003, effective July 1, 2003, established the
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund with the intent of stabilizing the
trauma system in Maryland by reimbursing trauma physicians for costs associated
with treating certain trauma patients, and by reimbursing trauma centers for costs
to maintain trauma physicians on call. This special non-lapsing Fund is financed
through a $2.50 annual surcharge on all Maryland vehicle registrations, and is
overseen and administered by MHCC and HSCRC. According to the State’s
accounting records, the Fund’s balance was approximately $20.6 million as of
June 30, 2008, representing an increase of $2 million from its September 30, 2005
balance of $18.6 million.
Because the level of Fund expenditures anticipated by the initial legislation has
not been met, legislation passed during the 2006 Legislative Session increased the
compensation available to trauma centers and expanded the authorized uses of the
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund. However, these changes had only a
limited impact on the Fund’s balance. Subsequent legislation (Chapter 627, Laws
of Maryland, 2007) required the MHCC and HSCRC to include options for
reducing the Fund’s balance in the Fund’s fiscal year 2007 annual report. For
example, these options were to include (1) identification of one-time-only uses for
eliminating the large surplus that accumulated in the early years of the Fund, and
(2) ongoing uses of the Fund that would align annual expenditures with annual
revenues. In their 2007 annual Fund report, the Commissions identified a number
of options for reducing the balance in the Fund (such as expanding the specialties
eligible for on-call reimbursement). Moreover, these options were included in
legislation that was passed during the 2008 Legislative Session. Based on a
review of the options included in the 2008 legislation, the Department of
Legislative Services – Office of Policy Analysis determined that a reduction in the
Fund balance was expected beginning in fiscal year 2009.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 7, 2006. We determined that the
Commissions had satisfactorily addressed one of the findings. The remaining
finding is repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
User Fees
Finding 1
As noted during our two preceding audits, MHCC did not assess fiscal year
2002 user fees in accordance with a new State law, resulting in an improper
allocation of fees among regulated industries; MHCC has not resolved this
issue.
Analysis
In our two preceding audit reports, we noted that MHCC had not assessed fiscal
year 2002 user fees, which funded the MHCC’s operations and totaled
approximately $8.2 million, in accordance with State law. Specifically, a law
change, effective July 1, 2001, required MHCC, in assessing user fees to each of
its four regulated industries, to use a methodology that considers the amount of
MHCC’s workload attributable to each industry. The new legislation also
required MHCC to assess user fees to certain health care practitioners (such as
dentists) that had not previously been assessed user fees, and introduced a new
waiver process. Although MHCC formally adopted a revised user fee assessment
methodology at its December 2000 meeting, MHCC management advised that
there was not enough time to fully implement all provisions of the new legislation
before fiscal year 2002 fees were assessed. As a result, the fiscal year 2002 user
fees were based on the percentages that existed prior to the law change and the
newly identified health care practitioners were not assessed fees as required. The
allocation method used did not affect the total amount of user fees assessed;
rather, each regulated industry was either over-assessed or under-assessed. For
example, hospitals were over-assessed $611,000 and nursing homes were under-
assessed $652,000. Subsequent user fees have been based on the law changes.
We recommended in our preceding audit report that MHCC consult with the
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) on this matter, which MHCC agreed to do.
MHCC management personnel advised us that it contacted the OAG during the
summer of 2008 and, as of July 2008, was awaiting its decision.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that, upon receipt of the OAG’s decision, MHCC take the
recommended action to resolve this matter.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Health Regulatory Commissions of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene for the period beginning September 26, 2005 and
ending April 30, 2008. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Commissions’
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Commissions’ operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Commissions by
the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Office of the Secretary and
related units. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are within the scope of our audit
of the Office of the Secretary.
The Commissions’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
Our audit did not disclose any conditions that we consider to be significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect the Commissions’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This report includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to the Commissions that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
The response from the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, on behalf of
the Commissions, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Maryland Health Care Commission
Response to the Legislative Audit Report
Findings and Recommendations
Legislative Audit Finding 1:
As noted during our two preceding audits, MHCC did not assess fiscal year 2002 user fees in
accordance with a new State law, resulting in an improper allocation of fees among regulated
industries; MHCC has not resolved this issue.
Legislative Auditor’s Recommendation:
We recommend that, upon receipt of the OAG’s decision, MHCC take the recommended action
to resolve this matter.
Administration’s Response:
The Commission disagrees with the auditor’s findings as the Commission believes that the FY
2002 assessments were properly determined in June 2001, using the methodology set forth in the
law that was in effect when the required notifications were timely given. The General Assembly
was aware that the implementation of the legislation would require both a process of consultation
with the affected Boards and the promulgation of new regulations. This process was initiated
promptly, the regulations became effective during the fiscal year, and notifications of resulting
assessments were made in June 2002 for the next fiscal year.
The Commission has consulted with the Office of the Attorney General and is awaiting a
decision. If the Office of the Attorney General determines the assessment should be
recalculated, the Commission at this time would be unable to comply with their decision. For
example Nursing Homes, Health Occupational Practitioners, Insurance Companies and Hospitals
pay their fees per facility or per licensee. The process of reallocation would increase or decrease
the amount owed to the Commission. We would be unable to collect or refund money to
facilities that are no longer in business or to Health Occupational Practitioners who have no
longer renewed their licenses.
Because the Commission is special funded, the recalculation of the assessments for Fiscal Year
2002 suggested by the audit, would not bring additional revenue to the State. As a practical
matter, a recalculation for the Health Occupation Boards would require the State to reissue
checks to approximately 50,000 board licensees for around .94 cents each. 1
1 Auditor’s Comment:
During our preceding audit, we obtained correspondence from the Chief Counsel for the Opinions and
Advice of the Office of the Attorney General which concurred with our position that fiscal year 2002 user
fees were not properly assessed, and stated that the law provided for no discretion on the timing of
implementation of the law. In the event the pending decision of the Office concludes that the
assessments should be recalculated and reassessed, we would suggest that the Commission, in
consultation with the Office, develop an appropriate methodology for reassessment of the fiscal year 2002
user fees that addresses the concerns expressed in the Department’s response.

--- Page 12 ---
Background Information
During the 1999 session of the General Assembly, House Bill 995 was merged with the Health
Resources Planning Commission and the Health Care Access and Cost Commission to create the
Maryland Health Care Commission. The Maryland Health Care Commission is a special funded
agency supported by an assessment on four categories of payers, insurance companies, hospitals,
nursing homes, and the health occupational licensing boards. House Bill 995 requires that, by
June 30th of each year, the Commission give notification to each assessed entity of the amount of
their fee (for the upcoming fiscal year). House Bill 995 also required the Commission to
complete a workload distribution study, to make recommendations on the percentage of the
budget to be paid by each industry, and to determine whether the current budgetary cap of $8.25
million would be sufficient to sustain forecasted expenditures.
The Commission completed the required study and presented several recommendations to the
Commission at its December 2000 meeting which included: 1) raise the current cap from $8.25
million to $10 million; 2) keep an assessment apportionment in place for four years; 3) conduct a
workload distribution study every four years; and, 4) seek to remove the apportionment formula
from the statute and replace it with an apportionment formula promulgated through regulation(s),
based on the workload distribution study. The Commission adopted staff’s recommendations and
the report was forwarded to the General Assembly on January 1, 2001, as required. The
Commission then submitted legislation to implement these recommendations through Senate Bill
786 – The Maryland Health Care Commission – Modifications and Clarifications.
At the time the 2001 legislation was introduced, the Commission assessed only some of the
Health Occupation Boards. Several of the Boards felt that all health care practitioners should be
assessed and lobbied for their inclusion. Senate Bill 786, as adopted, included all health care
practitioners in the assessment, but contained language directing the Commission to create a
waiver process allowing those practitioners making wages that were “substantially” less than
other providers to be exempted from the fee. The effective date of the bill was set as July 1,
2001, solely because the budget required an increase in the statutory ceiling to $10 million at the
beginning of the fiscal year. It is important to note that the Commission was required to notify
the Boards of their allocations for FY 2002 by June 30, 2001, before the effective date of the
new legislation. As a practical matter, notifications have to go out well before the required
notification deadline.
Implementation of the bill in fact involved much more that mere notification. The Commission
also had to promulgate regulations setting forth both a process to determine which occupations
would be exempted and the new allocations across industries. Even before the effective date of
the legislation, the Commission began the work necessary to develop a method for determining
exemptions for certain practitioners and to make necessary changes to the Commission’s
regulations.

--- Page 13 ---
This process included:
(cid:131) determining the average annual wages across professions in order to establish which
professions would be eligible for a waiver. This required the Commission to match each
health occupation profession within the State personnel classification system in order to
determine a representative average hourly wage;
(cid:131) establishing an average annual wage below which professions would be exempted from
the allocation;
(cid:131) attending meetings of each of the Health Occupation Boards to review the law, to
describe the scope of work, and to discuss the process for allocating and collecting the
fees; and
(cid:131) drafting, proposing, and adopting regulations to implement the new law.
After the above was done, the Commission:
(cid:131) determined the base number of practitioners for the assessed health occupations boards,
set the fee per practitioner, and, in June, notified the Boards of their status and
assessments for the following fiscal year;
(cid:131) surveyed each hospital and nursing home for admissions and revenue from the previous
calendar year and, in June, notified each facility of its assessment for the following fiscal
year; and
(cid:131) surveyed each insurance company for earned premiums and, in June, notified each of its
assessment for the following fiscal year.

--- Page 14 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark A. Ermer, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Chiaka N. Opara
Staff Auditor