Title: Executive Department - Governor - Boards, Commissions, and Offices - Office for Children - Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Date: 10/05/2007
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d7245606743fa
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:42:34.895450
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Executive Department
Governor
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Office for Children
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
October 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 5, 2007
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Nathaniel J. McFadden, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the following units of the Executive Department, through the
completion of the term of office of former Governor Robert L. Ehrlich, Jr., for the
period beginning January 1, 2005 and ending January 16, 2007.
Governor
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Office for Children
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Our audit disclosed certain internal control and record keeping deficiencies
relating to the Department’s State grants, federal funds, information systems
security, equipment, and cash receipts. For example, the Governor’s Office of
Crime Control and Prevention (within the Boards, Commissions, and Offices) had
not established procedures to ensure the propriety of certain grant expenditures,
and the Executive Department had not established a complete disaster recovery
plan for its computer operations.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agencies’ Responsibilities 7
Organizational Changes 7
Questioned Costs 8
Current Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention Grants
* Finding 1 – Adequate Procedures Were Not in Place to Ensure That Grant 9
Expenditures of the Victim and Witness Protection Program Were Proper
Federal Funds
Finding 2 – Controls Over the Records Related to Federal Fund Activity 10
at Certain Units Were Deficient
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 3 – Disaster Recovery and Backup of Critical Files Were Not 12
Adequately Addressed
* Finding 4 – Security Over the Computer Network Needs to be Enhanced 13
Equipment
Finding 5 – Proper Controls Were Not Established Over Equipment 14
Cash Receipts
* Finding 6 – Collections at Two Units Were Not Adequately Controlled 15
and Were Not Deposited Timely
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Payroll
Finding 7 – A Contractual Employee Was Improperly Paid $7,557 After 16
Termination From State Service
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Executive Department
October 2007
• The Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention had not
implemented comprehensive procedures to ensure expenditures for the
Victim and Witness Protection Program were proper, in accordance with
a recent Attorney General’s Opinion.
The Department should ensure that procedures are adequate to facilitate
monitoring the use of these Program funds.
• Certain control deficiencies were noted in the record keeping for federal
funds. For example, one unit did not routinely reconcile federal fund
activity recorded in its records with the State’s accounting records.
The Department should take the recommended actions to improve internal
controls in this area.
• Internal control and record keeping deficiencies were noted with respect
to information systems security, equipment, and cash receipts. For
example, a complete disaster recovery plan was not developed, and
security over the Department’s internal network needs to be enhanced.
The Department should take the recommended actions to improve internal
controls and record keeping in these areas.
• A contractual employee was improperly paid approximately $7,500 after
terminating from State service.
The Department should consult with the Office of the Attorney General in this
matter and take appropriate action.
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agencies’ Responsibilities
(cid:190) The Executive Department – Governor provides oversight, guidance, and
coordination to units within the Executive Department and to other
budgetary units within the Executive Branch of the State government. The
Department also provides the public with information about the
Governor’s policies and goals, and about the functions of State
government. According to the State’s accounting records, the Governor’s
expenditures were approximately $8.7 million during fiscal year 2006.
(cid:190) The Boards, Commissions, and Offices unit consists of various entities,
including the Office of Crime Control and Prevention, which were created
by statute or executive order to provide planning and coordination for
Executive Branch functions. According to the State’s accounting records,
these entities’ expenditures were approximately $51 million during fiscal
year 2006.
(cid:190) The Governor’s Office for Children promotes the State’s vision for a
stable, safe, and healthy environment for children and families and,
according to the State’s accounting records, had expenditures of
approximately $1.5 million during fiscal year 2006.
(cid:190) The Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing advocates for and promotes
the general welfare of individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing, and
provides, advocates, and coordinates the adoption of public policies,
regulations, and programs that will benefit deaf and hard of hearing
individuals. According to the State’s accounting records, this Office’s
expenditures were approximately $220,000 during fiscal year 2006.
Organizational Changes
(cid:190) Chapter 62, Laws of Maryland 2006, effective July 1, 2006 combined the
State Labor Relations Board (previously budgeted under the Department
of Budget and Management) with the Higher Education Labor Relations
Board to establish an independent unit of State government under
Executive Department – Boards, Commissions, and Offices.
7

--- Page 10 ---
(cid:190) The Office for Children, Youth, and Families (OCYF) closed on June 30,
2005 with the expiration of its authorizing legislation. Certain duties
performed by OCYF were assumed by the Governor’s Office for Children.
Certain other duties previously performed by OCYF were transferred to
the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene and the State Department of
Education.
Questioned Costs
The Office of Inspector General of the Corporation for National and Community
Service (an independent federal agency) contracted with a private firm to audit
grants awarded to the Maryland Governor’s Office on Service and Volunteerism
(GOSV)—a unit under Executive Department – Boards, Commissions and
Offices. The related audit report, which was issued on May 19, 2006, disclosed
questioned costs totaling $818,673. The audit covered the period from October 1,
2003 through December 31, 2005, and included a total of $5.8 million in costs
claimed by GOSV. In response to the audit report, the Executive Department
submitted additional documentation and explanations regarding the costs. The
Department has been informally advised that, as of June 21, 2007, the amount of
disallowed costs has been reduced to $95,012; the final amount of disallowed
costs is still being negotiated.
Current Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
We reviewed the current status of the 11 fiscal/compliance items from our
preceding audit report dated November 7, 2005. We determined that the
Department satisfactorily addressed six of these items. The remaining five items
are repeated in this report, two of which are combined into one item.
We also determined the status of the remaining issue from our preceding audit
report that was initially identified in our August 16, 1996 special report on the
Systems Reform Initiative. We have determined that the Governor’s Office for
Children has taken satisfactory action to resolve this issue.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention Grants
Finding 1
The Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention (GOCCP) had not
implemented procedures to ensure that expenditures for the Victim and
Witness Protection Program were proper.
Analysis
As of July 31, 2007, GOCCP had not implemented comprehensive procedures to
ensure that expenditures from the Victim and Witness Protection and Relocation
Program had been approved, were consistent with the purpose of the Program, and
had not exceeded the amount of the appropriation. According to the State’s
accounting records, GOCCP made six grant payments, totaling $600,000, to the
State’s Attorneys’ Coordinator during our audit period.
State law established the position of the State’s Attorneys’ Coordinator and
specified that the Coordinator would administer the Victim and Witness
Protection and Relocation Program. The purpose of the Program is to protect
crime victims and witnesses, and their families, and to relocate victims and
witnesses to protect them or to facilitate their participation in court proceedings.
In our preceding audit report, we recommended that GOCCP enter into written
agreements with the State’s Attorneys’ Coordinator for the Victim and Witness
Protection Program which delineate the uses of the funds, the responsibilities of
all parties, the expenditure reporting requirements, and verification procedures for
funds spent. We also recommended that GOCCP obtain expenditure reports and
monitor the use of the funds. The Department disagreed with these
recommendations and contended that it was only responsible for distributing the
funds to the State’s Attorneys’ Coordinator and not for monitoring the use of the
funds. As a result, an Opinion from the Office of the Attorney General was
requested to clarify the duties of GOCCP with respect to the Program. In an
Opinion, dated October 23, 2006, the Attorney General concluded that the State’s
Attorneys’ Coordinator is responsible for approving expenditures of the Program
by individual State’s Attorneys and that GOCCP has no authority to question
those decisions. However, the Opinion stated that, because the Program funds
appear in GOCCP’s budget, it is responsible for ensuring that the State’s
9

--- Page 12 ---
Attorneys’ Coordinator has approved the expenditures of funds, that the
disbursements of funds appear to be consistent with the purposes of the Program,
and that the disbursements do not exceed the amount of the appropriation.
On May 2, 2007, the Coordinator and GOCCP entered into an agreement which
defines each party’s responsibilities. For example, the agreement provides that the
Coordinator will obtain an accounting of expenditures made under the Program
from the individual State’s Attorneys. The agreement also specifies that GOCCP
will ensure that the Coordinator has approved expenditures under the Program,
that disbursements were consistent with the purposes of the Program, and that
disbursements did not exceed the appropriation. While correspondence between
the Coordinator and the GOCCP indicates that reports of activity will be provided
to GOCCP, the details of these reports had not been determined and no reports
had been provided as of July 31, 2007. In our opinion, to accomplish GOCCP’s
oversight responsibility, the Office should obtain detailed information (such as,
expenditure reports by individual State’s Attorneys, by category of expense) from
the Coordinator, in accordance with the intent of the aforementioned Opinion.
Recommendation 1
We again recommend that GOCCP implement comprehensive procedures to
monitor the use of the funds from this Program. We also recommend that
GOCCP obtain detailed information from the Coordinator to facilitate the
performance of its responsibilities, as outlined in the Attorney General's
Opinion, and as defined in the aforementioned agreement.
Federal Funds
Finding 2
Controls over the records related to federal fund activity at certain units
were deficient.
Analysis
Controls over the records related to federal funds at the Governor’s Office on
Service and Volunteerism (GOSV) and GOCCP—both units under Boards,
Commissions, and Offices—were deficient. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
• GOSV did not routinely reconcile federal fund activity recorded in its system
with the State’s accounting records (FMIS). As of January 31, 2007, no
monthly reconciliations for activity subsequent to June 30, 2006 had been
10

--- Page 13 ---
completed. In addition, when the reconciliations were performed, supervisory
review of the monthly reconciliations was not documented. Consequently,
assurance was lacking that these reconciliations were properly performed and
reviewed.
• The time allocation sheets used to record employee time in the GOCCP time
and attendance database were not always available or signed by the respective
supervisors. These time allocation sheets are critical for ensuring that
personnel costs are properly allocated to the various federal programs.
Specifically, our test of a two-month period for 13 employees disclosed that,
for 4 of these employees, there was inadequate documentation supporting the
time allocation. The allocation document could not be located for one month
for one employee and, for all 4 employees, the time allocation sheets were not
properly reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel for either one or
both months reviewed.
According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2006 GOSV and GOCCP federal
fund expenditures totaled $3.9 million and $18.6 million, respectively.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that adequate controls be established over federal fund
activity. Specifically, we recommend that the Department ensure that
monthly reconciliations of federal fund activity are performed. We further
recommend that supervisory personnel review and approve these
reconciliations. We also recommend that the Department ensure that all
time allocation documents are properly reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel and that they be maintained for future reference.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The Department of Budget and Management – Office of Information Technology
(DBM—OIT) provides information technology services to the Executive
Department – Governor. DBM—OIT operates and maintains a wide area
network for the Executive Department which provides connectivity and Internet
access to its various units. DBM—OIT provides IT support services, such as
network and server administration, to the Executive Department’s units and
maintains key Executive Department applications, including the Letter Scanning
and Routing System application (LSARS), the email system, and the Governor’s
website.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
The Executive Department did not adequately address disaster recovery or
backup of critical files.
Analysis
The Department did not adequately address disaster recovery or backup of critical
files.
• The Department did not have a complete information technology disaster
recovery plan for recovering from disaster scenarios (for example, a fire). In
accordance with the Department of Budget and Management’s IT Disaster
Recovery Guidelines, a complete information systems disaster recovery plan
should, at a minimum, address backup procedures, offsite storage, roles,
responsibilities and complete contact listings of critical personnel, network
connectivity considerations and equipment replacement. However, the
Department’s plan did not sufficiently address any of these elements. Without
a formal information technology disaster recovery plan, a disaster could cause
significant delays (for an undetermined period of time) in restoring operations
above and beyond the expected delays that would exist in a planned recovery
scenario. A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding
audit reports.
• As of February 26, 2007, the most recent backup tapes for critical servers
stored at an offsite facility were two months old. In addition, our testing of
file backup procedures disclosed that, for the three dates tested, backup tapes
were not created for three of seven critical servers tested.
Recommendation 3
We again recommend that the Department comply with the aforementioned
IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines and develop and implement a complete
disaster recovery plan. We also recommend that the Department maintain
recent backups of all critical servers.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 4
Security over the Department’s computer network needs to be enhanced.
Analysis
Security over the Department’s internal network needs to be enhanced.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• A number of publicly accessible servers were located on the internal network
rather than in a separate network zone to minimize security risks. These
servers, which could potentially be compromised, exposed the internal
network to attack from external sources. A similar condition was commented
upon in our two preceding audit reports.
• Firewall rules allowed various unnecessary or outdated connections to
portions of the Department’s internal network, placing various network
devices at risk. For example, we identified 38 outdated firewall rules, many of
which allowed Internet access to the Department’s internal network over
numerous ports.
• Intrusion detection prevention (IDP) systems were not used to protect critical
portions of the network. While the network included an IDP system, it was
not enabled. IDP systems gather and analyze network traffic to identify and
block network security breaches and attacks, and alert network administrators
of these situations. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
• The Department operated a wireless network with connectivity to the internal
network. However, the encryption protocol used to secure transmission of
data was not secure and could be easily compromised using readily available
tools.
• We were advised that the firewall logs were not regularly reviewed. In
addition, any reviews performed were not documented. Accordingly, there
were increased risks of unauthorized or malicious network activity occurring
and not being detected in a timely manner. A similar condition was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 4
We again recommend that the Department improve security over its internal
network. Specifically, we made detailed recommendations which, if
implemented, should provide for adequate security over the internal
network.
Equipment
Finding 5
Proper controls were not established over the Department’s equipment.
Analysis
Record keeping and physical inventory procedures at the Department were not in
compliance with certain provisions of the Department of General Services (DGS)
Inventory Control Manual. The Governor’s Finance Office (GFO) provides
various support services to units of the Executive Department, including the
maintenance of the equipment control accounts. According to the Department’s
records, as of June 30, 2006, the value of the equipment for all of these units
totaled approximately $4 million, including the Governor’s Office equipment of
approximately $1.6 million. Our review disclosed the following conditions:
• Although the Department advised us that an annual physical inventory had
been conducted of the Governor’s Office equipment, it did not maintain
support, such as inventory count sheets, to document that the inventory had
been conducted and that the results of the physical inventory had been
reconciled to the related detail records.
• The detail equipment records for the Governor’s Office were not adequately
maintained. For example, our test of 41 equipment purchases, totaling
$32,778, disclosed that 4 items (consisting of 3 monitors and a computer),
valued at $1,254, were not recorded in the detail records. In addition, of the
18 items selected for testing from the detail records, 17 items valued at
$67,442 (consisting of scanners, printers and related computer equipment)
could not be physically located by the Governor’s Office property officer.
• The GFO performed a reconciliation of the control accounts for all units with
the related detail records as of June 30, 2006. However, as of April 2007,
unreconciled differences totaling approximately $211,000 remained. In
addition, for four of the units, with equipment valued at approximately
14

--- Page 17 ---
$353,000, the GFO did not submit an annual report of fixed assets as required
by DGS for the period ending June 30, 2006.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that detail equipment records be
maintained by State agencies and that physical inventories be conducted and
reconciled to the detail records on a periodic basis. The Manual also states that a
control account should be maintained and that a periodic reconciliation of the
control account to the detail records should be performed and approved.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Department comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the Inventory Control Manual.
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
Internal controls over collections at two units were not adequate, and
collections were not always deposited timely.
Analysis
Collections received by the State Ethics Commission and Volunteer Maryland—
both units under Boards, Commissions and Offices—were not adequately
controlled and deposited in a timely manner. According to the records of the
Governor’s Finance Office (GFO), collections deposited by these two units
totaled approximately $238,000 for fiscal year 2006. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
• Independent verifications were not performed at either unit to ensure that
collections were forwarded to and received by the GFO for deposit, or that
they had been recorded in the State’s accounting records. Furthermore, the
Volunteer Maryland employee who maintained the accounts receivable
records also had access to the related cash receipts.
• Neither of these units forwarded collections to the GFO for deposit in a timely
manner. Our test of 29 receipts, totaling $162,600 from both offices,
disclosed that 27 receipts totaling $153,050 were deposited from three to eight
business days after receipt. In addition, late fees collected by the enforcement
unit of the State Ethics Commission which, according to its records totaled
approximately $11,000 during fiscal year 2006, were sometimes held for
several weeks prior to deposit and were not adequately secured during this
15

--- Page 18 ---
time. The Comptroller of the Treasury’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires that receipts be deposited no later than the first working day after
receipt.
Similar situations related to the State Ethics Commission were commented upon
in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We again recommend that employees without access to the collections verify
that all recorded collections were received by the GFO for deposit. We also
recommend that an employee without access to collections maintain the
related accounts receivable records. In addition, we again recommend that
collections be deposited no later than the first working day after receipt, as
required. Finally, we recommend that all receipts be adequately secured
prior to deposit.
Payroll
Finding 7
A contractual employee was improperly paid $7,557 after terminating from
State service.
Analysis
A contractual employee was improperly paid $7,557 after terminating from State
service. Specifically, this employee terminated service with the State on May 9,
2005, but continued to receive compensation through June 30, 2005. We were
advised that the employee’s immediate supervisor believed that the supervisor’s
own unused compensatory leave could be used so that the employee could
continue to be paid through the end of the contract. However, State regulations do
not provide for this. Since the employee did not work during the period from May
9, 2005 through June 30, 2005, nor did the employee have available leave to cover
this time frame, the employee was not entitled to the compensation under the
terms of the service contract. In this regard, the applicable service contract states
that the employee should be compensated for the performance of services that
were set forth in the contract.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the Department consult with the Office of the Attorney
General in this matter and take appropriate action.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the following units of the Executive Department for the periods
noted. At the request of the Executive Department – Governor, the units were
audited concurrently and one audit report is being issued.
Governor January 1, 2005 to January 16, 2007
Boards, Commissions, and Offices January 1, 2005 to January 16, 2007
Office for Children, Youth, and Families January 1, 2005 to June 30, 2005
Office for Children July 1, 2005 to January 16, 2007
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing January 1, 2005 to January 16, 2007
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Department’s
financial transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the current
status of the fiscal/compliance findings, as well as the remaining issue that
pertained to our 1996 special report on Systems Reform Initiative at the Office for
Children, Youth, and Families (subsequently the Office for Children), included in
our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Department’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit included various support services (such as payroll, processing vendor
payment transmittals) provided by the Executive Department – Governor on a
centralized basis to certain units and agencies within the Executive and
Administrative Control area of State Government (such as the Secretary of State),
as well as to the Maryland State Board of Contract Appeals. As previously
17

--- Page 20 ---
requested by the Governor’s Office, our audit also included activities related to
the operation and maintenance of Government House (for example, payroll for
staff, inventory record keeping).
We did not audit the Department’s federal financial assistance programs for
compliance with federal laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies.
Our audit scope was limited with respect to the Department’s cash transactions
because the Office of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the State’s main
bank accounts during a portion of the audit period. Due to this condition, we were
unable to determine, with reasonable assurance, that all Department cash
transactions prior to July 1, 2005 were accounted for and properly recorded on the
related State accounting records as well as the banks’ records.
The Department’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may change
or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Department’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Department that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
18

--- Page 21 ---
The Executive Department’s response to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
19

--- Page 23 ---
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit Report Executive Department
Questioned Costs - Governor’s Office on Service and Volunteerism
Agency Update: Virtually all outstanding documentation has been received from
GOSV’s grantees and forwarded to the Corporation for National and Community Service
with a formal appeal as to the disallowed costs. The Office is currently in discussion with
the CNCS Office of Audit Resolution and Policy regarding this appeal.
Recommendation 1 - State’s Attorneys’ Coordinator Grants
We again recommend that GOCCP implement comprehensive procedures to
monitor the use of the funds from this Program. We also recommend that GOCCP
obtain detailed information from the Coordinator to facilitate the performance of its
responsibilities, as outlined in the Attorney General's Opinion, and as defined in the
aforementioned agreement.
We partially agree. As has been noted in the audit report, in furtherance of the
recommendations of the preceding legislative audit regarding this Program, GOCCP staff
negotiated and entered into a written agreement with the State’s Attorney’s Coordinator.
Subsequently, on July17, 2007, staff met with the Coordinator to determine the precise
nature of the reporting to be required both from the local State’s Attorneys offices to the
Coordinator and from the Coordinator to GOCCP. As this agreement was not in effect
for the fiscal year just closed, it was agreed at that time that the required FY2007 year-
end expenditure report would delineate total expenditures by jurisdiction, as certified by
the Coordinator, and would be submitted by the end of August. This report was received
by GOCCP on August 29th.
Beginning with FY2008, the local State’s Attorneys will be required to complete and
submit a newly-developed quarterly accounting form, detailing expenditures by
categories and attested to by the State’s Attorney, to the Coordinator. The Coordinator
will then submit to GOCCP a summary quarterly report, detailing the distribution of
funds by jurisdiction. Accompanying this report will be a statement certifying that “the
State’s Attorneys’ Coordinator has approved the expenditure of the foregoing funds by
the jurisdictions indicated and the disbursement of theses funds was consistent with the
purposes of the Witness Protection and Relocation Fund”. This report is due to GOCCP
thirty days after the end of each quarter.
The Coordinator has incorporated the new process, as summarized above, into revised
Witness Protection & Relocation Fund Guidelines and Regulations, which have been
approved by the State’s Attorneys Coordination Council and distributed statewide. We
believe that the procedures that have been established and are being implemented are
fully consistent with the prior audit recommendations and both the Coordinator’s and
GOCCP’s legal responsibilities under law, as outlined in the Attorney General’s opinion.
1

--- Page 24 ---
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit Report Executive Department
Recommendation 2 – Controls over Federal Funds
We recommend that adequate controls be established over federal fund activity.
Specifically, we recommend that the Department ensure that monthly
reconciliations of federal fund activity are performed. We further recommend that
supervisory personnel review and approve these reconciliations. We also
recommend that the Department ensure that all time allocation documents are
properly reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel and that they be
maintained for future reference.
We agree. While GOSV had confirmed the proper recording of most of its Federal fund
activities, insufficient documentation was kept. The agency will implement an assurance
procedure for monthly reconciliations that includes supervisory review and approval.
GOCCP will ensure that all time allocation documents and employee time sheets are
properly reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel and that the time allocation
documents be maintained for future audit verification. It should be noted that at the time
of the audit, however, the use of their time and attendance database to properly allocate
payroll expenses to the appropriate Federal or State funding sources was quite new; this
process did not officially begin until FY06, although the initial start up and testing were
being undertaken during FY05. There were some inevitable learning curves that had to be
overcome, and they have been; the Federal funding agency is now recommending that
other States adopt GOCCP’s methodology for tracking staff time allocations.
Recommendation 3 – IT Disaster Recovery/Backup of Files
We again recommend that the Department comply with the aforementioned IT
Disaster Recovery Guidelines and develop and implement a complete disaster
recovery plan. We also recommend that the Department maintain recent backups
of all critical servers.
We agree. A Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) and a Continuity of Operations Plan
(COOP) exist and do contain the processes and procedures to restore critical IT systems
in support of critical Executive Office of the Governor (EOG) business functions.
However, these plans have not been updated to accurately reflect personnel and
technological changes associated with the current Administration. This Disaster
Recovery Plan is being re-written in accordance with the Department of Budget and
Management’s IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines, and will contain all elements noted in
the auditor’s analysis. Additionally, this plan will be periodically reviewed and updated.
The revised DRP is expected to be completed by December 2007.
2

--- Page 25 ---
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit Report Executive Department
During the audit period, the Department recognizes that there was a problem in
performing the normal backup procedures of the referenced servers. The application
errors that caused this issue have been resolved and backups resumed in accordance with
Departmental procedures, which were developed based on the Department’s business
impact analysis and risk mitigation strategies. Since March 2007, weekly backup tapes
have been sent to a local off-site location while monthly backup tapes are sent to a secure
third party tape vaulting service.
Recommendation 4 – Computer Network Security
We again recommend that the Department improve security over its internal
network. Specifically, we made detailed recommendations which, if implemented,
should provide for adequate security over the internal network.
We agree. At the time of the audit, the Department had just recently replaced the
firewall. Configurations and policies were migrated “as is” from the old unit to the new
one. This strategy was the preferred method to minimize potential security risks resulting
from a required reengineering of the firewall’s configuration, and to minimize the
possibility of service unavailability during the 2007 General Assembly Session.
The Department has reviewed firewall configurations and made the changes necessary to
comply with best practices and the State security policy. The new configuration
addresses the audit issues to ensure that security exposures to critical systems inside the
network are limited.
The Department has corrected the configuration associated with referenced wireless
network and will continue to ensure the proper configuration of all approved wireless
access devices to ensure the network is secured. The Department also implemented
firewall logs, which are centrally reviewed by DBM - OIT security personnel. These
reviews and investigations of any unusual activity noted are documented and maintained
for future reference.
The Department is in process of implementing additional recommendations discussed
with the auditors to provide for adequate security over the internal network.
Implementation of these recommendations should be completed by December 2007.
Recommendation 5 – Controls Over Equipment
We recommend that the Department comply with the aforementioned requirements
of the Inventory Control Manual.
3

--- Page 26 ---
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit Report Executive Department
We agree. The Department has made progress in its efforts to improve its inventory
procedures and remains committed to conducting these activities in accordance with
applicable procedures. As part of this effort, in addition to those procedures enumerated
in this recommendation, we will strengthen our accountability procedures for portable
electronic devices.
Recommendation 6 – Controls Over Collections
We again recommend that employees without access to the collections verify that all
recorded collections were received by the GFO for deposit. We also recommend
that an employee without access to collections maintain the related accounts
receivable records. In addition, we again recommend that collections be deposited
no later than the first working day after receipt, as required. Finally, we
recommend that all receipts be adequately secured prior to deposit.
We agree. While both agencies cited in the audit report already substantially comply
with appropriate internal control procedures regarding reconciliations and timeliness,
efforts will be made to ensure more complete compliance. In addition, the State Ethics
Commission staff has eliminated its practice of holding certain deposits until action is
taken by the Commission on the relevant enforcement action.
Recommendation 7 – Payments to Contractual Employee
We recommend that the Department consult with the Office of the Attorney
General in this matter and take appropriate action.
We agree. These events occurred under a prior Administration and, as a result, we are
not aware of all of the facts and circumstances leading to the decision to approve the
referenced leave. We do note that there is evidence that the supervisor in question sought
and received the approval of her supervisor, a former Deputy Chief of Staff to the
Governor, prior to allowing the subject employee to be paid through the end of her
contract. According to our review, it appears that both the immediate supervisor and the
employee attempted to follow proper procedures with regard to this request (the
supervisor’s compensatory leave balance was reduced by the amount of leave used by the
employee).
Based on the facts that are known to us, we would not elect to seek recovery of the funds
paid to the employee, nor to take action against the supervisor, more than two years after
the money was paid, as a result of a decision made by a prior Administration. We agree,
however, to consult with the Office of the Attorney General in this matter.
4

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Phyllis M. Clancy, CPA
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
A. Jerome Sokol, CPA
Information Systems Audit Managers
William R. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Andrew N. Dobin
Elaine D. Kagan
Staff Auditors