Title: Military Department
Date: 05/30/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744d7
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:18:36.425874
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Military Department
March 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Military Department maintains the Maryland National Guard within the State
of Maryland, including its 36 readiness centers and numerous other facilities used
by the Army and Air National Guard. In addition, the Department, through its
Maryland Emergency Management Agency (MEMA), coordinates Statewide
efforts in the event of emergencies and disasters that are beyond the capabilities
of local authorities. MEMA also coordinates disaster preparedness activities with
its federal and local counterparts and, through mitigation services, strives to
reduce or eliminate the impact of future disasters. The Department also
administers loan and grant programs that provide funding to volunteer fire
companies for facilities and equipment.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, the Department’s
operating expenditures totaled approximately $81 million, consisting of federal
fund expenditures of $47.3 million, general fund expenditures of $11.7 million,
and special fund expenditures of $22.0 million.
Distributions to Volunteer Company Assistance Fund
State law established the Volunteer Company Assistance Fund (VCAF) to provide
loans and grants to volunteer fire companies. Effective fiscal year 2007, State law
further provided that the Comptroller of Maryland shall distribute collections each
year from a court-imposed surcharge on traffic cases to the VCAF until a total of
$20 million had been distributed. During fiscal year 2014, the Comptroller
distributed the final $4.1 million needed to meet the $20 million mandate.
According to the State’s records, as of June 30, 2015, the fund balance totaled
approximately $30 million consisting of notes receivable due from volunteer fire
companies totaling $9.5 million and cash totaling $20.5 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives,
our audit included a review to determine the status of eight of the nine findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated May 30, 2013. We determined that
the Department satisfactorily addressed all eight of these findings. We did not
follow up on the remaining finding which pertained to State motor vehicles.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Federal Funds
Finding 1
The Military Department did not submit requests for reimbursement of
federal fund expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest
income to the State.
Analysis
The Department did not submit requests for reimbursement of federal fund
expenditures related to Maryland Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) and
National Guard Bureau (NGB) grants in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest
income to the State. Federal guidelines for these grants permit reimbursement to
be requested when expenditures are incurred. According to the State’s records,
during fiscal year 2015, MEMA and NGB grant expenditures totaled $33.5
million and $13.8 million, respectively.
Our test of 10 NGB grant reimbursement requests totaling $2.7 million processed
during fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015 disclosed that the requests were
submitted between 71 and 304 days after the Department spent the funds. For
example, one request for reimbursement of $318,885 that was spent during
August 2014 was not submitted until June 2015. Similarly, our test of 10 requests
for MEMA grant funds processed during the same period disclosed that 6 requests
totaling $2.9 million were submitted 35 to 193 days after the related expenditures
were incurred. The untimely recovery of these funds resulted in lost interest
income to the State totaling approximately $17,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Department submit federal fund reimbursement
requests in a timely manner, such as monthly.
Equipment
Finding 2
Adequate controls and records were not maintained for MEMA equipment.
Analysis
Adequate controls had not been established over MEMA equipment. According
to the Department’s detail records, the value of MEMA equipment as of June 30,
4

--- Page 7 ---
2015 totaled approximately $5.1 million, of which $3.3 million related to
sensitive equipment.
 Certain inventory and recordkeeping functions performed by employees were
not properly segregated as required. Specifically, the employee responsible
for conducting physical inventories of equipment and investigating the
differences between the inventory results and the related detailed records, also
maintained the detail records and the control account.
 The Department did not periodically reconcile its control account balance with
the total of the detail records as required. As of June 30, 2015, the balance of
the detail records ($5,127,858) exceeded the related control account balance
($3,777,911) by $1,349,947.
 The Department did not conduct a physical inventory of sensitive equipment
during fiscal years 2014 and 2015 as required.
Under these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could occur without timely
detection. The Department of General Services (DGS) Inventory Control Manual
requires that the duties of record keeping, maintenance of the control account, and
conducting physical inventories be segregated. The Manual further requires that a
control account be maintained on a current basis and be periodically reconciled
with the detail records, and that a physical inventory be conducted for sensitive
equipment items on an annual basis.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Department comply with the requirements of the
DGS Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that the
Department
a. segregate the duties of performing physical inventories, maintaining the
equipment detail records, and maintaining the control account;
b. periodically reconcile the balance of the control account with the total of
the related detail records and investigate any differences; and
c. conduct annual physical inventories of sensitive equipment as required.
We advised the Department on accomplishing the necessary separation of
duties using existing personnel.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Military Department for the
period beginning May 14, 2012 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Department’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal fund reimbursements, cash receipts,
payroll, procurements and disbursements, and equipment. We also determined the
status of eight of the nine findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of the Department’s compliance with those laws and regulations
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including the
Department.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Department’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
6

--- Page 9 ---
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Department’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Department’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Department that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as
an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Military Department State of Maryland
Audit Report Responses
Period 5/14/12 to 6/30/15
FEDERAL FUNDS:
Finding #1 – The Department did not submit requests for reimbursement of federal
fund expenditures in a timely manner, resulting in lost interest income to the State.
Response:
The Department concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The Department has taken
corrective action. Expenditures related to Maryland Emergency Management Agency
(MEMA) and National Guard Bureau (NGB) are now being processed in a timely
manner. Due to reviews required to be performed to ensure proper oversight and
accountability over grants and cooperative agreements, requests for reimbursements will
be processed no later than 90 days after the related expenditure.
EQUIPMENT:
Finding #2 – Adequate controls and records were not maintained for MEMA
equipment.
Response:
The Department concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. MEMA has taken
corrective action. New procedures have been implemented to segregate the duties of
performing physical inventories, maintaining the equipment detail records and
maintaining the control account. The balance of the control account is periodically
reconciled with the total of the related detail records and any differences are investigated.
Lastly, designated Accountability Officers are conducting annual physical inventories of
sensitive equipment as required.

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Senior Auditor
Christopher J. Fowler
Staff Auditor