Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Maryland Correctional Enterprises
Date: 07/24/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d72456067439c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:22:23.150738
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Maryland Correctional Enterprises
July 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change 4
Financial Statement Audits 4
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Cash Receipts
Finding 1 – Proper Controls Had Not Been Established Over Mail 6
Receipts
Accounts Receivable
Finding 2 – MCE Lacked Adequate Controls Over Non-Cash Credit 7
Adjustments
Materials and Supplies
Finding 3 – MCE Had No Documentation of Supervisory Review 7
and Approval of Adjustments To Inventory Records
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
The Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE) is organized under the State of
Maryland’s Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) and
was formerly a unit within the Department’s Division of Correction. Effective
July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization which eliminated
the Division of Correction as a separate budgetary unit and established three
regions within the State to provide inmate-related functions. These regions and
MCE are separate budgetary units organized under DPSCS’s Deputy Secretary of
Operations.
MCE operates under the provisions of the Correctional Services Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. The Code provides, in part, that MCE develop
programs that provide work experience or rehabilitation for eligible inmates. The
Code also provides that MCE be financially self-supporting. The goods produced
(for example, furniture, metal products, mattresses, and printing) and services
offered (for example, data entry) by MCE are available to State and federal
agencies, political subdivisions, and any charitable, civic, educational, fraternal,
or religious agency, association, or institution (for their own use and not for resale
to others), or as otherwise indicated in the law.
According to MCE’s audited financial statements, MCE’s fiscal year 2014
operating revenue and operating expenses were approximately $51.8 million and
$50.8 million, respectively, and its net operating income for fiscal year 2014
totaled $1 million. As of June 30, 2014, MCE’s net position totaled $32.5
million.
Financial Statement Audits
For fiscal years 2012, 2013, and 2014, MCE engaged an independent accounting
firm to perform the audit of MCE’s financial statements. In the related audit
reports, the firm stated that MCE’s financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position of MCE and the respective
changes in its financial position and its cash flows for the years then ended, in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated January 24, 2012. We determined that MCE
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Proper controls had not been established over mail receipts.
Analysis
MCE had not established adequate accountability and control over its mail
receipts. In February 2013, MCE began processing these receipts using remote
deposit, which scans the images of checks and electronically transmits the images
to the State’s bank for deposit. Our review disclosed that MCE did not
restrictively endorse checks “for deposit only” and did not verify that checks
scanned through the remote deposit system were properly marked as scanned, as
required. As of April 8, 2015, MCE had 110 checks on hand totaling $215,290
that were processed using remote deposit between March 3, 2015 and March 31,
2015 that had not been restrictively endorsed and marked as scanned.
Additionally, our review disclosed that MCE did not independently reconcile
scanned checks that were subsequently destroyed with its records of checks
initially received and deposited, as required. According to MCE records, mail
receipts totaled approximately $4.7 million during fiscal year 2014.
As a result of these conditions, receipts could be lost or misappropriated without
timely detection. The Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote
Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies requires checks to be restrictively
endorsed immediately upon receipt and requires agencies to verify that each
scanned check was properly marked as scanned. The Policy further requires that
the agency destroy scanned checks within thirty days of deposit and
independently reconcile both the checks deposited at the bank and the checks
destroyed to the incoming check receipt log.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCE
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt,
b. ensure that checks scanned through the remote deposit system were
properly marked as scanned, and
c. independently reconcile the checks deposited at the bank and checks
subsequently destroyed with the initial receipt log.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Accounts Receivable
Finding 2
MCE lacked adequate controls to ensure that non-cash credit adjustments to
customer accounts were authorized and proper.
Analysis
MCE lacked adequate controls to ensure that non-cash credit adjustments to
customer accounts were authorized and proper. Our review disclosed that,
although non-cash credit adjustment requests were approved by MCE
management prior to the adjustment being posted, there was no independent
supervisory review and approval of adjustments actually posted in MCE’s
automated accounts receivable system to ensure that only authorized adjustments
were recorded. Our judgmental selection and test of 10 non-cash adjustments
totaling $2.8 million which were processed between June 2013 and January 2015
disclosed that, even though the adjustments were proper, there was no evidence of
an independent supervisory review and approval after the adjustments had been
posted. As a result, unauthorized or inaccurate non-cash credit adjustments could
be made without detection.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
adjustments to accounts receivable records be reviewed and approved by an
employee in a supervisory capacity. According to MCE’s records, during fiscal
year 2014, MCE processed 210 non-cash credit adjustments totaling
approximately $3.1 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCE ensure that non-cash credit adjustments posted to
the accounts receivable records are reviewed and approved by supervisory
personnel and that this review is documented.
Materials and Supplies
Finding 3
MCE lacked documentation that adjustments to its materials and supplies
inventory records were reviewed and approved.
Analysis
MCE lacked documentation that adjustments to its inventory records were
reviewed and approved. Our review disclosed that for fiscal year 2014 MCE
performed an annual reconciliation of its materials and supplies inventory records
7

--- Page 10 ---
to amounts on hand and investigated any differences; however, there was no
documented supervisory review and approval of the investigations and the related
adjustments to the inventory records. MCE advised us that the required reviews
were conducted, but not documented.
The Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual requires
that all adjustments to the inventory records be approved by someone in authority
not below the level of Chief Administrative Officer. According to its records,
MCE made 39 adjustments totaling approximately $400,000, each in excess of
$4,000, after completing the fiscal year 2014 reconciliation. The materials and
supplies inventory balance reported to DGS as of June 30, 2014 totaled
approximately $10.3 million.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCE ensure that investigations of inventory variances
and the related inventory record adjustments are reviewed and approved, in
writing, by appropriate supervisory personnel.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Correctional
Enterprises (MCE), a unit within the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS), for the period beginning August 1, 2011 and
ending February 19, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCE’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, cash receipts,
accounts receivable, payroll, materials and supplies, and equipment. We also
determined the status of the finding included in our preceding audit report.
MCE engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2013, and 2014. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that MCE’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial position of MCE and the
respective changes in its financial position and cash flows for the years ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to
provide audit coverage pertaining to MCE’s equipment purchases and disposals
and materials and supplies recordkeeping. Our audit procedures in these areas
were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MCE’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed various data extracts of pertinent
9

--- Page 12 ---
information from the State’s Financial Management Information System (such as
revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MCE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCE that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DPSCS’ response, on behalf of MCE, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 15 ---
Stephen T. Moyer, Secretary
July 15, 2015
Page 2
c. implemented a policy to independently reconcile the checks deposited at the bank
and the checks subsequently destroyed with the initial cash receipt log.
Finding 2 - MCE lacked adequate controls to ensure that non-cash credit
adjustments to customer accounts were authorized and proper.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that MCE ensure that non-cash credit adjustments posted to the
accounts receivable records are reviewed and approved by supervisory
personnel and that this review is documented.
MCE’s Response
We Agree. Beginning in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2015, MCE implemented a
policy to ensure that non-cash credit adjustments posted to the accounts receivable
records were reviewed and approved by the Accounts Receivable Manager and that
such review is documented. It should be noted that of the $2.8 million in non-cash
credits selected for testing during the audit, $2.75 million resulted from the correction
of data entry errors discovered during the verification of invoices prior to customer
invoicing.
Finding 3 - MCE lacked documentation that adjustments to its materials and
supplies inventory records were reviewed and approved.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that MCE ensure that investigations of inventory variances and
the related inventory record adjustments are reviewed and approved, in writing,
by appropriate supervisory personnel.
MCE’s Response
We Agree. Effective with the 2015 fiscal year-end physical inventory and
reconciliation, MCE instituted a policy to ensure that the investigation of inventory
variances and the related inventory adjustments were reviewed and approved, in
writing, by appropriate supervisory personnel. Specifically, MCE will ensure that the
annual adjustment to the MAPICS material and supplies record is reviewed and
approved by the Chief Administrative Officer, the Chief Operating Officer, or the
Chief Executive Officer.

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker
Staff Auditor