Title: State Archives
Date: 04/16/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674282
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:39:14.925306
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Archives
April 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Archives is an independent unit of State government within the
Executive Branch. The State Archives’ central mission is to identify, appraise,
acquire, describe, preserve, and make electronically available the permanent
records of the past. The State Archives serves as the central depository for
Maryland permanent government records and certain designated private records
of permanent value, and is responsible for preserving and maintaining a collection
of artwork and historical documents of cultural significance. The State Archives
maintains a digital copy of all land records and updates the Maryland Manual
Online website. The State Archives also performs a number of computer-related
services for other State agencies, such as helping to design and update websites.
According to the State’s records, total State Archives expenditures were
approximately $12.5 million during fiscal year 2015.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of one of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated April 16, 2013. We followed up on
this finding based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to
the audit objectives. We determined that the State Archives satisfactorily
addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Equipment – Artistic Property
Finding 1
The State Archives did not separate the duties of custody and record keeping
for its artistic property.
Analysis
The State Archives had not established adequate internal control over the State’s
artistic property. The State’s artistic property includes thousands of paintings,
sculptures, manuscripts, decorative arts and furnishings that are in storage at
Archives, located in various State buildings, or on loan to several institutions,
such as the Baltimore Museum of Art and the Walters Art Gallery. The two
employees responsible for recording transactions for artistic property in the
3

--- Page 6 ---
related detail records also had physical access to the artistic property in storage at
Archives. As a result, items could be misappropriated without detection.
Although we did not determine the extent of the property in storage at Archives,
according to the Archives’ detail property records as of January 14, 2016, the
State owned 3,330 art collections with an insured value totaling approximately
$31.4 million.
The Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual requires that the
duties of inventory record keeping and inventory custody be segregated whenever
practical or economically feasible.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the State Archives ensure that employees responsible
for recording artistic property transactions in the detail records not have
access to the property. We advised the State Archives on accomplishing the
necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Archives for the period
beginning October 23, 2012 and ending November 8, 2015. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the State
Archives’ financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, purchasing and disbursements,
payroll, equipment (including artistic property), the State Archives Fund, and the
Archives Endowment Fund. We also determined the status of one of the two
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
State Archives’ operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The State Archives’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the State Archives’ ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
5

--- Page 8 ---
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The State Archives’ response to our finding and recommendation is included as
an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the State
Archives regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 9 ---
APPENDIX
MARYLAND STATE ARCHIVES
Hon. Larry Hogan Hall of Records Commission:
Governor Hon. Mary Ellen Barbera, Chair
Hon. Boyd K. Rutherford Chief Judge, Court of Appeals
Lt. Governor C. Gail Bassette
Timothy D. Baker Robert L. Caret, Ph.D.
State Archivist Ronald Daniels
Hon. Peter V. R. Franchot
Matthew P. Lalumia
Hon. Nancy K. Kopp
Chairman, Maryland Commission on
Mark B. Letzer
Artistic Property
Hon. Thomas V. Mike Miller, Jr.
Christopher B. Nelson
Del. Samuel I. Rosenberg
David Wilson, Ed.D.
April 8, 2016
Mr. Thomas J. Barnickel, III CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore MD 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
Thank you for your letter of April 6, 2016 regarding the draft audit report for the Maryland State Archives
covering the period October 23, 2012 through November 8, 2015. Attached is the agency response.
I would like to acknowledge the exceptional professionalism of your staff, and I appreciate their good work.
Sincerely,
Timothy D. Baker
State Archivist and
Commissioner of Land Patents
Edward C. Papenfuse State Archives Building 350 Rowe Boulevard Annapolis, MD 21401 Telephone: 410-260-6400 MD Toll Free: 800-235-4045 Fax: 410-974-3895
TTY users call MD Relay Internet address: http://msa.maryland.gov e-mail address: msa.helpdesk@maryland.gov

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Equipment – Artistic Property
Finding 1
The State Archives did not separate the duties of custody and record keeping for
its artistic property.
Analysis
The State Archives had not established adequate internal control over the State’s
artistic property. The State’s artistic property includes thousands of paintings,
sculptures, manuscripts, decorative arts and furnishings that are in storage at
Archives, located in various State buildings, or on loan to several institutions, such as
the Baltimore Museum of Art and the Walters Art Gallery. The two employees
responsible for recording transactions for artistic property in the related detail records
also had physical access to the artistic property in storage at Archives. As a result,
items could be misappropriated without detection. Although we did not determine
the extent of the property in storage at Archives, according to the Archives’ detail
property records as of January 14, 2016, the State owned 3,330 art collections with an
insured value totaling approximately $31.4 million.
The Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual requires that the
duties of inventory record keeping and inventory custody be segregated whenever
practical or economically feasible.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the State Archives ensure that employees responsible for
recording artistic property transactions in the detail records not have access to
the property. We advised the State Archives on accomplishing the necessary
separation of duties using existing personnel.
Agency Response:
The State Archives concurs with the recommendation.
Staff of the Commission on Artistic Property no longer have add, delete or edit privileges to
the inventory databases. They have retained “read-only” privileges. Responsibility for
recording artistic property transactions, (modifying the data in the inventory databases), has
been transferred to a position within the Administration Department. The person who has
assumed this responsibility does not have access to the artistic property and is not involved
with the annual physical inventory.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Winnie J. Tenekam
Staff Auditor