Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
Date: 07/25/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742c8
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:44:36.337285
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
August 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) investigates violent and
suspicious deaths and those deaths unattended by a physician. OCME also keeps
reports of all investigated deaths and performs autopsies, when necessary, to
determine the cause and manner of death, and makes these records available to the
courts, family members, and others. Furthermore, OCME furnishes the State’s
Attorneys with records relating to deaths for which, in the judgment of the
Medical Examiner, further investigation is deemed advisable. According to the
State’s records, during fiscal year 2013, OCME investigated 10,556 deaths and
performed 3,915 autopsies; OCME’s expenditures totaled approximately $10.6
million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated July 25, 2011. We determined that this finding was
not satisfactorily addressed and is repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner did not comply with State
procurement regulations when purchasing certain medical supplies.
Analysis
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) purchased certain medical
supplies without obtaining competitive bids and entering into written contracts, as
required by State procurement regulations. Our review of corporate purchasing
card transactions made during the period from May 2011 to May 2014 disclosed
repeated purchases for medical supplies from three vendors, totaling $496,000,
for which OCME did not obtain competitive bids and did not have a written
contract. Consequently, there is a lack of assurance that the State obtained these
items at the lowest cost. OCME purchased the vast majority of its medical
supplies from the three aforementioned vendors using the corporate purchasing
card. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
State procurement regulations generally specify that contracts in excess of
$25,000 shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, and that procurements
exceeding $5,000 must also have written contracts.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OCME comply with State procurement regulations by
soliciting competitive bids and executing written contracts, where applicable
(repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Chief Medical
Examiner (OCME), a unit of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, for
the period beginning May 6, 2011 and ending March 30, 2014. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OCME’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, and corporate
purchasing cards. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
OCME’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as expenditure data) and from the contractor
administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card
activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
4

--- Page 7 ---
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OCME by the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Office of the Secretary and related
units. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of
our audits of the Office of the Secretary.
OCME’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
Our audit did not disclose any conditions that we consider to be significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect OCME’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our
audit disclosed a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
The Department’s response, on behalf of OCME, to our finding and
recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
5

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 1
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner did not comply with State procurement
regulations when purchasing certain medical supplies.
Auditor’s Recommendation:
We recommend that OCME comply with State procurement regulations by soliciting
competitive bids and executing written contracts, where applicable (repeat).
Administration’s Response:
We concur with the finding. The PIN for the OCME Agency Buyer position was abolished in
January, 2011 as a result of the Voluntary Separation Program (VSP). OCME requested that a
new Agency Buyer PIN be created through the budget process. This request was denied. Even
without the Agency Buyer position, with the assistance of the DHMH Office of Procurement and
Support Services (OPASS), OCME was able to maintain compliance for a significant number of
service contracts during this period including: neuropathology contract, biological medical waste
removal contract, forensic anthropology contract, Cisco Smartnet contract, CT scanner
maintenance contract, HVAC service contract, janitorial services contract, and Lodox full-body
X-ray contract. OCME has continued to act in the best interest of the State to keep the facility
properly supplied and operating efficiently, while continuing to maintain National Association of
Medical Examiners (NAME) and American Board of Forensic Toxicology (ABFT)
accreditation.
To rectify the finding going forward, OCME will submit a reclassification request for an existing
vacant position in another classification to recreate an Agency Buyer position. Anticipated
timeframe to submit reclassification paperwork, obtain a freeze exception, complete a
recruitment, and have an Agency Buyer position filled is by 12/31/14. In the meantime, OCME
will conduct an audit of all corporate purchasing card expenditures and identify by categories all
items where purchases are expected to exceed $5,000. With the assistance of OPASS, we will
begin developing contracts for these goods following State procurement regulations by soliciting
competitive bids and executing written contracts where applicable. The contracts will be
developed from the highest expenditures to the lowest that exceed the $5,000 threshold. It is
anticipated that this process will begin immediately with existing resources and be fully
implemented with the hiring of the Agency Buyer.

--- Page 10 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor