Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Eastern Shore Region
Date: 12/04/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745aa
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:26:54.191788
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Eastern Shore Region
December 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 4, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Eastern Shore Region of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services, which comprises the Eastern Correctional Institution,
the Eastern Correctional Institution Annex, and the Poplar Hill Pre-Release Unit,
for the period beginning October 1, 2005 and ending July 15, 2008.
Our audit disclosed that the Region had not established sufficient controls over
certain disbursement transactions, inmate funds, materials and supplies, and
equipment.
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services’ response to this
audit, on behalf of the Region, is included as an appendix to this report. We wish
to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by
the Region.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations
Disbursements
Finding 1 – Proper Controls Had Not Been Established Over Certain 5
Disbursement Transactions
Inmate Funds
* Finding 2 – Reconciliations of Inmate Account Balances with the State 5
Comptroller’s Records Were Not Always Prepared
Materials and Supplies
* Finding 3 – Internal Control and Record Keeping Deficiencies Were 6
Noted
Equipment
* Finding 4 – Equipment Acquisitions Were Not Always Properly 7
Recorded in the Detail Records
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Eastern Shore Region is a separate budgetary unit within the Division of
Correction of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services and
consists of several facilities for adult male offenders.
Facilities Comprising the Division of Correction’s Eastern Shore Region
Inmate
Security Population as
Facility Location
Level of June 30,
2008
Eastern Correctional Medium
Westover, MD 2,658
Institution Security
Eastern Correctional Minimum
Westover, MD 600
Institution Annex Security
Poplar Hill Pre-Release Unit Pre-Release Quantico, MD 171
Total 3,429
According to the State’s records, total Region expenditures were approximately
$95.8 million during fiscal year 2008. In addition, the Region’s fiscal year 2008
appropriations provided for 900 positions, including 680 correctional officers.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 8, 2006. We determined that the
Region satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining three
findings are repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Disbursements
Finding 1
Proper controls were not established over the processing of certain
disbursement transactions.
Analysis
The Region was not using the available security features of the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) to restrict user access and prevent
unauthorized disbursement transactions. According to the State’s accounting
records, during fiscal year 2008, the Region used FMIS to process disbursements
totaling approximately $16.4 million. Specifically, we noted that five employees
had the capability to initiate invoices without independent approvals, and these
employees could also redirect payments to a vendor other than the one named on
the related purchase order. Consequently, these employees could potentially
process a fictitious invoice on a legitimate purchase order by changing the vendor
during the invoice entry process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Region fully use the available FMIS security
features by establishing independent online approval requirements for all
critical disbursement transactions. In addition, we recommend that the
Region remove the ability for an employee to change the vendor named on an
invoice.
Inmate Funds
Finding 2
Inmate account balances were not always reconciled with the State
Comptroller’s records, and differences identified were not investigated and
resolved.
Analysis
The total of the individual inmate accounts as maintained by the Region was not
always reconciled with the corresponding records of the State Comptroller.
Specifically, reconciliations were not prepared for the period from November
2006 through March 2008. In addition, the reconciliation prepared for May 2008
(the last reconciliation prepared as of the date of our review) contained a
5

--- Page 8 ---
difference of $82,985 (the Comptroller’s balance exceeded the Region’s balance)
that was not investigated. As of June 30, 2008, the Comptroller’s balance
($646,624) exceeded the total of the individual inmate accounts ($527,213) by
$119,411. Similar conditions were commented upon in our four preceding audit
reports.
Inmate funds represent monies earned by or received on behalf of inmates. These
funds, which are deposited with the State Treasurer, can be saved or inmates can
direct the Region to pay these funds to third parties.
Recommendation 2
We again recommend that the aggregate balance of the individual inmate
accounts be reconciled with the State Comptroller’s records on a timely
basis, such as monthly, and that all differences be investigated and resolved.
Materials and Supplies
Finding 3
Internal control and record keeping deficiencies were noted over the
Region’s materials and supplies.
Analysis
Internal control and record keeping deficiencies were noted over the Region’s
food, maintenance, and commissary supplies. According to the Region’s records,
expenditures for these supplies during fiscal year 2008 totaled approximately $6.1
million. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• Physical inventories of the food, maintenance, and commissary supplies were
conducted by the inventory custodians and were not subject to independent
verifications. As a result, errors or irregularities could occur without
detection. A similar condition was commented upon in our three preceding
audit reports.
• Requisition forms used for inventory postings of food supplies were not
compared with the copies of the forms provided to the employees who
received the supplies. As a result, the requisition forms could be altered after
the issuance of supplies, and additional items could be removed from the
related inventory without detection.
• The Region did not document its investigation of differences between
perpetual inventory record balances and physical inventory counts performed
6

--- Page 9 ---
in June 2008 for food and maintenance supplies—which collectively had a
book value of $565,078 at that time—and recounts were not performed. The
total dollar variance between the perpetual inventory records and the physical
counts for these areas was $207,981 (shortages of $103,125 and overages of
$104,856).
• A comparison on May 19, 2008 of our physical count of 60 items, costing
$61,000, from the food, maintenance, and commissary inventories, to the
perpetual inventory records disclosed differences totaling $18,266 (shortages
of $15,763 and overages of $2,503) for 36 items. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
The Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual requires
separation of custodial and recordkeeping duties and establishes related
recordkeeping requirements to be followed by State agencies.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Region comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we again recommend that employees
other than those who have custody of the inventories conduct the physical
inventories. Additionally, we recommend that the employee who maintains
the food perpetual inventory records compare, at least on a test basis, the
requisition copies used for inventory postings to the copies retained by the
employees receiving the goods. We also again recommend that the Region
accurately maintain perpetual inventory records, and that the Region
document investigations of variances between the perpetual inventory
records and physical inventory counts.
Equipment
Finding 4
Equipment acquisitions were not always properly recorded in the detail
records.
Analysis
Equipment acquisitions were not always properly recorded in the detail records.
According to the Region’s records, the book value of its equipment totaled
approximately $5 million as of June 2008. Specifically, our test of 190 equipment
items, costing $78,921, that were purchased during the period from October 2006
through February 2008, disclosed that 53 of these items, costing $20,553, were
not recorded in the detail records as of July 18, 2008.
7

--- Page 10 ---
A similar condition was commented on in our two preceding audit reports. The
Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual requires that detail
equipment records be maintained on a current basis.
Recommendation 4
We again recommend that the Region comply with the requirements of the
Inventory Control Manual.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Eastern Shore Region of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services for the period beginning October 1, 2005 and ending
July 15, 2008. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Region’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Our audit disclosed conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Region’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This report also
includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Region that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services, on
behalf of the Region, to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department
regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 17 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark A. Ermer, CPA
Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CFE
Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors