Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Office of the Secretary - Division of Administration - Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Date: 08/07/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744a3
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:11:22.537894
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
August 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – Licensees’ sensitive personally identifiable information 5
was stored without adequate safeguards.
Finding 2 – DLLR did not have an information technology 6
disaster recovery plan for the recovery of its information systems
operations.
Finding 3 – Password, account, and malware protection controls were not 7
sufficient to properly protect DLLR’s network.
Federal Funds
Finding 4 – DLLR could not substantiate $9.9 million in federal fund 8
fund revenues recorded at the end of fiscal year 2016.
Contract Procurements
Finding 5 – DLLR did not publish contract awards totaling $12 million 9
on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 6 – Electronic licensing collections for the Division of Financial 10
Regulation were not reconciled with bank statements and the State’s
accounting records.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) consists of the
Office of the Secretary and seven operating divisions. This audit report includes
the operations of the following units:
• Office of the Secretary
• Division of Administration
• Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
The Office of the Secretary and the Division of Administration provide executive
oversight, general administration, public information, fiscal services, information
technology support, and comprehensive planning for the other DLLR divisions.
The Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning administers various
employment and training activities, including certain workforce programs that are
funded primarily by the federal government.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2016, total DLLR
expenditures were approximately $330.6 million, of which $115.5 million related
to the three units audited.
The remaining divisions of DLLR (Unemployment Insurance, Financial
Regulation, Labor and Industry, Occupational and Professional Licensing, and
Racing) are included within the scope of, and reported upon, in separate audits.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 12, 2014. We determined that DLLR
satisfactorily addressed seven of these findings. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) Office of
Information Technology (OIT) was solely responsible for the Department’s
information technology (IT) support until DLLR began using the State of
Maryland Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) IT support services,
as follows:
• During June 2016, DLLR began using the DoIT firewalls including
network and IT security services (such as firewall and intrusion
detection prevention systems operations and maintenance).
• During August 2016, DLLR began receiving IT service desk
assistance, hardware support, and software support (including malware
protection support).
OIT operates several critical computer applications and databases on DoIT
supported hardware and on the Comptroller of Maryland’s Annapolis Data Center
mainframe. These applications include online services such as occupational and
professional licensing registration and renewal, and unemployment insurance
applications and ongoing claim submissions. DoIT operates a statewide network
for DLLR that connects DLLR’s local branch offices and the DLLR headquarters.
The statewide network provides DLLR users access to various information
technology services including the aforementioned services, network services,
email services, and Internet access. In addition, DLLR’s Maryland Workforce
Exchange system is maintained by a third-party service provider.
Finding 1
Licensees’ sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was stored
without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
DLLR inappropriately stored sensitive PII in clear text. Specifically, as of
November 29, 2016, we determined that a critical server contained 23 licensing
files that contained 589,836 unique social security numbers (SSN) in clear text
along with full names of licensees and dates of birth. In addition, we were
advised that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls. Furthermore, DLLR had not performed an inventory of its systems to
5

--- Page 8 ---
identify all sensitive PII, determined if it was necessary to retain the PII, and
deleted PII identified as unnecessary.
PII is commonly associated with identity theft. Accordingly, appropriate
information system security controls need to exist to ensure that PII is
safeguarded and not improperly disclosed.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that agencies protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLLR
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. use approved encryption algorithms to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected.
Finding 2
DLLR did not have an information technology disaster recovery plan (DRP)
for the recovery of its information systems operations.
Analysis
DLLR did not have an information technology DRP for recovering computer
operations from disaster scenarios (for example a fire). The State of Maryland
Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines provide best practices
on the minimum required elements needed for a DRP. Examples of minimum
required elements include alternate site processing arrangements, required
hardware and software components, and restoring network connectivity.
Without a complete and tested DRP, a disaster could cause significant delays (for
an undetermined period of time) in restoring information systems operations
above and beyond the expected delays that would exist in a planned recovery
scenario.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DLLR, in conjunction with DoIT, create a
comprehensive DRP that covers all of its information technology operations
6

--- Page 9 ---
and is in compliance with the best practices identified in the IT Disaster
Recovery Guidelines.
Finding 3
Password, account, and malware protection controls were not sufficient to
properly protect DLLR’s network.
Analysis
Password, account, and malware protection controls were not sufficient to
properly protect DLLR’s network. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
• Domain password and account settings were not sufficient to properly protect
DLLR’s network. For example, we noted that domain passwords were not
subject to any complexity requirements and never expired. As a result,
passwords could be easily compromised and accounts could be used
inappropriately for extended periods. The State of Maryland Information
Security Policy specifies requirements for passwords and accounts including
password complexity and age requirements.
• We identified 239 DoIT supported workstations whose users had
administrative rights over these workstations. None of these users were
network or system administrators, or had been specifically authorized in
writing to have such rights. Administrative rights are the highest permission
level that can be granted to users and allow users to install software and
change configuration settings. If these workstations were infected with
malware, the malware would run with administrative rights and expose these
workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user
accounts operated with only user rights. In addition, we identified 31
additional workstations with the local administrators group defined to include
a large number of individuals who did not require this privilege.
• Certain DoIT supported workstations had not been updated with the latest
releases for software products that are known to have significant security-
related vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products
frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, DoIT had
not updated these workstations for these patches. For example, we identified
1,862 instances of an outdated commonly vulnerable application on the DoIT
supported DLLR workstations with some of the instances in excess of five
years old.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLLR, in conjunction with DoIT,
a. establish password and account settings in accordance with the
aforementioned State of Maryland Information Security Policy;
b. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to system
and network administrators and those users specifically allowed such
rights, with any such assignments to non-IT administrators being
justified, approved, documented, and regularly reviewed to determine
whether such rights are still needed; and
c. ensure that all workstations are kept up-to-date for critical security-
related updates for commonly vulnerable applications.
Federal Funds
Finding 4
DLLR could not substantiate approximately $9.9 million in federal fund
revenues recorded at the end of fiscal year 2016, and could not substantiate
that any funds had been received.
Analysis
DLLR could not substantiate approximately $9.9 million in federal fund revenues
recorded at the end of fiscal year 2016, and could not substantiate that any of the
funds had been received as of January 2017. This revenue related to receivables
recorded for indirect costs incurred and uncollected during fiscal years 2014,
2015, and 2016 for several federal programs. Because of the length of the
reimbursement delays, the extent to which the amounts outstanding will be
received is uncertain.
DLLR management could not provide any documentation to support how the
recorded amounts were determined or that any of the funds had been received.
While DLLR management advised us that a portion of the fiscal year 2014
revenue was recovered, as of January 2017, DLLR personnel could not provide
any documentation of the receipt of funds. DLLR management advised us that
DLLR is currently working with the federal granting agency to recover the
amounts outstanding. To the extent that recorded federal fund revenues are not
received, general funds may be needed to eliminate the remaining deficits. This
issue was commented upon in our January 25, 2017 report on the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2016.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLLR
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported,
and
b. continue its efforts with the federal granting agency to recover the
aforementioned revenues.
Contract Procurements
Finding 5
DLLR did not publish contract awards totaling $12 million on eMaryland
Marketplace as required.
Analysis
DLLR did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM)
as required by State laws and regulations. eMM is an Internet-based, interactive
procurement system managed by the Department of General Services. We tested
eight information technology, maintenance, and professional services contract
awards made by DLLR during the period from May 2014 through December
2016, which totaled approximately $12 million. As of February 2017, none of the
eight contract awards had been published on eMM as required. Individually, these
contracts ranged in value from $33,000 to $9.4 million.
State laws and regulations generally provide that eMM is to be used by State
agencies to publish awards greater than $25,000 within 30 days of the award.
Publishing awards on eMM provides transparency over State procurements
including information about the winning bidder and the amount of the related
award.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DLLR comply with State laws and procurement
regulations by publishing contract awards on eMM within 30 days of the
contract award.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
DLLR did not reconcile electronic receipts collected by its Division of
Financial Regulation (DFR) with amounts recorded in the State’s accounting
records and with the related bank statements.
Analysis
DLLR did not perform monthly reconciliations of electronic collections received
through its website (that is, credit card receipts) for DFR with amounts recorded
in the State’s accounting records and with the related bank statements.
Specifically, as of September 2016, the only reconciliation conducted was for the
month of June 2016. Furthermore, this June 2016 reconciliation was not
comprehensive because it did not include a verification of foreclosed property
registration fee collections with the original source documents (that is, detailed
transaction reports). As a result, assurance was lacking that the State was
properly credited for all of DFR’s electronic receipts and that the receipts were
properly accounted for.
DFR collects credit card payments primarily for fees associated with business
licenses (such as for banks and consumer lenders) and for the registration of
foreclosed properties. According to DLLR’s records, DFR collections totaled
approximately $2.4 million during fiscal year 2016, which included foreclosed
property registration fees of approximately $950,000. Similar conditions were
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DLLR
a. perform monthly reconciliations of DFR electronic licensing receipt
collections with related bank statements and receipts recorded in the
State’s records (repeat), and
b. ensure the reconciliations are comprehensive.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Labor,
Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) – Office of the Secretary, Division of
Administration, and Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning for
the period beginning July 1, 2013 and ending August 16, 2016. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DLLR’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included information system security, cash receipts,
payroll, federal funds, procurement and disbursement activities, and grants. Our
audit included a review of certain support services (such as payroll, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions
including cash receipts processed through DLLR’s online licensing system and
bank lockbox accounts) provided by DLLR to its divisions. We also determined
the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of DLLR’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DLLR.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DLLR’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
11

--- Page 14 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data)
and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as
part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits
and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that
the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during this audit. We also extracted data from DLLR’s automated
online financial systems for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as electronic
licensing collections. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in
this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DLLR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may nevertheless
occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of internal control to
future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may change or compliance with
policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising its
legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DLLR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DLLR that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DLLR’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DLLR regarding the results of our
review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Licensees’ sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was stored
without adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLLR
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. use approved encryption algorithms to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected.
DLLR Response:
DLLR Agrees with this finding. The agency is currently working on an inventory
of systems containing PII that will be completed by August 31, 2017. Once the
inventory is complete the IT division will review with the departments having
ownership of the data and determine whether it is still required. The agency is
also capturing information on encryption status and purging policies on the PII
data during the inventory. Purging policies will be implemented where possible
and a review if effort/cost will be done for any unencrypted PII data found. Any
unencrypted data will be likely be associated with legacy systems that are at or
near end of life. A determination will be made if it is of best benefit to encrypt the
older end of life systems or to pursue replacements that will have encryption in
place. The complete analysis will be completed by the end of December, 2017.
Finding 2
DLLR did not have an information technology disaster recovery plan (DRP)
for the recovery of its information systems operations.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DLLR, in conjunction with DoIT, create a
comprehensive DRP that covers all of its information technology operations
and is in compliance with the best practices identified in the IT Disaster
Recovery Guidelines.

--- Page 17 ---
DLLR Response:
DLLR and DoIT agree with this finding. DLLR is in the process of being
migrated into DoIT’s Enterprise, so a discussion and review of timelines for
completion of the migration will have to be reviewed to determine the best course
for implementing an effective disaster recovery plan; that is whether one should
be implemented in DLLR’s current system, or one put in place at the time DLLR
is migrated to DoIT’s data center. DLLR and DoIT have already begun some
initial discussions and fact finding exercises to begin the process. A complete
disaster recovery plan should be completed within 12 to 18 months depending on
the option chosen for implementation.
Finding 3
Password, account, and malware protection controls were not sufficient to
properly protect DLLR’s network.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLLR, in conjunction with DoIT,
a. establish password and account settings in accordance with the
aforementioned State of Maryland Information Security Policy;
b. limit the assignment of administrative rights on workstations to system
and network administrators and those users specifically allowed such
rights, with any such assignments to non-IT administrators being
justified, approved, documented, and regularly reviewed to determine
whether such rights are still needed; and
c. ensure that all workstations are kept up-to-date for critical security-
related updates for commonly vulnerable applications.
DLLR Response:
DLLR and DoIT agree with this finding. The correct Group Policy Object (GPO)
for enforcing password policy will be back in place by September 30, 2017.
DLLR is also working with DoIT to ensure that all workstations are under their
patch management program and will continue to receive future patches and
application updates on a regular basis. DLLR and DoIT will also review user
rights to workstations to remove any unnecessary privileges and to document any
instances where the elevated privileges are required. An annual review of the
users/systems with elevated privileges will be conducted on an annual basis going
forward. The patch management and user rights review will be completed by
December 31. 2017.
2

--- Page 18 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 4
DLLR could not substantiate approximately $9.9 million in federal fund
revenues recorded at the end of fiscal year 2016, and could not substantiate
that any funds had been received.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLLR
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are properly supported,
and
b. continue its efforts with the federal granting agency to recover the
aforementioned revenues.
DLLR Response:
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation concurs with the
recommendations. The agency acknowledges the federal fund revenues (Schedule
G) submitted for SFY 2016 reflected a $9.9M federal fund receivable that raises
concern regarding whether the full amount is collectable.
For reimbursement of indirect costs, the agency uses a fixed rate with carry-
forward provision. This U.S. Department of Labor (USDOL) approved method
establishes an indirect rate that will be charged to future federal programs to
recover the indirect federal costs.
On July 27, 2017, the agency received approval of its previously submitted
indirect cost rate, submitted in December 2016. During the next 120 days, the
agency plans to submit two additional indirect cost rates for approval, bringing
the submissions current. The recently approved indirect cost rate verifies
carryforward amounts for two periods – fiscal year ending 2015 of $3,890,350
and fiscal year ending 2016 of $1,391,569. These carryover amounts total
$5,281,919 and will be recovered in the current fiscal year. Under this method of
indirect cost reimbursement, the carryforward amount in the indirect receivable
figure for the federal fund revenues of the closing statement does not meet the
definition of the Comptroller’s closing receivable. The Comptroller defines
accrued revenues as both measurable and available to liquidate liabilities within
60 days. This reimbursement will occur during the full fiscal year.
Of the $9.9M federal receivable documented in the closing federal fund revenues
for SFY 2016, $5.282M is in the process of collection as the carryover portion of
the current approved indirect rate. The remaining balance of $4.618M will
3

--- Page 19 ---
require a deficiency appropriation. The agency has determined that it failed to
properly allocate the indirect expenditures according to the approved indirect cost
rate proposals for several of the past fiscal years which led to the need for a
deficiency appropriation. The agency will continue its analysis and corrective
actions and work with their control agencies to finalize a deficiency appropriation.
Lastly, the agency acknowledges it is unacceptable that management could not
provide the appropriate supporting documentation or substantiate receipt of
federal funds. Appropriate personnel action is being taken to ensure managers are
held accountable for the actions resulting in this finding and that it does not
reoccur. Additional training in revenue accounting, along with fiscal grants
management, will be scheduled for all fiscal managers and supervisors.
Contract Procurements
Finding 5
DLLR did not publish contract awards totaling $12 million on eMaryland
Marketplace as required.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DLLR comply with State laws and procurement
regulations by publishing contract awards on eMM within 30 days of the
contract award.
DLLR Response:
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation agrees with the
recommendation. The agency will ensure that all contract awards over $25,000
are published on eMarylandMarketplace.
The agency did notify all offerors of contract awards by letter and corrected
previous award notifications via eMaryland Marketplace on February 17, 2017.
4

--- Page 20 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
DLLR did not reconcile electronic receipts collected by its Division of
Financial Regulation (DFR) with amounts recorded in the State’s accounting
records and with the related bank statements.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DLLR
a. perform monthly reconciliations of DFR electronic licensing receipt
collections with related bank statements and receipts recorded in the
State’s records (repeat), and
b. ensure the reconciliations are comprehensive.
DLLR Response:
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation concurs with the
recommendations. The agency has performed all monthly reconciliations, through
May 2017 and June 2017 is in process. The reconciliation is four way and
comprehensive, including all information from the official source documents
detailed in the audit. All receipts will be properly accounted for through a review
of source documents and any discrepancies will be noted and followed through
including those noted in the audit.
5

--- Page 21 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Anthony V. Calcagno
Stephanie A. Laciny
Nidhi S. Lakhanpal
Staff Auditors
Robert H. Dean
Justin P. Vlahacos
Information Systems Staff Auditors