Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, College Park - Office of Information Technology
Date: 10/06/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d72456067474c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:58:41.762385
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
Office of Information Technology
October 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
October 6, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland,
College Park (UMCP), Office of Information Technology (OIT). OIT provides
computing and network resources and operates as a computer service bureau for
UMCP. Our audit included an internal control review of the UMCP data center
and the network administered by OIT.
Our audit disclosed that proper internal control had not been established over
several significant areas. For example, the UMCP internal network was not
properly protected from external exposures. Furthermore, controls over
modifications made to critical data center system files were not adequate.
Systems that operate on the UMCP computing platforms include student
information, student accounts receivable, and financial aid.
The University System of Maryland Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of
OIT, is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by OIT.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Office of Information Technology Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Network Security and Control
Finding 1 – The Internal Computer Network Was Not Adequately Protected 6
Finding 2 – Monitoring of Critical Network Devices Was Not Adequate 7
* Finding 3 – Wireless Network Access to Critical Applications Was Not 8
Adequately Secured Through Encryption
Data Center Information System Security and Control
* Finding 4 – Logging and Reporting Over Certain Critical System and 8
Production Data File Modifications Were Not Adequate to Ensure
the Propriety of the Modifications
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Office of Information Technology Responsibilities
The Office of Information Technology (OIT) is responsible for providing computer
and communications resources and services to faculty, staff, and students at the
University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP). Its staff develops and supports
applications (for example, payroll, student accounts receivable, student grade files)
on a variety of computers and operates an extensive computer network. OIT uses a
mainframe and numerous servers for UMCP’s primary applications. The network
is managed by OIT’s Network Telecommunications Services Division and provides
Internet access, wireless network access, email, and file sharing to approximately
37,000 students and 9,500 full-time equivalent faculty and staff in more than 200
buildings on the UMCP campus. According to UMCP records, OIT has a budget
of approximately $39 million, and has 354 permanent and contractual positions for
fiscal year 2009. See below for a graphic depiction of the UMCP’s network and its
components.
Overview of the UMCP’s Networking Environment
OIT operates a network for UMCP that includes numerous servers, a mainframe
computer, numerous firewalls, critical routers, and connectivity to the Internet.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 19, 2006. We determined that OIT
satisfactorily addressed five of these seven findings. The remaining two findings
are repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Network Security and Control
Background
The Office of Information Technology (OIT) is responsible for managing
UMCP’s wide area network (WAN) and for providing external connectivity to
UMCP’s computing systems. The UMCP WAN comprises more than 1,500
network devices. The core portion of the WAN includes a number of
switches/routers and firewalls which are used to protect critical network segments
including the data center (which houses the mainframe and critical production
servers) and the network management systems (which contain critical servers
used to maintain the UMCP network). The WAN also includes several virtual
private network devices used by staff and faculty. The UMCP network is
connected to the Internet through three Internet service providers and to the
network.MD Statewide Government Intranet network (SwGI). In addition, the
UMCP WAN has a wireless component that covers the UMCP Campus for use by
faculty, staff, students, and visitors.
Finding 1
The internal computer network was not adequately protected.
Analysis
The internal network was not adequately protected. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
• The data center and the network management systems were not adequately
secured from certain traffic from several untrusted third parties, including the
Internet, students, computer labs, and the wireless network. For example,
students and the public, through the Internet, could access internal servers
used for the student admissions process and for viewing and posting student
grades. Access rules for critical network devices should use a “least
privilege” security strategy that gives users only the access needed to perform
assigned tasks.
• Account controls over administrative access to core network devices were
inadequate. For example, 23 employees (including 3 terminated employees)
had unnecessary administrative read access to core network devices
responsible for protecting the internal network. Unnecessary read access
could allow an individual to gather information with the intent of attacking
these network devices.
6

--- Page 9 ---
• Numerous outdated access rules resided on several firewalls/routers tested.
As a result, access to network devices that was not warranted may have been
allowed.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that adequate controls be established to protect the internal
network. We made detailed recommendations to OIT which, if implemented,
should provide for adequate security in this area.
Finding 2
Monitoring of critical network devices was not adequate.
Analysis
Monitoring of critical network devices, including routers and the mainframe
firewall, was not adequate as follows:
• The firewall protecting the mainframe computer was not configured to log all
key user and system activity and to alert administrators to critical firewall
operating conditions. Furthermore, we were advised that the firewall event
log was not routinely reviewed; in addition, the reviews performed were not
documented.
• We were advised that the security and event logs for all core routers and
critical management and authentication servers were not regularly reviewed.
Furthermore, the reviews performed were not documented.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OIT
a. ensure that all key security events recorded by critical network devices
are logged, and that administrator alerts are enabled; and
b. regularly review security and event logs for critical network devices,
follow up on questionable items, and document these reviews and
investigations.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 3
Wireless network access to critical applications was not adequately secured
through encryption.
Analysis
Wireless network access to critical applications was not adequately secured
through encryption. Individuals could choose to establish a wireless connection
either in a secured (encrypted) mode or in an unencrypted mode. Wireless
connections made involving an unencrypted session exposed the wireless
transmissions to improper disclosure. Software is readily available on the Internet
that can intercept and scan unencrypted wireless network traffic to obtain
confidential information. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
The University System of Maryland’s (USM) Guidelines in Response to the
State’s IT Security Policy, dated March 2008, require that institutions use
encryption for any transmission of, or access to, sensitive information.
Recommendation 3
We again recommend that UMCP require that all wireless connections to
critical UMCP applications use secure (encrypted) methods.
Data Center Information System Security and Control
Finding 4
Logging and reporting over certain critical system and production data file
modifications were not adequate to ensure the propriety of the modifications.
Analysis
Logging and reporting over certain critical system and production data file
modifications were not adequate to ensure the propriety of the modifications.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• Modifications to numerous critical system files were not logged by the
security software. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding
two audit reports.
8

--- Page 11 ---
• Direct modifications to production data files used by the student information,
student accounts receivable, and financial aid systems were not logged by the
security software. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
• The computer program that generated the report of logged changes to critical
system files did not include numerous system files in its search parameters. In
addition, the report generated by this program did not identify the specific
files that were changed; rather it only identified the libraries containing the
changed files. Accordingly, this report was of limited use in monitoring
changes to system files.
As a result of these conditions, there was a lack of assurance as to the propriety of
changes made to numerous system and production data files.
Recommendation 4
We recommend
a. that modifications to critical system files be logged by the security
software (repeat);
b. that direct modifications to production data files used by the student
information, student accounts receivable, and financial aid systems be
logged by the security software (repeat); and
c. that the report of logged changes to critical system files be amended to
include changes to all critical system files and to specifically identify the
files that were changed.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland
College Park (UMCP), Office of Information Technology (OIT). Fieldwork
associated with our audit of OIT was conducted during the period from May 2008
to March 2009. Additionally, fieldwork associated with our audit of the network
was conducted during the period from December 2008 to June 2009. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OIT’s internal
control over the UMCP data center and network, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer systems that
support UMCP. Our audit also included an assessment of the security controls for
critical routers, firewalls, switches, and virtual private network appliances, as well
as an assessment of security controls related to UMCP’s wireless connectivity and
the use of software vulnerability assessments for critical network servers. OIT’s
fiscal operations are audited separately as part of our audit of UMCP; the latest
report that covered OIT’s fiscal operations was issued on March 25, 2009. We
also determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report
on OIT, dated January 19, 2006.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit procedures included
inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and
observations of OIT’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives.
Data provided in this report for background or informational purposes were
deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
10

--- Page 13 ---
OIT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OIT’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OIT that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The University System of Maryland Office’s response, on behalf of OIT, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the results of our review
of its response.
11

--- Page 15 ---
University of Maryland, College Park
Response to OLA Audit Dated September 2009
September 25, 2009
Recommendation 1
We recommend that adequate controls be established to protect the internal network. We
made detailed recommendations to OIT which, if implemented, should provide for
adequate security in this area.
Response 1
The University concurs. OIT agrees to implement additional corrective actions to further protect
the internal network.
Due Date: 1/31/2010
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OIT
a. ensure that all key security events recorded by critical network devices are logged, and
that administrator alerts are enabled; and
b. regularly review security and event logs for critical network devices, follow up on
questionable items, and document these reviews and investigations.
Response 2
The University concurs.
a. OIT will take the necessary corrective actions to ensure that all key security events recorded
by critical network devices are logged, and that administrator alerts are enabled; and
b. OIT will implement processes to regularly review security and event logs for critical network
devices, follow up on questionable items, and document these reviews.
Due Date: 6/30/2010, contingent upon budget and resource availability.
1

--- Page 16 ---
University of Maryland, College Park
Response to OLA Audit Dated September 2009
September 25, 2009
Recommendation 3
We again recommend that UMCP require that all wireless connections to critical UMCP
applications use secure (encrypted) methods.
Response 3
The University concurs.
Since the previous audit, OIT has made substantial infrastructure improvements to implement
OLA’s recommendations with regard to this control weakness. All critical applications
commonly accessed from the wireless network have been encrypted for the past two years.
Efforts reflected in the response to finding #1 will close any remaining gaps.
Due Date: 1/31/2010
Recommendation 4
We recommend
a. that modifications to critical system files be logged by the security software (repeat);
b. that direct modifications to production data files used by the student information,
student accounts receivable, and financial aid systems be logged by the security
software (repeat); and
c. that the report of logged changes to critical system files be amended to include changes
to all critical system files and to specifically identify the files that were changed.
Response 4
The University concurs with one exception.
a. OIT will log modifications to critical system files with the security software. However, we
strongly disagree that this is a repeat finding. The specific file cited had not previously been
identified as "critical".
b. OIT will implement corrective actions to log modification access to all administrative
systems.
c. OIT will amend the modifications report to include all critical system files and specifically
identify the files that were modified.
Due Date: 6/30/2010, contingent upon budget and resource availability.
2

--- Page 17 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss
Amanda L. Roller
Information Systems Staff Auditors