Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Division of Labor and Industry
Date: 03/31/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d72456067449d
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:10:37.283087
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
November 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Safety Inspections
Finding 1 – The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) did not have a 5
process to ensure the consistent issuance of citations to, or
assessments of allowed penalties on, entities that failed to obtain
and pass the required elevator, boiler, or pressure vessel inspections.
Regulatory Management System
* Finding 2 – DLI lacked assurance that the outsourced management 7
system was protected against operational and security risks.
* Finding 3 – DLI did not perform periodic reviews of user access 8
capabilities for the regulatory management system, resulting in
several users with inappropriate access.
Prevailing Wage
Finding 4 – DLI was not effectively monitoring and enforcing contractor 9
compliance with the State’s prevailing wage requirements.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 5 – DLI had not established adequate accountability and control 11
over certain collections.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) is a separate unit within the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation. The mission of DLI is to protect
and promote the health, safety, and employment rights of Maryland citizens.
Specifically, DLI administers State laws that deal with employment issues, work-
related safety and health issues, and prevailing wages, as well as safety
inspections of amusement rides, boilers and pressure vessels, elevators, and
railroads. According to the State’s records, DLI’s expenditures for fiscal year
2017 totaled approximately $17.2 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 31, 2015. We determined that DLI
satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining three findings are
repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Safety Inspections
Background
The Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) is responsible for ensuring that safety
inspections of registered boilers, pressure vessels, and elevators are performed in
accordance with State law. Most inspections are required to be performed
annually, while certain boilers and pressure vessels are to be inspected biennially.
Although some inspections are performed by DLI personnel, the majority of
inspections are performed by third-party entities. As of April 3, 2018, DLI was
responsible for ensuring the safe operation of 53,710 boilers and pressure vessels
and 23,873 elevators.
Boilers, pressure vessels, and elevators are not permitted to be operational without
a valid certificate of inspection. A certificate of inspection is issued by DLI after
all violations identified during the inspection, if any, have been corrected. By
law, DLI may issue civil penalties up to $5,000 for each boiler, pressure vessel,
and non-public elevator in violation. If entities continue to operate a boiler,
pressure vessel, or elevator with an expired certificate, or if violations are not
corrected timely, additional penalties may be levied up to $1,000 per day.
Finding 1
DLI did not have a process to ensure the consistent issuance of citations to, or
assessments of allowed penalties on, entities which failed to obtain and pass
the required elevator, boiler, or pressure vessel inspections.
Analysis
DLI did not have a process to ensure the consistent issuance of citations or
assessments of allowed penalties on entities which failed to obtain and pass the
required inspections and thus were operating boilers, pressure vessels, or elevators
without a valid certificate of inspection. The citations serve as notification to
entities with expired certificates, and direct the entities to obtain the required
boiler, pressure vessel, or elevator inspection and submit the required inspection
documentation to DLI.
The failure to ensure that the required elevator, boiler, and pressure vessel
inspections are obtained and passed could result in their ongoing use in an unsafe
manner. According to agency records, which we tested and found to be reliable,
as of April 3, 2018, there were 1,731 boilers and pressure vessels that had been
operating for more than 60 days without a valid certificate of inspection. In
addition, as of March 30, 2018, there were 3,131 elevators that had been operating
5

--- Page 8 ---
for more than 60 days without a valid certification of inspection, of which 2,124
elevators were operated by non-public entities and therefore were subject to the
aforementioned penalties.
DLI did not issue any citations to entities which failed to obtain and pass the
required elevator inspections during the period between August 2015 and
November 2017. In addition, while DLI began issuing these citations in
November 2017, it did not attempt to collect any penalties for the 1,846 citations
issued to elevator operators through March 30, 2018. In this regard, during this
period, there were 28 entities that voluntarily submitted checks totaling
approximately $22,500 in payment of the penalties referenced on their citations;
however, DLI returned the funds.
As of April 3, 2018, DLI also did not issue any citations and assess penalties since
December 2015 to entities that failed to obtain and pass the required boiler and
pressure vessel inspections. Based on our review of 10 boilers and pressure
vessels with expired certificates as of April 3, 2018, we noted that their
certificates had been expired for periods from 108 to 1,236 days with no citations
issued or penalties assessed by DLI.
The operation of boilers, pressure vessels, and elevators without a valid certificate
of inspection does not necessarily mean that they have not been inspected.
Rather, in certain instances inspections may have been performed but noted
violations had not been corrected or the necessary documentation submitted to
DLI.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLI institute a process to ensure it issues citations and
assesses penalties to entities which fail to obtain and pass the required
inspections, including those noted above.
Regulatory Management System
Background
Since November 2002, DLI has contracted with a vendor to host, maintain, and
support a web-based regulatory management system. This outsourced system
manages the registration and tracking of boilers, pressure vessels, elevators, and
amusement rides; the scheduling and documentation of required inspections; the
issuance of inspection certificates; and enforcement actions for violations or other
non-compliance with regulatory requirements.
6

--- Page 9 ---
The contract value is approximately $880,000 for the term beginning January 1,
2013 and ending December 31, 2018. The system is used collaboratively by DLI
and other State and local regulatory agencies, as well as by insurance companies
who perform boiler inspections for DLI. These insurance companies also provide
funding for this system. According to State records, through April 10, 2018, DLI
has paid the vendor approximately $569,000 under the current contract.
Finding 2
DLI lacked assurance that the outsourced management system was protected
against operational and security risks.
Analysis
DLI lacked assurance that the outsourced management system for boilers,
pressure vessels, elevators, and amusement rides was protected against
operational and security risks. The contract did not require the vendor, a service
organization, to periodically obtain an independent review of controls and provide
DLI with the resultant report. In lieu of these reports, DLI had not performed
security reviews of the service providers’ operations. Consequently, there was no
assurance that the service provider had established adequate security controls over
system data.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organizations. Based on this guidance,
customers, such as DLI, may obtain from service organizations an independent
auditor’s report referred to as a System and Organization Controls (SOC) for
Service Organizations report. There are several types of SOC reports, with
varying scopes and levels of review and auditor testing. One type of report,
referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, includes the results of the auditor’s review
of controls placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness for the period
under review and could include an evaluation of system security, availability,
processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy.
At our request, DLI contacted the vendor to see if a SOC 2 Type 2 report had
been performed. The service provider responded that it had obtained a SOC 2
Type 1 report for the period ending June 30, 2017. A SOC 2 Type 1 report is
limited to an evaluation of the system controls as of a point in time, while a Type
2 report provides an evaluation and related testing of the vendor’s system and
control environment over a period of time, providing greater assurance that the
system was sufficiently protected.
Best practices require that vendors demonstrate compliance with industry
information security requirements, and that customer entities regularly obtain
7

--- Page 10 ---
from the vendors related reports that evidence such compliance. This condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report, to which DLI responded that
future contracts would include the necessary SOC review requirements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DLI
a. ensure that future contracts include provisions requiring service
organizations to annually obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews for outsourced
systems (repeat), and
b. obtain and review these SOC 2 Type 2 reports and take appropriate
action to ensure that all critical operational and security-related concerns
are properly addressed (repeat).
Finding 3
DLI did not perform periodic reviews of user access capabilities for the
regulatory management system, resulting in several users with inappropriate
access.
Analysis
DLI did not perform periodic reviews of user access capabilities for the regulatory
management system. Consequently, several users had system access that was not
required. Furthermore, the system did not provide output reports of changes made
by third-party insurance inspectors (such as to remove boiler and pressure vessels
from the system) that could be used to ensure any such changes were proper.
We noted that 8 of the 152 active users as of April 9, 2018, had administrative
access even though it was not required for their job responsibilities. The
administrative access allowed these 8 employees to add, modify, and delete user
access roles on the regulatory management system, including their own. In
addition, these users could change and remove boilers, pressure vessels, elevators,
and amusement rides from the regulatory system and could modify and delete
inspection invoices and inspection violations. When we brought this situation to
its attention, we were advised that DLI removed administrative access or
deactivated the accounts for 7 of these users. DLI also advised us that it is
working with the vendor to restrict the capabilities of the administrative access
role so that it cannot be used to add, modify, and delete user accesses. DLI
believes the eighth employee needs administrative access but the employee should
not have user access modification capabilities.
In addition, access assigned to 96 third-party boiler and pressure vessel insurance
inspectors to record inspection information also allowed them to remove boilers
8

--- Page 11 ---
and pressure vessels from the system. Because the system is used collaboratively
by DLI and insurance company inspectors, DLI cannot further restrict this access.
While DLI personnel reviewed inspection activity recorded by third-party
inspectors, this review would not identify instances when a boiler or pressure
vessel had been removed, and no output reports of changes made by these
inspectors were available. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLI
a. perform a periodic documented review of user access capabilities for the
regulatory management system and ensure users are assigned only those
capabilities needed to perform job duties (repeat), and
b. work with the system vendor to develop appropriate access restrictions
and to provide output reports that can be used to ensure boilers and
pressure vessels removed from the regulatory management system are
proper (repeat).
Prevailing Wage
Finding 4
DLI was not effectively monitoring and enforcing contractor compliance
with the State’s prevailing wage requirements. The automated system was
not properly flagging questionable contractor payroll reports, required
payroll report reviews were not conducted, and fines were not assessed.
Analysis
DLI was not effectively monitoring and enforcing contractor compliance with the
State’s prevailing wage rate requirements. Our review disclosed that DLI’s
automated prevailing wage system was not properly flagging all questionable
payroll reports for review. These self-certified payroll reports are submitted by
the contractors and are recorded by DLI in its automated prevailing wage system
for monitoring purposes. In addition, DLI did not ensure its investigators
reviewed the required number of payroll reports to monitor compliance with the
requirements. Finally, DLI did not consistently assess fines to contractors when
certified payroll reports were not submitted timely.
 DLI’s prevailing wage system was not flagging payroll reports, for
investigative review, when the reports evidenced possible non-compliance
with the prevailing wage requirements. As of May 7, 2018, the system had
flagged for review only 8 of the 99,005 certified payroll reports submitted
9

--- Page 12 ---
since August 20, 2017. By comparison, during fiscal year 2017, the system
flagged 17,538 reports for review. We were advised by DLI management that
the reduction in flagged payroll reports occurred because, beginning in August
2017, the flagging program was not being consistently applied to payroll
reports, although DLI management could not provide an explanation as to
why this had occurred.
In addition, we observed that the system flagging logic did not include all
situations representing potential violations of the prevailing wage law. For
example, the system was not programmed to flag payrolls that evidenced
employees working more than 10 hours in a day but who did not earn
overtime wages as required.
 DLI did not ensure its investigators reviewed the required number of certified
payroll records. When selecting reports to review, DLI directed its
investigators to first review all payroll reports that were flagged by the
system. If the flagged reports did not represent at least 10 percent of all
submitted reports, the investigators were to select additional reports to ensure
that 10 percent of all submitted reports were reviewed. However, during
fiscal year 2017, investigators had only reviewed 2,001 of the 17,538 reports
flagged by the system and, in total reviewed 10,797 reports, representing only
7 percent of the 153,675 reports submitted.
 DLI did not consistently assess fines to contractors which failed to submit
their certified payroll reports within 14 days after the end of each pay period.
State law provides that a $10 fine shall be assessed for each day a contractor is
late submitting its certified payroll report to DLI. According to information
from the certified payroll reports as recorded in DLI’s automated prevailing
wage system, we calculated that approximately $7 million in late submission
fines were due for fiscal year 2017, but DLI only collected $40,000.
According to DLI personnel, these fines were not assessed because DLI only
enforced collection from contractors with a history of submitting late payroll
reports. However, we noted contractors who repeatedly submitted late payroll
reports but were not required to pay fines. For example, during the audit
period, one contractor submitted 166 payroll reports for nine project for
periods of 10 to 673 days late, which should have resulted in approximately
$368,000 in fines However, the contractor was not assessed and did not pay
any fines during our audit period.
Contractors and subcontractors on State-funded construction projects of $500,000
or more are required to pay employees no less than the prevailing wage rates, as
determined by DLI. These entities are required to submit self-certified payroll
10

--- Page 13 ---
reports listing the worker classifications and wages paid for every pay period
under the contracts. DLI uses its automated prevailing wage system to record
contractor self-certified wage data and to help identify possible violations of the
prevailing wage law.
DLI is required to monitor compliance with the prevailing wage rate
requirements. Under State law, entities failing to pay the prevailing wage rates
are required to make restitution to the employees. In addition to the late
submission fines, these entities may be fined $20 per day for each employee paid
less than the established wage rate. According to DLI records, during fiscal year
2017, at its direction, entities paid approximately $476,000 to employees for wage
underpayments and $21,000 in related fines for these underpayments.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLI ensure
a. the automated prevailing wage system is working as intended and is
configured to flag all potential violations of prevailing wage laws;
b. investigators review the required number of certified payroll reports,
including all reports flagged as having potential violations; and
c. fines are assessed and collected when companies fail to submit payroll
records timely.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
DLI had not established adequate accountability and control over certain
collections.
Analysis
DLI had not established adequate accountability and control over certain
collections. According to its records, DLI collected approximately $1.9 million
during fiscal year 2017. Our review of procedures at six DLI units with fiscal
year 2017 collections totaling approximately $1.6 million, disclosed the following
conditions:
 Collections at three units totaling approximately $320,000 during fiscal year
2017 were not recorded immediately upon receipt. Rather, checks were stored
in a safe until the disposition of the checks could be determined before being
recorded.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 Collections were not always deposited timely. Our review of collections
received at all six units for 10 days during fiscal years 2017 and 2018, totaling
approximately $213,000, disclosed that collections from 8 days, totaling
$86,000, were deposited from 2 to 14 business days after disposition of the
checks was determined.
 Deposit verifications at one unit were inadequate because they were
performed by an employee who also processed the related collections.
Collections received by this unit totaled approximately $685,200 during fiscal
year 2017.
 An employee who processed collections at one unit had access to modify the
related accounts receivable records in DLI’s regulatory management system.
As a result, this employee could alter the accounts receivable record and
misappropriate funds without detection. Collections at this unit in fiscal year
2017 totaled approximately $212,000 and generally related to inspection fees
and related activity.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of initial recordation, timely deposits, and
segregation of duties were included in our preceding audit report.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including initial
accountability over collections received, timely deposits, independent verification
of collections to deposit, and adequate separation of cash receipt processing
duties.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DLI
a. immediately record cash receipts upon receipt (repeat),
b. deposit all cash receipts in a timely manner (repeat),
c. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by employees who are
independent from the collection process (repeat), and
d. ensure that employees involved with cash receipts functions are
independent from the accounts receivable functions (repeat).
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Labor,
Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) – Division of Labor and Industry (DLI) for the
period beginning May 19, 2014 and ending March 18, 2018. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DLI’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, accounts receivable, and DLI’s
monitoring of compliance with certain laws pertaining to prevailing wages, as
well as safety inspections for boilers, pressure vessels, and elevators. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DLI by the DLLR –
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll processing,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
DLI’s operations and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
13

--- Page 16 ---
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from DLI’s automated systems used for monitoring
safety inspections and certified payrolls for prevailing wages for the purpose of
testing compliance with State laws and regulations. We performed various tests
of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
DLI’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DLI’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DLI that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The DLLR – Office of the Secretary’s response, on behalf of DLI, to our findings
and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise DLLR regarding the results of our review of its
response.
14

--- Page 18 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
May 19, 2014 - March 18, 2018
Findings, Recommendations and Response
Safety Inspections
Finding 1
DLI did not have a process to ensure the consistent issuance of citations to, or assessments
of allowed penalties on, entities which failed to obtain and pass the required elevator,
boiler, or pressure vessel inspections.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLI institute a process to ensure it issues citations and assesses
penalties to entities which fail to obtain and pass the required inspections, including those
noted above.
Response:
DLI concurs with the finding and agrees with the recommendation and, in fact, implemented a
more robust plan to issue citations in November of 2017. A dedicated citations management unit
has been established in the Safety Inspections department and is focused on timely issuance of
citations, penalties when applicable, and collections of assessed fines. From November, 2017
through October 31, 2018, DLI has issued 6,088 citations and applicable penalties to elevators,
boilers, and pressure vessels that are in violation.

--- Page 19 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
May 19, 2014 - March 18, 2018
Regulatory Management System
Finding 2
DLI lacked assurance that the outsourced management system was protected against
operational and security risks.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DLI
a. ensure that future contracts include provisions requiring service organizations
to annually obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews for outsourced systems (repeat), and
b. obtain and review these SOC 2 Type 2 reports and take appropriate action to
ensure that all critical operational and security-related concerns are properly
addressed (repeat).
Response:
DLI concurs with the finding. The contract for the outsourced management system
was that was in effect during the 2015 audit was still in effect throughout this audit
cycle. Immediately after review of the 2015 audit, the department began to work with
the service provider to resolve this issue. The vendor was successful in completing an
initial assessment in June 2017, which led to the SOC 2 Type 1 report being issued on
June 30, 2017. This report had been made available to the legislative audit team
during this recent audit cycle.
In December 2017, prior to the completion of the project, the contracted vendor was
purchased by another company, which resulted in the need to begin the SOC 2
certification process again. The operating system is transitioning to the new owner’s
hosting facility. The service provider is committed to the SOC 2 Type 2 certification
process and will communicate progress and share the reports with DLI as they
become available. Future contract renewals will include requirements for SOC 2
Types 1 & 2 reviews.
DLI agrees with the recommendations:
A. A provision requiring the vendor to annually obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews for the Safety
Inspection Unit operating system will be included as procurement requirements for the new
contract to be awarded in 2019, and all future contracts.
B. DLI will ensure a provision requiring submission of the SOC 2 report within 30 days of
completion is included in the new, and future, contract language. Upon receipt, DLI will
review the report and ensure the vendor maintains an “unqualified” or “modified opinion”
result for each of the audit categories. In addition, contract language will provide that the
vendor is responsible for all costs incurred to submit to the SOC 2 review and responsible
correcting within 90 days any adverse opinions as well as any associated costs.

--- Page 20 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
May 19, 2014 - March 18, 2018
Finding 3
DLI did not perform periodic reviews of user access capabilities for the regulatory
management system, resulting in several users with inappropriate access.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLI
a) perform a periodic documented review of user access capabilities for the
regulatory management system and ensure users are assigned only those
capabilities needed to perform job duties (repeat), and
b) work with the system vendor to develop appropriate access restrictions and to
provide output reports that can be used to ensure boilers and pressure vessels
removed from the regulatory management system are proper (repeat).
Response:
A. Users are now more thoroughly reviewed regularly by DLI IT staff and updates are
made as new users are added and removed (for example, as employees leave State
service). A report to show when this occurs is not a function in the database software
at this time but is being incorporated into new contract language for 2018 and future
contracts. In addition, DLI requested the vendor to implement a prompted review
mechanism that will require the system administrator in DLI to answer a series of
questions once a month confirming the access levels of each user.
B. DLI requested the vendor to make changes that will correct the different needs of
system users’ access to limit access to only what is required to perform job duties of
each user; the request is currently issued as a high priority and completion is expected
before November 30, 2018. This will allow more flexibility for employee workflows
and ensure future compliance. Additionally, the vendor has been asked to incorporate
an output report that clearly identifies which boilers or pressure vessels were removed
in the system, when they were removed, and which user performed the action. That
output report will be reviewed and verified quarterly the Chief Boiler Inspector. Any
inconsistencies will be investigated, corrected if necessary, and documented. Both
the user access and removal of boiler or pressure vessel units output report
functionality will be a provision of the new 2018, and all future, contracts.

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
May 19, 2014 - March 18, 2018
Prevailing Wage
Finding 4
DLI was not effectively monitoring and enforcing contractor compliance with the State’s
prevailing wage requirements. The automated system was not properly flagging
questionable contractor payroll reports, required payroll report reviews were not
conducted, and fines were not assessed.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLI ensure
a) the automated prevailing wage system is working as intended and is configured
to flag all potential violations of prevailing wage laws;
b) investigators review the required number of certified payroll reports, including
all reports flagged as having potential violations; and
c) fines are assessed and collected when companies fail to submit payroll records
timely.
Response:
DLI concurs with the findings, agrees with the recommendations, and has already taken the
follow abatement steps:
A. Corrective Action: Since the problem was detected on April 25, 2018, Office of
Information Technology (OIT) staff has been working to improve the performance of
the nightly payroll processing as well as other aspects of the prevailing wage
application. Some of these improvements are currently undergoing final stage
testing. In addition, Prevailing Wage staff will work with OIT staff to make
additional improvements and changes to the existing applications.
B. Corrective Action: Investigators will begin to review 10% of all submitted payrolls
and 100% of flagged payrolls within two weeks of submittal. When a close-out
request is submitted all remaining unreviewed payrolls will be reviewed before close-
out is issued, resulting in 100% of all submitted payrolls being timely reviewed with
any necessary investigatory and resolution action taken. The unit will implement and
be fully in compliance with this change in procedures before the end of fiscal year
2019.
C. Corrective Action: late fees will be assessed and collected when companies fail to
submit payroll records timely and any waivers of the fees are subject to supervisory
review and an additional step of Program Manager approval. Each request includes
justification with documentation for consideration of approval. All documentation is
signed and dated and is contained in affected case files. DLI acknowledges the
assessed balance of late fees generated by the operating system and will undertake an

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
May 19, 2014 - March 18, 2018
analysis to ensure the accrued late fees have been properly assessed and any balance
is addressed.

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Labor and Industry
Response to Legislative Audit
May 19, 2014 - March 18, 2018
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
DLI had not established adequate accountability and control over certain collections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DLI
a) immediately record cash receipts upon receipt (repeat),
b) deposit all cash receipts in a timely manner (repeat),
c) ensure that deposit verifications are performed by employees who are
independent from the collection process (repeat), and
d) ensure that employees involved with cash receipts functions are independent
from the accounts receivable functions (repeat).
Response:
DLI concurs with the finding, agrees with the recommendations, and has already taken the
following corrective actions:
A. Corrective Action: During the audit period one unit failed to provide adequate logs
for checks received. After a conversation with the internal audit team and review of
the unit’s policy it was confirmed that the daily transmittal log would be sufficient as
a check log. This was corrected immediately at the time of the audit and a check log
and daily transmittal log are both being used in the units. Completed.
B. DLI, in conjunction with Office of Administration, will process checks in a timely
manner and strictly adhere to the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures
Manual
C. DLI has requested access directly to the online bank records for the person
completing independent verification so the person performing the verification is
comparing information received directly from the bank instead of a copy of mailed
statement.
D. DLI will ensure employees involved with the cash receipts functions do not perform
duties related to accounts receivable functions.

--- Page 24 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Gary B. Staples
Staff Auditors