Title: Uninsured Employers' Fund
Date: 09/28/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d72456067471c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:55:00.694604
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
June 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 6, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Uninsured Employers’ Fund
(UEF) for the period beginning December 1, 2020 and ending October 31, 2024.
UEF is an independent State agency that is responsible for paying workers’
compensation awards (including medical payments) to claimants who failed to
receive payments from their employers that did not have workers’ compensation
insurance as required by State law. UEF is also responsible for collecting
assessments from certain employers and insurance companies to fund these
awards as well as reimbursements from uninsured employers. Since September
2017, UEF has contracted with a Third Party Administrator (TPA) that is
responsible for investigating, processing, and managing UEF claims.
Our audit disclosed that UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue collection of
amounts due from insurance companies and employers. Specifically, UEF’s
automated accounts receivable system did not produce accurate accounts
receivable aging reports and UEF could not document it had attempted to identify
and refer delinquent employers for license suspension, as permitted by State law.
These conditions were noted but not corrected from our three preceding audit
reports dating back to November 2014. UEF also did not always refer delinquent
accounts to the Department of Budget and Management’s Central Collection Unit
(CCU), a condition noted but not corrected from our five preceding audit reports
dating back to May 2009. As of March 2025 we identified 389 delinquent
accounts totaling approximately $2.0 million that had not been referred to CCU as
required.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit also disclosed that UEF did not ensure that payments to its TPA were
adequate supported and consistent with the contract terms, a condition noted but
not corrected from our two preceding audit reports dating back to January 2018.
Specifically, UEF did not obtain adequate documentation to support hours worked
by TPA employees complied with contract terms and the related amounts billed.
According to UEF records, payments to the TPA between December 2020 and
October 2024 totaled approximately $7.1 million.
Finally, our audit disclosed a cybersecurity-related finding. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit report.
Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
UEF’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. Consistent
with State law, we have redacted the elements of UEF’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit finding. We reviewed the response to our findings and related
recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are
sufficient to address all issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by UEF.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity 4
Increase in Unfunded Liability and Potential Fund Insolvency 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Accounts Receivable
* Finding 1 – The Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) did not adequately 7
monitor and pursue collection of all delinquent accounts and did not
refer delinquent accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU)
as required.
Third-Party Administrator (TPA) Payments
* Finding 2 – UEF did not obtain and review sufficient documentation to 9
support the administrative fees paid to the TPA for administrative
services.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 10
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes items repeated in full or part from preceding audit report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) is responsible for paying workers’
compensation awards (including medical payments) to claimants who failed to
receive payments from their employers that did not have workers’ compensation
insurance as required by State law. According to State records, during fiscal year
2024, UEF’s expenditures totaled approximately $4.3 million (see Figure 1).
UEF’s primary source of revenue is an assessment collected from employers and
insurance companies on awards and settlement agreements involving permanent
disability or death approved by the Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC).
Figure 1
UEF Positions, Expenditures, and Funding
Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 13
Vacant 0
Total 13
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $1,873,302
Technical and Special Fees 1,763,921
Operating Expenses 653,497
Total $4,290,720
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Source
Funding
Special Fund $4,248,202
Non-Budgeted Fund 42,518
Total $4,290,720
Source: State financial and personnel records
4

--- Page 7 ---
As noted in Figure 2, UEF’s fund balance as of June 30, 2024, totaled
approximately $5.3 million. During fiscal year 2024, revenues (primarily
assessments) totaled approximately $9.3 million, claim payments (indemnity and
medical payments) totaled approximately $6.8 million. Between fiscal years 2021
and 2024, assessment revenue declined while claim payments increased.
Figure 2
Summary of UEF Financial Data for Fiscal Years
2021 - 2024
($ in millions)
$15.0
Claim Payments Operating Expenses Assessment Revenue Fund Balance
$10.0
$8.5 $8.6
$7.1 $5.0
$5.3
$0.0
2021 2022 2023 2024
Source: State records
Unfunded Liability and Potential Fund Insolvency
UEF’s most recent actuarial study performed in December 2020 indicated that, as
of June 30, 2020, UEF had an unfunded liability for its claims of approximately
$115.8 million, representing an increase of $99.8 million since UEF’s prior
actuarial study performed in January 2015. The 2020 study primarily attributed
this significant increase to UEF having more complete and reliable claims data
than was available at the time of the prior estimate.
The unfunded liability results from claim obligations being funded on a pay-as-
you-go basis. Accordingly, obligations that become due in future periods will
have to be paid from future assessments collected from employers and insurance
companies. In this regard, the December 2020 study indicated that the Fund will
be insolvent by fiscal year 2030 unless a temporary increase to UEF’s assessment
rate is maintained in future years.1
UEF and the Workers Compensation Commission (WCC) formed a workgroup to
study and report on potential changes to UEF’s funding structure, operations, or
1 Chapter 495, Laws of Maryland, 2020, provided for a temporary increase (from 2 percent to 3
percent) for fiscal year 2021.
5

--- Page 8 ---
other factors to address the potential insolvency. UEF recommended that the
legislature increase the assessment collected from employers and insurance
companies and the legislature approved an increase in the rate to 2.5 percent
effective July 1, 2025.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 14, 2021. See Figure 3 for the
results of our review.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding
Finding Description Implementation Status
Finding
UEF did not ensure that payments to its TPA
were adequately supported and consistent with
the contract terms. As a result, we identified Repeated
Finding 1
payments totaling $521,083 for which the rate (Current Finding 2)
paid by UEF was not included in the contract
or exceeded the rates specified in the contract.
UEF did not adequately review recurring
indemnity payments processed by the TPA to Not repeated
Finding 2
ensure claimants were still eligible for
payment.
UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue
collection of all delinquent accounts. As of
November 30, 2020, there were 1,920 Repeated
Finding 3
delinquent accounts totaling $14.5 million that, (Current Finding 1)
based on their age, should have been referred to
the State’s Central Collection Unit.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) did not adequately monitor and pursue
collection of all delinquent accounts and did not refer delinquent accounts to
the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU), as required.
Analysis
UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue collection of all delinquent accounts
and did not refer delinquent accounts to CCU, as required. UEF maintains
accounts receivable records for amounts due from insurance companies and
employers. These amounts include assessments on certain Workers’
Compensation Commission (WCC) awards, fines and penalties assessed by WCC,
and reimbursements due from uninsured employers for claimant awards and
medical payments made on their behalf. As of March 2025, UEF’s records
reflected an accounts receivable balance totaling approximately $117.4 million,
with $115.6 million currently outstanding for more than 90 days.
Dunning Notices Were Not Issued at Proper Intervals
UEF did not always send the required number of dunning notices at required
intervals. Our test of 15 delinquent invoices2 over 180 days past due totaling
approximately $8,000, disclosed that for 14 invoices totaling $7,800, UEF did not
send the required dunning notices. For example, UEF did not send any dunning
notices for 7 of the invoices and only sent one notice for 3 invoices. CCU
regulations, as amended for UEF, require that three written demands, at 30-day
intervals, will normally be made before an account is declared delinquent.
A similar condition was noted during our five preceding audit reports dating back
to May 2009. In response to our prior report, UEF stated they would work to
improve the process and would comply with the recommendation by March 2022.
UEF was unable to provide explanations for why certain accounts are still not
pursued for collection.
Delinquent Accounts Were Not Referred to CCU as Required
UEF did not refer all delinquent accounts to CCU as required. According to
UEF’s records as of March 2025, there were 389 delinquent accounts totaling
approximately $2 million that were more than 180 days old and should have been
2 Test items were selected from UEF reports based on the age of the accounts (over 180 days),
timing of assessments (within the audit period), and likelihood to hold a business license.
7

--- Page 10 ---
referred to CCU. This included 20 delinquent accounts that collectively totaled
approximately $1.5 million, which had been delinquent for periods ranging from
243 days to 16 years. Delays in the pursuit of outstanding debt may decrease the
likelihood of collecting the funds owed.
A similar condition was noted in our five preceding audit reports dating back to
2009. In response to our prior audit, UEF advised that it has attempted over
multiple years to identify and send all identifiable debts to the CCU. UEF
management advised us that it hired an employee to specifically address getting
delinquent accounts referred to CCU. While the number of delinquent accounts
not referred to CCU has significantly decreased since the prior audit, additional
efforts are needed to address the remaining delinquent accounts.
Account Aging Reports Were Not Accurate and Reliable
The accounts aging reports produced by UEF’s automated accounts receivable
system were not accurate and reliable for use in monitoring its accounts
receivable balances. Specifically, as of March 2025, the total amount of
delinquent accounts referred to CCU according to UEF’s aging report ($108.9
million) did not agree to a detailed report of delinquent accounts that were
referred ($27.9 million); a difference of $81 million.
A similar condition was noted in our three preceding audits dating back to 2014.
In response to our prior report, UEF advised that it would resolve the issues with
the aging report by March 2022. However, as noted above, UEF did not correct
the aging reports as indicated in its prior response.
Delinquent Employers Were Not Always Referred for License Suspension
UEF could not document that it attempted to identify and pursue license
suspensions for delinquent employers. In this regard, our test of 5 licensed
employers with accounts totaling $77,336 that had been delinquent for between
181 days to more than 3 years, disclosed that UEF could not document that it
attempted to identify whether any held a business or professional license or permit
for any of the employers. State law permits UEF to request State and local
licensing authorities to suspend the applicable license or permit of employers who
fail to pay an assessment or penalty, or who failed to reimburse UEF for the
payment of an award.
A similar condition was noted in our three preceding audit reports dating back to
November 2014. In response to our preceding audit report, UEF advised that it
had established a process to identify and refer delinquent accounts to applicable
State and local licensing authorities for license or permit suspension. Although
UEF created new written procedures for investigating and referring delinquent
8

--- Page 11 ---
accounts, UEF could not document that it had implemented the process and as of
January 2025 could only document that it referred 13 delinquent accounts for
license suspension between January 2020 and October 2024.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UEF
a. generate dunning notices and produce accurate accounts receivable aging
reports to monitor and pursue collection activities (repeat),
b. refer all delinquent accounts to CCU for collection in accordance with
CCU regulations (repeat), and
c. document attempts to identify and refer delinquent employers to
applicable State and local licensing authorities for license or permit
suspension (repeat).
Third-Party Administrator Payments
Finding 2
UEF did not obtain and review sufficient documentation to support the
monthly fees paid to the third-party administrator (TPA) for administrative
services.
Analysis
UEF did not obtain and review sufficient documentation to support the monthly
fees paid to the TPA for administrative services. UEF paid the TPA a fixed
monthly fee for each year of the contract (a total of approximately $7.1 million
during the period from December 1, 2020 to October 31, 2024) for administrative
services. In accordance with the TPA contract, the administrative services were
to include nine full-time dedicated vendor employees to process UEF claims.
Our review disclosed that the invoices submitted by the TPA did not identify the
vendor employees or related hours worked by employees, as required by the
contract. As a result, UEF was precluded from determining the reasonableness of
billed services. In this regard, we reviewed ten monthly statistical reports
(January through October 2024) routinely provided by the TPA to UEF, which
were not used by UEF in the invoice approval process. Based on our review of
these reports and comparison to the related monthly invoices, we determined that
for five of the ten months, the TPA only reported claims activity processed by
seven to eight employees.
UEF management advised us that it was aware that the TPA was not providing all
the required staffing during this period but had not pursued the matter with the
9

--- Page 12 ---
TPA and did not attempt to recover any administrative fees. Due to the lack of
TPA personnel payroll data, we were unable to quantify the monetary impact for
the missing positions.
A similar condition was noted in our two preceding audit reports dating back to
January 2018. In response to our preceding audit report, UEF developed written
procedures for monitoring TPA billings and operations which included a
requirement for weekly reports of hours to be sent to the contract monitor by the
TPA. Despite this requirement, the UEF employee responsible for TPA invoice
review and approval, did not review the reports from the TPA; only the invoices.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UEF ensure that invoiced amounts are supported and
agree to contract approved rates and level of services prior to approving
invoices for payment (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Finding 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance
and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with UEF’s response, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Uninsured Employers’ Fund
(UEF) for the period beginning December 1, 2020 and ending October 31, 2024.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UEF’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included UEF’s monitoring of the Third-Party
Administrator contract deliverables (including claims processing, assessment
collections and billings), accounts receivable, cash receipts, and information
systems security and control. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 1, 2020 to October 31, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UEF’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical sampling was used to select the transactions
tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a finding, the
results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to project those
results to the entire population from which the test items were selected.
11

--- Page 14 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from UEF’s automated accounts receivable system for the
purpose of testing assessment accounts receivables. We performed various tests
of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
UEF’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UEF, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UEF’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
12

--- Page 15 ---
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UEF that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of this cybersecurity finding have been
communicated to UEF and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
UEF’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise UEF regarding the results of our review of its
response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 18 ---
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Agency Response Form
Accounts Receivable
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) did not adequately monitor and pursue
collection of all delinquent accounts and did not refer delinquent accounts to
the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU), as required.
We recommend that UEF
a. generate dunning notices and produce accurate accounts receivable aging
reports to monitor and pursue collection activities (repeat),
b. refer all delinquent accounts to CCU for collection in accordance with
CCU regulations (repeat), and
c. document attempts to identify and refer delinquent employers to
applicable State and local licensing authorities for license or permit
suspension (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Agency agrees with this finding and is working to comply with
additional comments as all recommendations.
deemed necessary.
In the 2021 OLA Agency Audit, the UEF was found to have had a
large number of debts, spanning several decades, that had not been
referred to the CCU for collections. In response, the UEF hired a
temporary employee to identify all outstanding debts and to refer
them to CCU. The UEF examined each entry and was successful in
greatly reducing the amount of unreferred debts. The UEF will
continue its work to do so until all outstanding debts have been
reviewed and referred.
The UEF also understands the value that its power to suspend
business licenses can have on its collection efforts. In fact, this has
been a focus of the agency since its prior audit.
In 2021, in response to the Audit, the UEF installed a written
license suspension revocation process, which requires an agency
employee to begin the process of suspending business licenses in
every case where the UEF is triggered and not reimbursed.
By way of background, Maryland does not issue general business
licenses but, instead, issues specific licenses that may be required
depending on the trade of the business (e.g. Contractor license,
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 19 ---
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Agency Response Form
Liquor license, Tree Expert license, etc.). Therefore, not all
businesses are required to have licenses and many more businesses
we interact with operate unlawfully, without required licenses.
Even in situations where employers do have a valid license, the UEF
may not legally suspend that license unless the employer fails to pay
an assessment or reimburse the UEF after a valid award. Businesses
that have valid licenses are often willing to enter into payment
arrangements with the UEF to prevent the UEF from suspending
their licenses. For these reasons, the total number of cases leading
to actual suspension requests may appear relatively low.
The UEF emphasizes that it has been largely effective at requesting
the suspension of applicable licenses in cases where:
a) there is an affirmed Order to pay after a hearing;
b) the employer has a valid license; and,
c) the employer has not entered into a payment plan with the UEF.
The UEF is now aware and acknowledges, thanks to the work of the
auditors, that it needs to improve the process for documenting its
license searches and subsequent correspondences with employers
and licensing agencies to ensure that its effectiveness is record,
quantified and monitored by management. The audit finding is
legitimate and the agency is grateful to the auditors for their work in
uncovering this issue so that the agency can rectify any
shortcomings with the process and improve it.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/31/2025
Please provide details of Plan/Timetable
corrective action or
explain disagreement. Dunning Notices –
The UEF agrees that, in certain cases, Dunning notices were not
being sent in accordance with the required timelines. The UEF
management has reiterated to staff the importance of these notices
being sent timely. The UEF will continue to improve the processes
for debt collection and attempt to identify technology-based
efficiencies in the process that will ensure that notices be sent
according to the required timelines and that aging reports are
accurate.
Staff is and will continue to be reviewing dunning notices as
produced to investigate and determine where issues are arising to
cause production failure (process requires staff review which
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 20 ---
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Agency Response Form
involves significant review of individual entries) - to be completed by
7/31/2025
- based on findings of review corrective actions will be taken
by 8/31/2025 to ensure proper notices are sent out
- further review of corrected process will then be tested for
accuracy to be completed by 10/31/2025
Accurate aging reports –
Staff review and correction are in progress. Relevant staff has been
consulted and have been instructed to determine why this is
occurring and to correct it.
- evaluation of issues causing errors will continue and be
completed by 8/15/2025
- evaluation of systems involved and investigation into ability
to adjust existing systems by staff to be concluded by
9/30/2025
- system adjustments will be implemented by 10/31/2025
- staff review of dunning notices to ensure improvements and
accuracy have been achieved - completed by 11/30/2025
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/1/2025
Please provide details of The UEF has been provided the list of the 389 accounts
corrective action or identified by the OLA. Many of these debts are very old and each
explain disagreement. debt must be individually investigated and referred to CCU when
appropriate. The UEF has already begun these investigations and
will ensure that all appropriate old debts are referred to the CCU.
As of October 2024, the UEF has already instituted written
procedures for ensuring that all new debts will be timely referred to
the CCU going forward.
Plan/Timetable
In progress – UEF is self-funded but has hired a temporary
staff person to do this work and comply with this
recommendation -current and ongoing
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Agency Response Form
A review of the 389 Accounts identified by the OLA has begun and
is currently ongoing but requires individual investigation of each
account – current and ongoing
as appropriate debts are identified those debts are referred to CCU;
estimated completion date 8/1/2025 for 389 Accounts to be reviewed
and sent to the CCU as required
as new debt has been and continues to be received it has been and
will continue to be forwarded to the CCU - ongoing
investigation and review older debt for appropriateness of
forwarding to CCU will continue and be ongoing – ongoing
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/2025
Please provide details of Plan/Timetable
corrective action or
explain disagreement. Review and Correction in Progress –
The UEF’s written procedures for license suspension procedures
require that all actions taken on license suspensions be documented
in its internal legal software. The OLA audit revealed this was not
being done regularly. The UEF has already stressed the importance
to collections employees of electronically documenting such actions.
Going forward a specific license suspension folder will be created on
the internal software for each account in collections and all license
search results and related communications will be notated in that
folder. UEF management will also begin requiring monthly status
reports of license suspension activities and will perform periodic
checks of the internal software program to ensure proper
documentation.
The UEF has had a formal program with a written protocol in place
to identify and refer applicable employers for license suspensions
ongoing and continues that program regularly. This will continue.
As a result of the OLA Audit, it has been discovered that although
employers are regularly reviewed for license suspension the process
of required documentation has not been occurring.
Review and monitoring improvements are required to ensure that
the actual results are being recorded properly and the UEF is
currently reviewing that part of the process and identifying
immediate improvements that are required and acting to correct
any lapses in data entry or management on an ongoing basis.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Agency Response Form
The UEF is currently reviewing the program to improve
documentation and ensure records reflect the actual case by case
actions taken in all appropriate cases and to ensure all applicable
eligible employers are referred for license suspensions– expected
completion date 8/31/2025
Third-Party Administrator Payments
Finding 2
UEF did not obtain and review sufficient documentation to support the
monthly fees paid to the third-party administrator (TPA) for administrative
services.
We recommend that UEF ensure that invoiced amounts are supported and
agree to contract approved rates and level of services prior to approving
invoices for payment (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The Agency agrees with this Finding and will continue the process of
additional comments as complying with the Recommendation.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 8/31/2025
Please provide details of The UEF understands and appreciates the importance of effectively
corrective action or monitoring its TPA. Although, the TPA employees work onsite and
explain disagreement. the agency is, therefore, aware if the contract’s personnel
requirements are being met, the agency agrees that the TPA’s
invoices did not meet the requirements of its contract. The UEF has
already forwarded the TPA a copy of the “invoicing” section of the
TPA contract demanding that invoices comply with the contractual
terms going forward, including listing all claims personnel, their
wages, and their hours worked. Moreover, UEF employees have
been directed not to pay any invoices that do not meet these
requirements going forward.
Plan/Timetable
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 23 ---
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
Agency Response Form
The vendor has been notified of the requirements expected from it to
provide documentation which satisfies this Finding.
The UEF has also initiated and is continuing to expand and refine a
program to ensure the required information relevant to this finding
is obtained by the agency for review and approval
Constant reviews of documents will occur and revisions as
appropriate will also be implemented to obtain the data required by
the Finding.
Final implementation of the program is expected 8/31/2025.
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Finding 3 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the finding, including
the analysis, related recommendations, along with UEF’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, UEF’s responses indicated agreement with the
finding and related recommendations.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 24 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
John B. Wachter, CFE
Senior Auditor
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Summer L. Carbaugh
Kareem R. Jackson
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Information Systems Staff Auditor