Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Vital Statistics Administration
Date: 07/12/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ecc9d72456067475e
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:00:03.809026
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Vital Statistics Administration
July 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Vital Statistics
Administration (VSA) is responsible for registering all births and deaths occurring
in the State; issuing certified copies of birth, death, and marriage certificates; and
compiling and analyzing various vital statistics data. Certified copies of these
certificates are available, for a fee, at the VSA headquarters location in Baltimore.
Birth certificates and certain death certificates are also available at 22 local health
departments (LHDs).
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, VSA’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $4.6 million. According to its records, VSA
collected approximately $10.1 million in vital record fees during fiscal year 2015
for the issuance of approximately 577,000 certified copies of certificates, of
which approximately $3.2 million was collected by LHDs.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 27, 2014. We determined that VSA
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Vital Records
Finding 1
VSA did not have comprehensive procedures for conducting LHD site visits,
which were performed to assess procedures and controls over the issuance of
birth and death certificates and collection of the related fees.
Analysis
VSA did not have comprehensive written procedures for completing its annual
LHD site visits. The objective of the site visits is to determine whether the 22
LHDs had adequate controls in place to ensure all birth and death certificates
were properly issued and related fees were deposited. Comprehensive written
procedures would promote effective and consistent monitoring of LHD activity
and provide clarity by defining documentation and response requirements.
3

--- Page 6 ---
According to its records, LHDs collected approximately $3.2 million during fiscal
year 2015 for the issuance of 204,029 certified copies of birth and death
certificates. The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene assigns responsibility
and provides certain guidance to the LHDs for the issuance of birth and death
certificates through a memorandum of understanding.
LHD site visits were performed by VSA office personnel and consisted of the
completion of a standard checklist of questions. Written guidance was not
provided to these personnel regarding the type of evidence to be examined when
conducting the reviews and the amount of documentation needed to support the
work done and conclusions reached. The checklists did not document how the
information was obtained and who was interviewed, and there was no requirement
for supervisory review of the work performed. Finally, the LHDs were not
required to respond to the review reports regarding the intended corrective
actions. Consequently, VSA management lacked assurance that the reviews were
properly conducted and any corrective actions were appropriate.
We reviewed the reports issued in August 2015 for the 22 LHD site visits
conducted during the months of May through August 2015. Five reports
disclosed deficiencies for which corrective action was necessary. Although the
reports directed the LHDs to implement the corrective actions, VSA did not
require the LHDs to respond or submit a corrective action plan. Three of the
LHDs, nevertheless, provided written responses indicating certain corrective
action to be taken. The reports for the remaining two LHDs that did not provide a
written response disclosed conditions regarding the failure to segregate duties and
to secure birth certificate paper. During fiscal year 2015, these two LHDs issued
1,455 birth certificates with related collections totaling $27,640.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that VSA prepare comprehensive written procedures for its
site reviews of LHD operations relating to the issuance of birth and death
certificates. At a minimum, these procedures should address the type of
evidence to examine when conducting the reviews, the amount of
documentation needed to support the work done and conclusions reached,
the need for supervisory review and approval, and a requirement for
obtaining responses and corrective action plans from the LHDs.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
VSA operates the Electronic Vital Registration System (EVRS) and the Electronic
Death Registration System (EDRS). EVRS is a system which is used for the
registration of births, issuance of certified copies of birth certificates, and
preparation of vital statistics data files and reports. EVRS serves all facilities and
individuals providing birth data to VSA. EDRS is a system which is used for
registration of deaths and issuance of certified copies of death certificates. EDRS
serves all facilities and individuals providing death data to VSA. The Department
of Health and Mental Hygiene - Office of the Secretary is responsible for the
operation and maintenance of the network supporting EVRS and EDRS.
Finding 2
Logging and reviews of database security and audit events were not properly
performed or documented, and VSA did not remove inactive domain
accounts on a timely basis.
Analysis
Security and audit event monitoring over the production EVRS and EDRS
databases was inadequate, and VSA did not remove inactive domain accounts on
a timely basis.
• For both the EVRS and EDRS databases, although direct modifications made
to critical tables were logged, these logged events were not included in reports
for management review and investigation.
• We were advised that daily reviews of security event and audit event activity
were performed; however, documentation did not exist to evidence these
reviews.
• We identified 46 active user accounts (assigned to 45 unique individuals) that
had not been used for extended periods to log into the domain. Specifically,
as of our test date of January 22, 2016, inactivity periods ranged from 62 to
368 days for these 46 accounts.
Accordingly, significant database security and audit events could go undetected,
thus permitting unauthorized or inappropriate activities to adversely affect the
integrity of the aforementioned databases and unauthorized individuals could
possibly access critical network resources.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that application and
system auditing be enabled to the extent necessary to capture access,
modification, deletion and movement of critical/confidential information by each
unique user. The Policy also requires that procedures be developed to routinely
(for example daily or weekly) review audit records for indications of unusual
activities, suspicious activities or suspected violations, and report findings to
appropriate officials for prompt resolution and that accounts be disabled or locked
after 60 days of inactivity.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that VSA
a. include direct changes to critical EVRS and EDRS database tables on
reports of security events for management review;
b. document reviews and any subsequent investigations of the EVRS and
EDRS database logging reports, with such documentation retained for
future reference; and
c. disable unused domain accounts after 60 days of inactivity in accordance
with the Information Security Policy.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Vital Statistics
Administration (VSA) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH)
for the period beginning February 25, 2013 and ending December 8, 2015. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine VSA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, certificate issuance, and
information systems. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to VSA by DHMH’s
Office of the Secretary and related units. These support services (such as payroll,
maintenance of accounting records, related fiscal functions, and certain aspects of
the network information systems related to VSA’s Electronic Vital Registration
System (EVRS) and the Electronic Death Registration System) are included
within the scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
VSA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from VSA’s
EVRS for the purpose of testing user access and the issuance of certificates. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data extracted
from this system were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
VSA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
7

--- Page 10 ---
adversely affect VSA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to VSA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of VSA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Vital Statistics Administration
Finding 1
VSA did not have comprehensive procedures for conducting LHD site visits, which were
performed to assess procedures and controls over the issuance of birth and death
certificates and collection of the related fees.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that VSA prepare comprehensive written procedures for its site reviews of
LHD operations relating to the issuance of birth and death certificates. At a minimum,
these procedures should address the type of evidence to examine when conducting the
reviews, the amount of documentation needed to support the work done and conclusions
reached, the need for supervisory review and approval, and a requirement for obtaining
responses and corrective action plans from the LHDs.
Administration response:
The Administration concurs with this recommendation and will establish comprehensive written
procedures detailing specifics to be examined when conducting its review of LHD operations. In
addition, the Administration will document each LHD’s supervisory review and signatory
endorsement of suggested improvements and related conclusions. Procedures will be completed
and documented within 60 days.
Finding 2
Logging and reviews of database security and audit events were not properly performed or
documented, and VSA did not remove inactive domain accounts on a timely basis.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that VSA
a. include direct changes to critical EVRS and EDRS database tables on reports of security events
for management review;
b. document reviews and any subsequent investigations of the EVRS and EDRS database
logging reports, with such documentation retained for future reference; and
c. disable unused domain accounts after 60 days of inactivity in accordance with the
Information Security Policy.

--- Page 13 ---
Administration response:
a. The Administration concurs with the Auditor’s recommendation and is conducting
research to identify options that will not over burden our production systems.
b. The Administration concurs with the Auditor’s recommendation. VSA system
administrators have put procedures in place and in use to address these issues. The
reports are reviewed and a log is being kept for future reference.
c. The Administration concurs with the Auditor’s recommendation. VSA system
administrators have begun to produce an Active Directory report each month and
will ensure that all accounts are disabled after 60 days of inactivity.

--- Page 14 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Evan E. Naugle
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Senior Auditor