Title: Office of the Attorney General
Date: 07/09/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674292
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:40:38.285213
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Attorney General
March 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. OAG operates under the provisions of Title 6 of the
State Government Article. OAG acts as legal counsel to the Governor, General
Assembly, Judiciary, and State agencies, boards, and commissions, and represents
the State in all legal matters of interest to the State. OAG also reviews legislation
passed by the General Assembly for form and legal sufficiency; enforces antitrust,
consumer protection, and securities laws; prosecutes Medicaid provider fraud; and
monitors residential juvenile facilities. According to the State’s records, OAG’s
expenditures totaled approximately $30.4 million (primarily salaries and wages)
during fiscal year 2014.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Controls were not established to ensure collections were properly accounted
for and deposited.
Analysis
Proper controls were not established over cash receipts, which totaled
approximately $21.7 million during fiscal year 2014. These collections, which
included certain registration fees and lawsuit settlements, were initially received
in the various OAG divisions (such as the Consumer Protection Division) and
were forwarded to its Fiscal Division for deposit.
 The Fiscal Division employee who performed the deposit verification was not
independent of the cash receipts process. This employee had routine access to
the collections and was also responsible for recording deposits in the State’s
accounting records and processing chargebacks resulting from checks that
were dishonored by the bank. In addition, this employee did not use the initial
recordation document when performing the deposit verification for the
Consumer Protection Division. Rather, a summary report of collections was
used for this purpose.
3

--- Page 6 ---
 Cash receipts were not sufficiently safeguarded prior to deposit. Funds
received in the Consumer Protection Division and funds forwarded to the
Fiscal Division were routinely stored in a location accessible to numerous
employees throughout the day.
As a result of these conditions, funds could be misappropriated without detection.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that a
reconciliation of the initial recordation of collections to the amount deposited be
performed by an employee independent of the cash receipts function.
Additionally, the Manual requires that receipts be adequately safeguarded until
deposited.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OAG
a. ensure that collections are verified to deposit by an employee independent
of the cash receipts functions and that the initial record of collections is
used during the deposit verification process, and
b. adequately safeguard collections prior to processing and deposit.
We advised OAG on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) for the period beginning March 8, 2011 and ending July 17, 2014.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OAG’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
4

--- Page 7 ---
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, cash receipts,
special funds, non-budgeted funds, and payroll.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OAG’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
OAG’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding that we consider to be a significant deficiency in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect OAG’s ability to
maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This finding also represents
a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to OAG that did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
OAG’s response to our finding and recommendation is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise OAG regarding the results of our
review of its response.
6

--- Page 9 ---
APPENDIX
BRIAN E. FROSH ELIZABETH F. HARRIS
Attorney General Chief Deputy Attorney General
THIRUVENDRAN VIGNARAJAH
Deputy Attorney General
STATE OF MARYLAND
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
FACSIMILE NO. WRITER’S DIRECT DIAL NO.
(410) 576-6447 (410) 576-6442
March 4, 2015
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
Thank you for your letter regarding the draft audit report for the Office of
the Attorney General (“OAG”) for the period beginning March 8, 2011 and
ending July 17, 2014. Enclosed you will find the OAG’s response.
If you or your staff need any further information, please contact Beverly
Pivec, Director of Administration at 410-576-6442.
Sincerely,
Attorney General
200 Saint Paul Place  Baltimore, Maryland, 21202-2021
Main Office (410) 576-6300  Main Office Toll Free (888) 743-0023
Consumer Complaints and Inquiries (410) 528-8662  Health Advocacy Unit/Billing Complaints (410) 528-1840
Health Advocacy Unit Toll Free (877) 261-8807  Homebuilders Division Toll Free (877) 259-4525  Telephone for Deaf (410) 576-6372
www.oag.state.md.us

--- Page 10 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Controls were not established to ensure collections were properly accounted for and deposited.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OAG
a. ensure that collections are verified to deposit by an employee independent of the cash
receipts functions and that the initial record of collections is used during the deposit
verification process, and
b. adequately safeguard collections prior to processing and deposit.
Office of the Attorney General Response
Recommendation 1 (a)
The OAG has established procedures and controls in place. The person responsible for the FMIS
entry merely verified the accuracy of the written deposit ticket prior to the deposit going to the
bank. This one minute verification was the only access to the checks referred to in the
breakdown of controls. And, while we believe the current internal control to be sufficient, we
will implement to recommendation to have an employee independent of the cash receipts
function verify the accuracy of the written deposit ticket. We will also implement the
recommendation to use the initial recordation document when performing the deposit
verification for the Consumer Protection Division. This deposit verification will be performed by
an employee independent of the cash receipts function.
Recommendation 1 (b)
We believe the current internal controls to be sufficient in safeguarding checks prior to the
deposit. The OAG is in a secured building with limited access and the Consumer Protection
Division and the Fiscal Unit are located on secured floors with limited access. In the Fiscal Unit,

--- Page 11 ---
checks were kept in a filing cabinet in an office that was locked at night. And, while we believe
those control to be strong, we have further secured the area by keeping the filing cabinet locked
at all times. In the Consumer Protection Division, checks are kept in a locked room that also
contains evidence (“Evidence Room”). The Division Chief’s Management Associate maintains
the key to the Evidence Room. She provides access to only a limited number of employees and
the access that is granted normally is limited in duration. It is unusual for an employee to need
access to the Evidence Room while checks are being stored. We believe this is an efficient and
secure way to store the checks.

--- Page 12 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Amanda L. Howell
Staff Auditor