Title: University System of Maryland - Frostburg State University
Date: 02/04/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d724560674424
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:48:11.461843
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Frostburg State University
April 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Former FSU Official’s Leave Usage 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – Capabilities Assigned to Individuals on the Financial 6
Management Systems Were Not Adequately Restricted
Finding 2 – Procedures For Maintaining and Securing Workstations 7
Were Not Sufficient
Finding 3 – Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information Was Not 9
Appropriately Safeguarded
Finding 4 – Access and Monitoring Controls Over Two Databases 10
and Applications Were Not Sufficient to Protect Critical Data
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Frostburg State University (FSU) is a comprehensive public institution of the
University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of the
System’s Board of Regents. FSU offers an array of undergraduate and graduate
degrees with an emphasis on arts, humanities, business, applied technologies,
education, environmental sciences, human services, and social and behavioral
sciences. Student enrollment for the Fall 2015 semester totaled 5,756 students,
including 4,961 undergraduate students and 795 graduate students. FSU’s budget
is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a State general
fund appropriation, and by restricted revenues, such as federal grants and
contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, FSU’s revenues for fiscal
year 2015 totaled approximately $114.6 million, including a State general fund
appropriation of approximately $37.4 million.
Former FSU Official’s Leave Usage
FSU and USM’s Internal Audit Unit conducted an investigation into possible
irregularities in leave reporting. In particular, the investigation examined the
propriety of 30 days of sick leave taken by a former FSU official just prior to the
official’s departure from FSU in 2015. Reporting sick leave rather than annual
leave effectively increased the official’s final payment for unused annual leave.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the USM Chancellor advised the former
official, in an October 2015 letter, that the net amount of sick leave for the 30
days in question was $20,044.
As required by a Governor’s Executive Order (Standards of Conduct for
Executive Branch Employees and Reporting of Misconduct), in October 2015 the
Chancellor advised the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division of the
possible irregularities. This matter was also forwarded to the Governor’s Chief
Counsel.
USM advised us that FSU received payment of $20,044 on April 18, 2016 and
that it does not anticipate taking any further action.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 21, 2013. We determined that FSU
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
Frostburg State University’s (FSU) Office of Networking and
Telecommunications and Office of Information Technology provide technical
information systems support to FSU through the operation and maintenance of
campus-wide administrative applications, such as the human resources system,
the student administration system, and the financial system. The Office of
Information Technology also operates an integrated administrative and academic
computer network, which provides connections to multiple servers used for
administrative applications and related databases. The campus network also has
connections to the Internet, the Maryland Research and Education Network, and
certain University System of Maryland (USM) institutions and includes a firewall,
other network traffic filtering devices, and an extensive campus wireless network.
Finding 1
FSU did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on the financial
management systems were adequately restricted.
Analysis
FSU did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on its financial
management systems were adequately restricted to prevent improper student
account and financial aid transactions. Our review of system capabilities assigned
to 142 active users disclosed that some users were assigned unnecessary or
inappropriate system capabilities.
 Our review of nine critical functions related to student accounts determined
that three system users were assigned unnecessary or inappropriate access to
one or more of those functions. For example, one of the users with the
capability to process non-cash credits was responsible for reviewing and
approving these non-cash credits. According to FSU records, non-cash credits
processed during fiscal year 2015 totaled approximately $3.9 million.
 Our review of 15 critical functions related to student financial aid determined
that 6 system users were assigned unnecessary or inappropriate access to one
or more of those functions. For example, these 6 users could modify student
financial data used to determine if a student is eligible for federal aid and also
indicate that the information had been verified. The 6 users also had the
6

--- Page 9 ---
capability to create and modify student financial aid budgets, which establish
a maximum amount a student can receive in aid, without supervisory review.
 FSU had not established adequate controls over the termination of user
accounts. Specifically, user accounts for 6 individuals who were previously
employed by FSU remained active for periods of 1 to 16 months after the
individuals left FSU employment. In addition, for one other account, an
existing employee received a new account while unnecessarily retaining
access to the old account.
USM’s Information Technology Security Standards specify that institutions are
responsible for ensuring that access rights reflect employee status, including
changes in employee status. In addition, institutions must segregate various
functions, such as processing and authorizing business transactions, to ensure the
appropriate separation of duties for system users or implement compensating
controls to mitigate the risk.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FSU
a. restrict user access capabilities for critical functions to those employees
who require such capabilities for their job duties, including those noted
above, in a manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties and
independent review and approval of critical transactions; and
b. establish procedures to ensure that all user accounts are terminated
timely.
Finding 2
Procedures for maintaining and securing numerous FSU workstations were
not sufficient.
Analysis
Procedures for maintaining and securing numerous FSU workstations were not
sufficient.
 Certain workstations were configured with users having administrative rights.
Administrative rights are the highest permission level that can be granted and
allow users to install software and change configuration settings. Our test of
ten workstations disclosed that eight employees’ user accounts were
inappropriately defined with administrative rights rather than with user rights.
We were advised by FSU personnel that faculty and staff are generally given
7

--- Page 10 ---
administrative rights on their workstations. As a result, if the workstations
used by accounts with administrative rights were infected with malware, the
malware would run with administrative rights and expose these workstations
to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts
operated with only user rights.
 Certain computers tested had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, FSU had not
updated all of its computers for these patches. For example, of 13 computers
tested for one of these software products, we noted that 7 computers were
running older versions of this software that had not been updated for periods
ranging from 2 to 15 months.
 The malware protection software used to protect FSU workstations was not
properly configured to limit users’ capabilities. Specifically, users of all eight
workstations tested could disable malware protection software features that
would render the software unable to protect against malware threats.
 Although FSU used an enterprise-wide management tool to administer
malware protection software on its computers, FSU did not use the
management capabilities of this tool to verify that the malware protection
software and related definition files were up-to-date on its computers. In this
regard, FSU personnel advised that regular reviews of the management tool’s
dashboard and reports were not performed. Specifically, 10 of 11 computers
tested did not have a current version of the malware protection software
installed and 2 of these 10 computers had outdated malware protection
signatures which detect malware and prevent it from attacking the computers.
The USM Information Technology Security Standards state that institutions must
install software to protect systems from malicious programs such as viruses,
trojans, and worms. The software should be configured to update signatures
regularly.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FSU
a. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to
network administrators;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates on its
computers;
8

--- Page 11 ---
c. configure its malware protection software so that users cannot disable the
settings which allow users to override and modify default security
controls established by management; and
d. use its malware protection enterprise-wide management tool to regularly
confirm that all computers are configured with anti-malware software
that is operating properly, up-to-date and has current anti-malware
signatures. These regular reviews should be documented and retained
for future reference.
Finding 3
Sensitive personally identifiable information was not appropriately
safeguarded.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was stored in two critical
databases in clear text. Specifically, we noted that, as of August 18, 2015, these
two databases contained sensitive PII for 131,488 and 134,042 unique individuals
in clear text. This included the individuals’ full names, dates of birth, addresses,
and social security numbers. In addition, we determined that this sensitive PII
was not protected by other substantial mitigating controls.
This PII, which is commonly associated with identity theft, should be protected by
appropriate information system security controls. The USM Information
Technology Security Standards state that protection measures for confidential data
can include the deletion of unneeded confidential information, encryption or other
equally secure safeguards, and if encryption is used to protect confidential
information the USM encryption standards must be used.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FSU:
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if this sensitive information is properly protected by
encryption or other equally secure safeguards, and
d. comply with the aforementioned USM IT Security Standards to control
and properly secure all sensitive PII.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 4
Access and monitoring controls over two databases and applications were not
sufficient to protect critical data.
Analysis
Access and monitoring controls over two databases and applications were not
sufficient to protect critical data.
 Access to critical roles, tools, and permission lists used by the financial and
student administration applications were not properly restricted. For example,
we noted that four accounts were improperly assigned the financial
application’s administrator role as the related individuals did not require this
capability to perform their job duties. As a result of this role assignment,
these four accounts had unnecessary, full access to all of the financial
application’s menus, pages, and interfaces along with unnecessary use of
critical administrative tools. The USM IT Security Standards state that
institutions must implement and document processes to ensure that access
rights reflect employee status.
 FSU did not log changes to the financial application’s security settings
relating to password controls, procurement cards, and critical security options.
In addition, for the student administration application, FSU did not generate
reports of logged changes to critical password settings. Furthermore, although
critical student administration system database security events were properly
logged, reports generated from the logged events were configured to exclude
almost all of the critical logged security events. As a result, numerous
significant security events were not reviewed for propriety. The USM IT
Security Council Guide for Security Event Logging requires each institution to
maintain appropriate audit trails of events and actions related to critical
applications and data.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the FSU
a. implement controls over the financial and student information system
applications which properly restrict access to critical roles, tools, and
permission lists;
b. log changes to critical application security settings;
c. generate reports of logged changes to critical application settings and
regularly review these reports; and
d. configure the reports of logged database security events to include all
significant security events.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Frostburg State University (FSU) for the period beginning
June 4, 2012 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine FSU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, student accounts receivable,
purchases and disbursements, student financial aid, payroll, and information
technology systems. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to FSU by the USM
Office. These support services (for example bond financing) are included within
the scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include
an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of FSU’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including the components of USM.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, and observations of
FSU’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the items were selected.
11

--- Page 14 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from FSU’s financial systems for the
purpose of testing certain areas, such as student accounts receivable and financial
aid. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
FSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect FSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to FSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of FSU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
12

--- Page 15 ---
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
FROSTBURG STATE UNIVERSITY
JUNE 4, 2012 TO JUNE 30, 2015
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
FSU did not ensure that capabilities assigned to individuals on the financial
management systems were adequately restricted.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FSU
a. restrict user access capabilities for critical functions to those employees
who require such capabilities for their job duties, including those noted
above, in a manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties and
independent review and approval of critical transactions; and
b. establish procedures to ensure that all user accounts are terminated
timely.
University response
a. FSU has completed this recommendation effective March 2016.
b. FSU will restrict access and establish procedures to ensure all accounts are
terminated timely. We plan to complete this recommendation by July 2016.
Finding 2
Procedures for maintaining and securing numerous FSU workstations were
not sufficient.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FSU
a. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to
network administrators;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates on its
computers;
c. configure its malware protection software so that users cannot disable the
settings which allow users to override and modify default security
controls established by management; and
d. use its malware protection enterprise-wide management tool to regularly
confirm that all computers are configured with anti-malware software
that is operating properly, up-to-date and has current anti-malware
signatures. These regular reviews should be documented and retained
for future reference.

--- Page 18 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
FROSTBURG STATE UNIVERSITY
JUNE 4, 2012 TO JUNE 30, 2015
University response
a. FSU will restrict administrator rights on workstations. We expect to be
completed by June 18.
b. FSU has completed this recommendation effective January 2016.
c. FSU will complete this recommendation by May 2016.
d. FSU has completed this recommendation effective December 2015.
Finding 3
Sensitive personally identifiable information was not appropriately
safeguarded.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FSU:
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if this sensitive information is properly protected by
encryption or other equally secure safeguards, and
d. comply with the aforementioned USM IT Security Standards to control
and properly secure all sensitive PII.
University response
FSU is in the process of strengthening its PII controls, and will fully complete all
four recommendations by June 2018.
Finding 4
Access and monitoring controls over two databases and applications were not
sufficient to protect critical data.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the FSU
a. implement controls over the financial and student information system
applications which properly restrict access to critical roles, tools, and
permission lists;
b. log changes to critical application security settings;
c. generate reports of logged changes to critical application settings and
regularly review these reports; and

--- Page 19 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
FROSTBURG STATE UNIVERSITY
JUNE 4, 2012 TO JUNE 30, 2015
d. configure the reports of logged database security events to include all
significant security events.
University response
a. FSU has completed this recommendation effective September 2015.
b. FSU is preparing application code changes to meet this recommendation with
an expected completion date of July 2016.
c. FSU will begin generation and review of these reports by July 2016.
d. FSU has completed this recommendation effective January 2016.

--- Page 20 ---
AUDIT TEAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Evan E. Naugle
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Christopher D. Jackson, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Wesley M. Elder, CPA
Christopher J. Fowler
Staff Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditors