Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Prevention and Health Promotion Administration - Health Systems and Infastructure Administration - Office of Preparedness and Response


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2012, DHMH integrated certain responsibilities and financial activities of the Family Health Administration and the Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration into the newly created Prevention and Health Promotion Administration.
Date: 03/18/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d724560674562
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:17:29.885393
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration
Health Systems and Infrastructure Administration
Office of Preparedness and Response
March 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational Change 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Client and Provider Eligibility
Finding 1 – PHPA Did Not Use Available Resources to Verify 6
Applicant Income and to Identify Possible Third-Party
Insurance for Certain Programs
Finding 2 – PHPA Did Not Always Consider Critical Information 7
When Redetermining Applicant Eligibility For One Program
Finding 3 – Access to Systems Used to Maintain Critical 8
Information and Process Related Claims For Certain Programs
Was Not Adequately Restricted
Finding 4 – PHPA Did Not Always Obtain Certain Necessary 9
Documents to Establish Provider Eligibility and Did Not
Conduct Periodic Eligibility Reassessments
Cash Receipts
Finding 5 – PHPA Lacked Adequate Procedures and Controls Over 10
Certain Collections
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA), Health Systems
and Infrastructure Administration (HSIA), and the Office of Preparedness and
Response (OPR) are units within the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(DHMH).
 PHPA protects, promotes, and improves the health and well-being of
Marylanders and their families through the provision of public health
leadership and community-based public health efforts, including partnerships
with local health departments, with special attention to at-risk and vulnerable
populations. PHPA provides State grant funding to the local health
departments for various purposes including support for their operational costs.
 HSIA improves the health of all Marylanders by assuring access to and the
quality of health care, and provides resources and technical assistance to allow
each local health department to provide essential public health services, such
as family planning and adult health and geriatric services.
 OPR organizes and prepares for public health and medical emergencies
through statewide partnerships with public, private, and government agencies
to coordinate an effective emergency response for the health and safety of all
Maryland residents.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014, expenditures for PHPA,
HSIA, and OPR totaled $328 million, $50 million, and $16.5 million,
respectively.
Organizational Change
Effective July 1, 2012, DHMH reorganized its public health structure. The
reorganization realigned program responsibilities underneath the Deputy
Secretary for Public Health Services and brought under its direction certain
functions previously performed by other DHMH units. Specifically, DHMH
integrated certain responsibilities and financial activities of the Infectious Disease
and Environmental Health Administration (IDEHA) and the Family Health
Administration into the newly created PHPA. The reorganization also created
HSIA, as a new administration, consisting of certain functions previously
performed by IDEHA.
Our audit also included OPR which is another unit under the Deputy Secretary for
Public Health Services. Previously, OPR was audited as part of our DHMH –
Office of the Secretary and Other Units audits.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of four of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report on the DHMH Infectious Disease and
Environmental Health Administration, dated December 17, 2010. We followed
up on these four findings based on our assessment of significance and risk relative
to our current audit objectives. Our audit also included a review to determine the
status of the three findings contained in our preceding audit report on the DHMH
Family Health Administration, dated August 23, 2011. We determined that
PHPA satisfactorily addressed these seven findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Client and Provider Eligibility
Background
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) – Prevention and Health
Promotion Administration (PHPA) is responsible for determining client and
provider eligibility for the Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment
Program (BCCDTP), the Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (MADAP),
and the MADAP-Plus program. These programs are funded with special funds
and/or federal funds.
BCCDTP pays for certain medical costs on behalf of low-income individuals who
have a qualifying medical condition. According to the State’s records, BCCDTP
spent approximately $14.7 million in special funds on behalf of approximately
3,300 recipients during fiscal year 2013.
MADAP helps low to moderate income individuals pay for certain HIV/AIDS
drugs and the MADAP-Plus program helps some of these individuals pay for their
health insurance premiums, providing access to inpatient and outpatient health
care as well as prescription coverage. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2013, MADAP and MADAP-Plus expenditures totaled approximately
$58.9 million and the programs were serving 5,505 clients in MADAP, 2,452 of
whom were also enrolled in MADAP-Plus as of September 18, 2014.
Finding 1
PHPA did not use available independent resources to help verify applicant
income and to identify possible third-party insurance for certain programs.
Analysis
PHPA did not use available independent resources to help ensure new and
renewal applicants for BCCDTP, MADAP, and MADAP-Plus submitted
complete and accurate income information. For example, PHPA did not use
online resources, such as the Maryland Automated Benefits System (MABS) and
the National Directory of New Hires. These resources are used by other State
entities, such as the Department of Human Resources, to verify income for other
critical programs, including Medicaid.
Furthermore, although PHPA required BCCDTP and MADAP applicants to
provide documentation of any third-party insurance coverage the applicants
maintained, PHPA had no procedure in place to independently identify the
existence of third-party insurance. We noted that DHMH’s Medical Care
6

--- Page 9 ---
Program Administration (MCPA) uses an independent contractor to search for
possible third-party insurance covering its program applicants and recipients.
Applicants are required to submit documentation with their new and renewal
applications such as pay stubs and information about third-party insurance
coverage. Because applicant income must be considered when determining an
applicant’s eligibility, and the existence of third-party insurance may affect the
amount of program payments made for a recipient, it is critical that steps be taken
to ensure the complete and accurate reporting of this information.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PHPA implement procedures to use available resources,
such as MABS and the aforementioned MCPA contract, to help verify
applicant income and to identify any third-party insurance.
Finding 2
PHPA did not always consider certain critical information, such as income
and insurance data, in its BCCDTP eligibility redeterminations.
Analysis
PHPA did not always consider certain critical information reported by applicants,
such as income and insurance data in its review of BCCDTP renewal applications,
which could impact applicant eligibility and the amount of claim payments for
BCCDTP services. Applicants for BCCDTP services must submit documentation
with their renewal applications to support their continued medical and financial
eligibility. Our test of 13 renewal BCCDTP applications approved during our
audit period disclosed the following conditions associated with 5 applications
with paid claims for the related applicants totaling approximately $1.1 million
during fiscal years 2011 through 2013 (a portion of these claims were paid in the
period after the tested BCCDTP renewal applications were approved):
 Two renewal applications indicated that the applicant’s spouse had earned
income, but the applicant did not provide sufficient documentation of the
income. PHPA did not request any additional information from these
applicants or include the spouses’ income when calculating the applicants’
financial eligibility.
 Information on three of the renewal applications tested (including one
application noted in the previous bullet) indicated that the applicant may have
had third-party insurance (such as a pay stub with a deduction for health
insurance), but that information was not pursued by PHPA staff. Third-party
insurance may have covered certain of the costs paid by PHPA.
7

--- Page 10 ---
 One renewal application included a new social security number (SSN) for the
applicant, but the SSN was not recorded by PHPA in the database used to
track enrollees. Although an applicant is not required to provide a SSN to be
eligible for BCCDTP benefits, if a SSN is provided it should be recorded in
the database. An applicant’s SSN can be used to help verify applicant income
and any third-party insurance coverage.
Eligibility is redetermined annually, at which time applicants must resubmit an
application and supporting documentation similar to the initial application
process. It is critical that PHPA adequately evaluate all reported data to ensure
recipient eligibility and the propriety of payments made.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that PHPA
a. record all critical information reported by applicants and use the
information to evaluate continued applicant eligibility and the existence
of third-party insurance; and
b. determine whether the aforementioned applicants were eligible and had
third-party insurance, and take appropriate action.
Finding 3
PHPA did not adequately restrict access to systems used to maintain critical
program information and pay related claims.
Analysis
PHPA did not adequately restrict users’ access to the MADAP system, used to
maintain critical information such as eligible applicants for the MADAP and
MADAP-Plus programs, and the claims adjudication and point of sale systems
used to process related claims. Our review of the access capabilities that had been
assigned to users as of April 10, 2014 identified the following conditions:
 Twenty-two employees were assigned capabilities that allowed them to record
an individual as eligible for MADAP and MADAP-Plus in the MADAP
system without independent approval, including 16 employees who did not
need this access based on their job responsibilities.
 Six of these employees also had incompatible duties in that they could also
manually process related claims on the MADAP system and/or the claims
adjudication and point of sale systems without being subject to an adequate
independent approval. Four of these six employees did not require this
capability to perform their job responsibilities.
8

--- Page 11 ---
 Four of these employees could add and modify pharmacy and insurance
vendors and add drugs to the formulary maintained on the MADAP system
without independent supervisory approval. Two of these four employees did
not require this capability to perform their job responsibilities.
Consequently, improper payments could occur without timely detection.
MADAP applications are reviewed by PHPA clerical staff and, once approved,
the applicants are entered into the MADAP system. The system is interfaced with
the claims adjudication and point of sale systems, which are used by pharmacies
to ensure that individuals requesting medications have been approved for
MADAP and to initiate the related claims. Claims for the MADAP-Plus program
(health insurance premiums) are manually processed and entered into the
MADAP system for processing.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that PHPA
a. ensure a documented review of critical data recorded into the MADAP
system is performed by independent supervisory personnel,
b. separate incompatible duties that allowed employees to input individuals
as eligible and to manually process related claims, and
c. eliminate capabilities to ensure employees can only perform duties
required as part of their job responsibilities.
Finding 4
PHPA did not always obtain required documents necessary to determine
BCCDTP provider eligibility and did not conduct periodic reassessments to
ensure providers maintained their eligibility.
Analysis
PHPA did not always obtain required documentation to establish eligibility for
BCCDTP providers and did not conduct periodic reassessments of provider
eligibility.
 PHPA did not always obtain copies of physician licenses and proof of liability
insurance required by State regulations. For example, when approving
applications from providers (medical practices), individual physician licenses
were not always obtained for all physicians working for that provider.
Additionally, PHPA did not require proof of licensure to be submitted for
certain other types of individuals, such as physical therapists and occupational
therapists, even though State regulations require licensure for participation by
these individuals in BCCDTP. As a result, providers were approved as
eligible BCCDTP providers without all individual physicians or therapists
9

--- Page 12 ---
being subject to PHPA license verification and claims were processed for
services rendered by these unverified individuals. Furthermore, unless
voluntarily submitted by providers, proof of liability insurance required by
State regulations was not obtained by PHPA. Our test of 20 claim payments
totaling $408,452 processed during fiscal years 2011, 2012, and 2013
disclosed that 8 payments totaling $361,646 were for services performed by 8
physicians whose licenses were never verified by PHPA. In addition, proof of
required insurance was not on file for 9 of 15 provider applications tested
which were processed during fiscal years 2011, 2012, and 2013.
 PHPA did not conduct periodic reassessments of provider eligibility to ensure
that providers remained compliant with State regulations. Our test of 15
provider applications disclosed that, as of March 2014, the licenses for 2
physicians employed by one of these providers had expired on September 30,
2012 and September 30, 2013 respectively, and the license for another
physician employed by the provider had been suspended on November 16,
2012. PHPA was not aware of the status of these licenses until we brought the
status to its attention, and could not readily determine if services were
rendered by these physicians, and claims were paid, after their licenses had
expired or were suspended.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that PHPA
a. at the time of application, obtain documentation of licensure and
insurance for all individual physicians and therapists as required by State
regulations;
b. periodically reassess provider eligibility; and
c. investigate the aforementioned instances of unverified, expired, or
suspended licenses, and ensure that the required documentation is
obtained and appropriate actions are taken.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
PHPA lacked adequate procedures and controls over certain collections.
Analysis
PHPA lacked adequate procedures and controls over HIV Client Services (which
handles MADAP and MADAP-Plus) and BCCDTP collections, which totaled
approximately $48.1 million and $1.5 million, respectively, during fiscal year
2013.
10

--- Page 13 ---
 The PHPA employee who processed BCCDTP collections was also
responsible for updating the related accounts receivable records, which
included amounts due from primary insurers and providers for overpayments,
and from manufacturers for pharmacy rebates. As a result, funds could be
misappropriated without being readily detected.
 PHPA did not perform timely or complete verifications of HIV Client
Services collections to deposit. Specifically, as of March 2014, collections
received since July 2013 had not been verified to deposit. In addition, when
PHPA’s verification procedures were performed, the procedures did not
ensure that all amounts initially recorded were subsequently deposited.
Specifically, a PHPA employee agreed recorded amounts to the State’s
accounting records rather than to validated bank documentation.
 PHPA did not pursue the feasibility of having drug manufacturers submit
large rebates via wire transfer instead of by check. Rebate checks received by
PHPA relating to HIV Client Services periodically were in amounts that could
exceed a million dollars. The use of wire transfers would expedite the deposit
of rebates and improve controls over these funds.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires cash handling, record keeping, and accounts
receivable duties be segregated, and collections be independently verified to
validated bank documentation.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that PHPA establish adequate controls over HIV Client
Services and BCCDTP collections. Specifically, we recommend that PHPA
a. ensure employees without access to collections maintain the related
accounts receivable records,
b. perform timely and complete deposit verifications that ensure all
recorded collections were deposited, and
c. pursue the feasibility of receiving large collections via wire transfer.
We advised PHPA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the periods noted:
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration – July 1, 2012 to October
27, 2013
Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration – January 5,
2010 to June 30, 2012
Family Health Administration – August 4, 2010 to June 30, 2012
Health Systems and Infrastructure Administration – July 1, 2012 to October
27, 2013
Office of Preparedness and Response – February 27, 2013 to October 27,
2013
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHMH’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included contracts and grants, client and provider
eligibility and related claims, cash receipts, payroll, and corporate purchasing
cards. We also determined the status of four of the seven findings contained in
our preceding audit report on DHMH’s Infectious Disease and Environmental
Health Administration, and the status of the three findings contained in our
preceding audit report on DHMH’s Family Health Administration.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DHMH’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
12

--- Page 15 ---
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by DHMH’s Office of
the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll processing
functions, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of DHMH - Office of the
Secretary. Furthermore, responsibilities related to grants awarded to local health
departments are divided between the DHMH – Office of the Secretary and the
various administrations. Our audit included a review of the calculations of
amounts awarded which is the responsibility of the administrations, but did not
include other responsibilities related to these grant awards such as ensuring the
grant funds are expended in accordance with the related agreements which is
within the scope of our audit of DHMH – Office of the Secretary. In addition, our
audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of DHMH’s compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including DHMH.
DHMH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DHMH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
13

--- Page 16 ---
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHMH that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DHMH to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHMH regarding the
results of our review of its response.
14

--- Page 19 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
PHPA did not use available independent resources to help verify applicant
income and to identify possible third-party insurance for certain programs.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PHPA implement procedures to use available resources,
such as MABS and the aforementioned MCPA contract, to help verify
applicant income and to identify any third-party insurance.
PHPA Response:
PHPA concurs with the recommendation that it would be beneficial to use
available resources, such as MABS and the aforementioned MCPA contract, to
help verify applicant income and to identify any third-party insurance.
Both the BCCDTP and MADAP programs have begun preliminary research and
conversations with the Department of Human Resources and MCPA to explore
the cost and efficiency associated with available resources to verify applicant
income, in order to make an informed decision regarding implementation.
The new Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) will include the
capability to identify whether BCCDTP applicants may have third-party
insurance. BCCDTP staff will then follow up on this information to confirm the
existence of third-party insurance for that applicant. The implementation of the
MMIS system has been delayed. In the interest of improving BCCDTP and
MADAP Program operations in the interim, preliminary discussions have begun
with MCPA to determine whether it is possible to utilize their existing vendor to
identify third- party insurance prior to the implementation of the new MMIS
system.

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 2
PHPA did not always consider certain critical information, such as income
and insurance data, in its BCCDTP eligibility redeterminations.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that PHPA
a. record all critical information reported by applicants and use the
information to evaluate continued applicant eligibility and the existence
of third-party insurance; and
b. determine whether the aforementioned applicants were eligible and had
third-party insurance, and take appropriate action.
PHPA Response
a. PHPA concurs with this recommendation to record all critical information
reported by applicants and use the information to evaluate continued applicant
eligibility and the existence of third-party insurance. The BCCDT Program
has policies in place for application review and will provide additional
training to all staff responsible for application review.
Additionally, the new Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS)
claims processing system will include the capability to identify whether an
applicant has third-party insurance. However, the implementation of the new
MMIS system has been delayed, and its expected implementation date for the
BCCDT Program is unknown. Per the Administration’s response in number 1
above, discussions have begun with MPCA to determine whether it is possible
to utilize their existing vendor to identify third- party insurance prior to the
implementation of the new MMIS system.
b. PHPA concurs with this recommendation and will determine whether the
aforementioned applicants were eligible and had third-party insurance, and
take appropriate action as regulations and policy allow.
Finding 3
PHPA did not adequately restrict access to systems used to maintain critical
program information and pay related claims.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that PHPA
a. ensure a documented review of critical data recorded into the MADAP
system is performed by independent supervisory personnel,

--- Page 21 ---
b. separate incompatible duties that allowed employees to input individuals
as eligible and to manually process related claims, and
c. eliminate capabilities to ensure employees can only perform duties
required as part of their job responsibilities.
PHPA Response
a. PHPA concurs with the recommendation that all critical data be subject to
supervisory review and, by the end of fiscal year 2015, the program will have
in place a supervisory review process, inclusive of documentation, that
verifies the accuracy of critical data received and recorded for all
determinations made by eligibility specialists. The final approval or denial of
an application will be made at the supervisory level.
b. PHPA concurs with the recommendation to separate incompatible duties that
could allow employees to input individuals as eligible and to manually
process related claims. One of the two employees cited in the Finding has left
State services and the problem will be resolved as described next in response
c.
c. PHPA concurs with the recommendation to restrict access to authorized users
and has initiated action to be completed by the end of FY 15 to clearly define
and delineate the division of incumbent duties, revise job descriptions (MS-
22s) as necessary, and restrict access to the database system consistent with
assigned duties and responsibilities.
Finding 4
PHPA did not always obtain required documents necessary to determine
BCCDTP provider eligibility and did not conduct periodic reassessments to
ensure providers maintained their eligibility.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that PHPA
a. at the time of application, obtain documentation of licensure and
insurance for all individual physicians and therapists as required by State
regulations;
b. periodically reassess provider eligibility; and
c. investigate the aforementioned instances of unverified, expired, or
suspended licenses, and ensure that the required documentation is
obtained and appropriate actions are taken.
PHPA Response
a. PHPA concurs with this recommendation to obtain documentation of licensure
and insurance for all individual physicians and therapists at the time of application.
The instructions for completing the provider application form for the Program
currently requires submission of copies of all applicable licenses with the

--- Page 22 ---
completed application, and specifically directs that a copy of the current
medical license for each physician be attached. Also, the Program will
modify its provider application form to require the submission of insurance
documentation for each provider listed on an application for all new
applications effective July 1, 2015. The Program will conduct additional
training of staff to strengthen Program oversight of licensure and insurance
requirements. Finally, when the new Medicaid Management Information
System (MMIS) is implemented, providers will be responsible for updating
their own information online with verification by Program staff or a MMIS
fiscal agent, and claims will be paid accessing this information. In addition, a
direct interface with the applicable licensing board will allow for ongoing
licensing updates.
b. PHPA partially concurs with this recommendation to establish procedures to
periodically reassess provider eligibility. The instructions for completing the
provider application form for the Program currently informs providers that
they will be asked to update licensure information periodically. Also, by
regulation, the program is required to update the list of participating medical
care providers not less than once a year and has a procedure for updating
provider licenses annually during the anniversary month of the practice’s
enrollment in the Program. In addition, provider licenses are updated every
time the Program receives a request to update the practice’s information, such
as add or terminate providers or update billing or location addresses.
However, due to limited resources, the large number of providers/ practices,
and the significant amount of time the updates require, the entire provider
license updates have not been completed according to the annual schedule.
Provider licensure and insurance information will be collected as part of
provider enrollment under the new Medicaid Management Information
System (MMIS). Also, a direct interface with the licensing board will allow
for ongoing licensing updates. Finally, when MMIS is implemented, the
Program will confirm insurance annually when it confirms licensure status.
In the interim until the MMIS is implemented, the Program will determine a
schedule to periodically reassess provider eligibility including licensure and
insurance to the extent feasible with current staffing resources.
c. PHPA concurs with the recommendation to investigate the aforementioned
instances of unverified, expired, or suspended licenses, and ensure that the
required documentation is obtained and appropriate actions are taken as
regulations and policy allow.

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 5
PHPA lacked adequate procedures and controls over certain collections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that PHPA establish adequate controls over HIV Client
Services and BCCDTP collections. Specifically, we recommend that PHPA
a. ensure employees without access to collections maintain the related
accounts receivable records,
b. perform timely and complete deposit verifications that ensure all
recorded collections were deposited, and
c. pursue the feasibility of receiving large collections via wire transfer.
We advised PHPA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
PHPA Response
a. PHPA partially concurs with the recommendation in that effective December
2006, the BCCDTP Program implemented a process that assures that
incoming checks are appropriately handled and deposited correctly. The
process also ensures that any reimbursements that were expected were
actually collected in full. This process involves a separation of duties that
include BCCDT Program office clerks receiving a check, logging the received
check into the check/cash receipt log as “received”, and endorsing the check
with a DHMH Deposit Only stamp indicating the account for deposit. The
fiscal clerks then receive the check from the office clerks, initial the
check/cash receipt log to acknowledge receipt, determine the appropriate
PCA/agency object code/fiscal year that the check should be credited to,
create a cash receipt memo, and deliver the check to General Accounting.
The fiscal clerks are responsible for accounts receivable and each fiscal clerk
maintains the shared recoupment spreadsheet for their own accounts.
In addition, the BCCDT Program utilizes the services of the Center for Cancer
Prevention and Control fiscal coordinator, as an independent reconciler who
verifies the deposits and monthly reconciles the check/cash receipt log with
the recoup spreadsheet as well as the FMIS accounts to assure there is no
misappropriation of funds.
b. PHPA concurs with this finding and recommendation as it relates to HIV
Client Services. As of March 4, 2015, PHPA has verified all deposits through
January 2015 by reconciling the daily check log to the daily deposit slips and
verifying that all deposits are recorded in FMIS. No exceptions were noted.
Also, PHPA will strive to complete future monthly verifications within 30
days following the closeout of each month’s fiscal activities. Finally, as a

--- Page 24 ---
point of clarification, the reconciliation of deposits with bank statements is
performed for all DHMH Central Office units by the DHMH Division of
General Accounting.
c. PHPA concurs with this recommendation as it relates to HIV Client Services,
and PHPA will examine the feasibility of establishing an EFT arrangement for
drug rebates in the future.

--- Page 25 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Karen J. Howes
Senior Auditor
Daniel R. Brann, CPA
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Calvin Matthews, Jr.
Kimberly J. Wagner
Staff Auditors