Title: Maryland African American Museum Corporation
Date: 09/01/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d09cc9d724560674258
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:36:19.932139
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland African American Museum Corporation
February 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AuDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
february 9, 2017
\itrren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ. BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Maryland African American
Museum Corporation (MAAMC) for the period beginning March 12, 2013 and
ending September 5, 2016. MAAMC, along with its Board ofDirectors, oversees
the programs ofthe Reginald F. Lewis Museum ofMaryland African American
History and Culture.
Our audit disclosed that MAAMC did not comply with certain provisions ofits
endowment fund investment policy. MAAMC could not provide documentation
that the Board’s finance and Audit Committee actively monitored and directed its
investments, which totaled $7.3 million as ofAugust 2016, in accordance with its
investment policy and we noted that, as ofAugust 2016, equity investments
exceeded the percentage specified in the policy. MAAMC also did not obtain
required conflict ofinterest statements from its financial manager.
MAAMC did not always comply with its procurement policies. for example, for
certain procurements greater than $10,000, MAAMC did not obtain the required
management approvals and only obtained one proposal and, therefore, the State
may not have received the most advantageous prices for the related services.
Finally, adequate controls were not established over its museum collections ofart
and historical artifacts.
MAAMC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis
audit by MAAMC.
Respectfully submitted,
72)
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street• Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline $77-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
State Grants 4
Financial Statement Audits 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Endowment Fund
* Finding 1 – The Maryland African American Museum Corporation 6
(MAAMC) did not comply with certain provisions of its endowment
fund investment policy.
Purchases
Finding 2 – MAAMC did not always comply with its procurement 7
policy regarding obtaining written proposals and obtaining
management approvals.
Museum Collections of Art and Historical Artifacts
* Finding 3 – Adequate accountability and controls were not 8
established over MAAMC’s collections of art and historical artifacts.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland African American Museum Corporation (MAAMC) was created
by State law in 1998 to oversee the development and future programs of the
Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American History and Culture,
located in Baltimore City, which opened to the public in June 2005. MAAMC is
constituted as a public instrumentality and an independent unit in the Executive
Branch. A Board of Directors manages the affairs of MAAMC, which appoints
an executive director to direct and supervise its administrative and technical
affairs.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2016, MAAMC’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $3.96 million, which consisted of $1.96
million in general fund expenditures and $2 million in privately funded
expenditures.
State Grants
Each year MAAMC enters into a Memorandum of Understanding with the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) which requires that funding from
State general fund grants should support no more than 50 percent of MAAMC’s
operating expenses. The State general fund grants totaled $2 million each year for
fiscal years 2014 and 2015, and $1.96 million in fiscal year 2016.
Financial Statement Audits
MAAMC engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2013, 2014, and 2015. In
the related audit reports, the firm stated that MAAMC’s financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of MAAMC and
the respective changes in its net assets and its cash flows for the aforementioned
years in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 19, 2013. We determined that
MAAMC satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining two
findings are repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Endowment Fund
Finding 1
The Maryland African American Museum Corporation (MAAMC) did not
comply with its endowment fund investment policy with respect to oversight
of investments and conflict of interest disclosure requirements from its
financial manager.
Analysis
MAAMC did not comply with certain provisions of its endowment fund
investment policy.
 MAAMC could not provide documentation that the Finance and Audit
Committee (FAC) of its Board of Directors performed certain functions
designed to help it monitor and direct its endowment investments. MAAMC’s
endowment fund investment policy requires the FAC to obtain monthly reports
on investment performance and meet with its professional financial manager at
least once a year. However, MAAMC was unable to provide documentation
from its FAC meetings as evidence that the FAC had met with the financial
manager, reviewed the required reports, and evaluated investment performance
during our audit period. For example, 40 to 60 percent of the endowment
investments should be in equity investments according to its policy. However,
our review of the investment statements as of August 31, 2016 disclosed that
equity investments accounted for 69 percent of total endowment fund
investments.
 MAAMC did not receive conflict of interest statements from its current
financial manager during our audit period. The investment policy requires the
financial manager to certify, at least annually, that neither the firm nor any of
its partners, members, or employees has any relationship with MAAMC or its
directors that could appear to impair either the good faith or judgment of the
firm to act in the best interests of MAAMC with respect to MAAMC’s
accounts or the good faith judgment of MAAMC with respect to the
investments and choice of its managers. After we brought this to MAAMC’s
attention, it received the required conflict of interest statement from its
financial manager, dated September 16, 2016.
According to the investment policy, the overall financial objectives of the
endowment is to provide income for MAAMC’s current and future operations and
6

--- Page 9 ---
to increase the value of the endowment. Adherence to the policy would help
ensure that these objectives are met. According to statements from the financial
manager, endowment fund investments totaled $7.3 million as of August 31,
2016. Similar conditions were commented upon in our two preceding audit
reports.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MAAMC
a. ensure that the FAC properly monitors and directs investments in
accordance with its investment policy and retains documentation to
support these efforts (repeat); and
b. obtain the required conflict of interest documentation from financial
managers and properly address any conflicts (repeat).
Purchases
Finding 2
MAAMC did not always comply with its written procurement policy
regarding obtaining written proposals and obtaining management approvals.
Analysis
MAAMC did not always comply with its written procurement policy. While
MAAMC is exempt from following State procurement regulations, it has adopted
a procurement policy that is designed, in part, to ensure that MAAMC’s Board of
Directors is apprised of significant procurements and can assist the Board in
exercising its oversight function. According to MAAMC’s records, disbursement
transmittals totaled approximately $10.4 million between fiscal years 2014 and
2016. Our review of procurements relating to 10 disbursements made during
fiscal year 2016 disclosed the following conditions with 7 procurements:
 MAAMC did not solicit at least two written proposals for four procurements,
each greater than $10,000, as required by its procurement policy.
Specifically, MAAMC only obtained one proposal for these procurements
and, consequently, MAAMC lacked assurance that the related contract
awards, which totaled $349,000, provided the State the most advantageous
prices for the related services. According to MAAMC’s records,
disbursements to these four vendors totaled $339,000 as of June 30, 2016.
The awards included, for example, a contract for security services for
$267,000, and exhibit preparation services totaling $30,000.
7

--- Page 10 ---
 Seven procurements totaling $488,000, each exceeding $10,000, did not have
documentation of the required approvals of both the Executive Director and
Chairman of the Board, and MAAMC had not established written contracts
for three of these procurements. Specifically, the Executive Director
approved only two of these procurements and the Chairman had not
approved any of the seven procurements. Payments to the three vendors
without contracts totaled $146,000 between fiscal years 2014 and 2016.
MAAMC’s procurement policy requires that procurements in excess of
$10,000 have a written contract that is approved by MAAMC’s Executive
Director and Chairman of the Board.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MAAMC comply with its procurement policy.
Specifically, we recommend that MAAMC
a. obtain at least two written proposals for all procurements greater than
$10,000 as required, and
b. ensure that procurements receive the appropriate documented approvals
and that written contracts are established in accordance with its policy.
Museum Collections of Art and Historical Artifacts
Finding 3
Adequate accountability and controls were not established over MAAMC’s
museum collections of art and historical artifacts.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not established over MAAMC’s museum collections of
art and historical artifacts. MAAMC did not maintain an independent control
record to help establish accountability over the museum collections and ensure
that all museum collection additions and removals are properly recorded.
According to MAAMC’s detail records, as of September 2016, MAAMC’s
collections included 9,243 items. Of this total, 5,460 (59 percent) had not been
assigned a value, and the remaining 3,783 items were valued at approximately
$1.6 million.
MAAMC advised us that items were generally only assigned a value when the
donor provided an appraisal, and that it lacked the funding necessary to have
every item in its collections appraised. Although it may not be cost beneficial to
appraise every item in its collections, we noted that MAAMC had not established
a policy to require that items with potentially significant value be identified and
8

--- Page 11 ---
assigned a value. The values could be determined through appraisal or other
means, such as fair market values of like items.
In addition, the employee who maintained the detail records of MAAMC’s
museum collections also had physical access to the museum collections and was
responsible for recording any needed adjustments to the records based on the
results of physical inventories conducted. The separation of these duties is
necessary to establish accountability over the museum collections.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of a control record and inadequate
separation of duties were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MAAMC
a. maintain a control record of its museum collections that is independent of
its detail records (repeat),
b. develop a policy to identify items in its collections with potentially
significant values and ensure that values are assigned to these items in its
records, and
c. ensure that employees who maintain the detail records do not have
physical access to the collections (repeat).
We advised MAAMC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland African American
Museum Corporation (MAAMC) for the period beginning March 12, 2013 and
ending September 5, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MAAMC’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included endowment investments, purchases and
disbursements, cash receipts, payroll, and museum collections inventories. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MAAMC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit. We also performed various data extracts of pertinent
information (such as expenditure data and museum collection inventory) from
MAAMC’s internal accounting records. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
10

--- Page 13 ---
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MAAMC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MAAMC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MAAMC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MAAMC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MAAMC regarding the
results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
F.LEWISMUSEUM
ofMarylandAfricanAmerican
History&Culture
February 3, 2017
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: Responses to the Audit Report Draft Dated January 2017
for Maryland African American Museum Corporation (MMMC)
Dear Mr. Barnickel,
Enclosed please find the MMMC’s responses to Legislative Audit Report dated January 2017.
If you have any questions, do not hesitate to call me or the Director of Finance & Administration,
Alexis Davis, at 443-263-1800.
Sincerely,
Wanda Draper
Executive Director
Enclosure
Cc: Beverly A. Cooper, Chair, Board of Directors, MMMC
tel 443 263 i8oo
fax 410 333 1138 wwwRFLewisMuseumorg

--- Page 15 ---
Maryland African American Museum Corporation
Audit Responses
February 3, 2017
Finding Number 1a
We agree with the recommendation. Due to board attrition, the Finance and Audit Committee
(FAC) did not have regular meetings with minutes during the period under audit. In May 2016,a
new member joined the Board of MAAMC and became Chair of the FAC. At that time, both the
Executive Director (ED) and the Director of Finance & Administration (DFA) positions were
vacant, leaving the FAC without the staff support needed to function effectively. In October
2016, the new ED joined MAAMC, followed by the DFA in January 2017. The DFA and the
FAC Chair met in Jan. 2017 and scheduled FAC bi-monthly meeting dates for the remainder of
calendar 2017. Each meeting will include a review of the investments activity and earnings
since the previous FAC meeting. After each meeting, minutes will be prepared and filed in
accordance with board policy.
Finding Number 1b
We agree with the recommendation. MAAMC’s financial manager provided the required
conflict of interest statements, dated Sep. 16, 2016 and certified that there is no conflict of
interest between the financial manager and the Maryland African American Museum
Corporation Endowment fund. Annual conflict of interest statements will be requested by the
FAC annually not later than the FAC meeting immediately preceding the fiscal year end.
Finding Number 2
We agree with the recommendations. MAAMC has implemented purchasing procedures where
two written proposals are required for all procurements greater than $10,000. Contracts of
$10,000 and above will be evidenced in writing and executed by the signatures of the ED and
the Board Chair. In addition, all purchases will be approved in writing by the ED or in the ED’s
absence, by the DFA.
Finding Number 3a
We agree with the recommendation. The Collections Management Policy will be updated by
March 1, 2017 to include an inventory report process that records detail records of all collections
holdings. Under the new policy, the primary recorder will no longer have the authority to
accession objects into the collection. The generated report will be composed in an electronic
database with hard copies produced quarterly for backup purposes. In addition, an independent
control record of the entire collections holdings will be prepared semi-annually and be
maintained by the Finance Department.

--- Page 16 ---
Finding Number 3b
We agree with the recommendation. The updated Collection Management Policy (refer to
Finding 3a, above) will also be updated to provide a temporary, specified monetary value for all
objects and items entering the collection. When applicable, temporary valuations will derive from
research of fair market values of like objects. Any initial monetary valuation of more than
$25,000 will require an independent third party appraisal, and will carry an independent
insurance rider beyond the Museum’s general liability insurance. This process was
implemented December 1, 2016 for all new, incoming objects. In addition, the process was
extended to include the backlog of existing collections with an estimated completions date of
June 2018.
Finding Number 3c
We agree with the recommendation. Due to the limited size of the curatorial staff it is
impractical to completely segregate the responsibilities for detailed record keeping of collections
from custodial holdings. To compensate for this deficiency, the Director of the Curatorial
Division, or their designee, will schedule a semi-annual audit of a test sample of the collections
to be performed by the DFA, or their designee, to review, evaluate and make recommendations
to correct any discrepancies the audit discloses.

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor
Victoria L. Hohl-Mariani
Staff Auditor