Title: Maryland Health Insurance Plan
Date: 02/16/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d724560674504
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:24:38.455491
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Health Insurance Plan
February 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
The Maryland Health Insurance Plan (MHIP) is an independent unit of State
government. MHIP is governed by a Board of Directors, and operates certain
medical plans as well as the Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program
(SPDAP). MHIP’s goal is to provide access to affordable, comprehensive health
benefits to medically uninsurable residents of the State. The medical plans are
primarily specially funded by assessments on patient revenues of acute care
hospitals in the State and certain nonprofit health service plans, as well as by
premiums paid by certain MHIP enrollees. SPDAP provides subsidies to reduce
the out-of-pocket costs for low and moderate income Medicare recipients enrolled
in the Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage. SPDAP is specially funded by
a nonprofit health service plan entity (in lieu of its payment of premium taxes) as
provided for in State law. All special funds are non-lapsing and MHIP’s financial
activity is subject to an annual audit by an independent accounting firm.
According to the audited financial statements, MHIP’s fiscal year 2014 receipts
totaled $226 million and disbursements totaled $231 million.
Chapter 159, Laws of Maryland 2013, closed MHIP medical plans to new
enrollment as of December 31, 2013 as a result of the implementation of the
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE). MHIP, in consultation with
MHBE, continued coverage on its medical plans for existing enrollees to reduce
the impact on enrollees transitioning to the private market. Coverage for those
enrollees was terminated December 31, 2014. Claim payments for services
incurred prior to that date continued to be processed in calendar year 2015.
SPDAP had also been scheduled to terminate as of December 31, 2014; however,
Chapter 84, Laws of Maryland 2014, extended the end date for SPDAP to
December 31, 2016. MHIP anticipates that legislation will be introduced in the
2016 legislative session to transfer oversight of SPDAP to the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene and to terminate MHIP as a unit of State government
effective July 1, 2016.
Financial Statement Audits
MHIP engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its statutory
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2013, 2014, and
2015. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that MHIP’s financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, its admitted assets, liabilities,
and net assets as of June 30 and the results of its operations and cash flows for the
3

--- Page 6 ---
years then ended on the basis of accounting practices prescribed or permitted by
the Maryland Insurance Administration.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 25, 2012. We determined that MHIP
satisfactorily addressed those findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Administrative Service Organization
Background
The Maryland Health Insurance Plan (MHIP) contracted with an Administrative
Service Organization (ASO) to provide benefit management services, including
member enrollment, premium billing and collection, and the payment of provider
claims for its medical plans. Although the contract term ended December 31,
2014, the ASO is obligated to provide certain administrative services after that
date, including, for example, processing outstanding claims and addressing any
related appeals or grievances. At the time of our audit, these services were still
being performed. Because all medical plan coverage has terminated (as explained
on page 3 of this report), no subsequent contracts for benefit management services
have been executed. According to MHIP’s records, during fiscal year 2015, the
ASO paid medical claims totaling approximately $66.7 million.
Finding 1
Although MHIP attempted to obtain an independent review of the ASO’s
claims management system to ensure that the related internal controls were
designed and operating effectively, it was unable to obtain the cooperation of
the ASO.
Analysis
Although MHIP had attempted to obtain an independent review of the automated
claims management system at its own cost, it was unable to obtain the cooperation
of the ASO. The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued
guidance concerning examinations of a service organization’s automated systems.
Based on this guidance, service providers may contract for an independent review
of controls, resulting in an independent auditor’s report referred to as a service
organization controls (SOC) report. The purpose of such a review is to provide
4

--- Page 7 ---
assurances to all of the ASO’s customers, including MHIP, concerning the design
and effectiveness of internal controls related to its processing of transactions for
clients. Without such a review, the system’s operational integrity could not be
ensured and the system could be vulnerable to a variety of exposures, such as
third-party access to critical system data. In this regard, the system contains
demographic information for individuals, including name, address, and date of
birth, as well as sensitive personal health information, including medical
diagnosis codes and prescribed medications.
MHIP management advised us that it made several attempts to have the
recommended review performed, but the ASO has refused to obtain an
independent review of the claims management system on its own or allow MHIP
to independently obtain such a review. Although the ASO is not contractually
obligated to obtain a review, certain critical transactions, including claim
payments, continue to be processed on the ASO’s system, and sensitive personal
information relating to MHIP enrollees remains with the ASO. Consequently, we
continue to believe that MHIP must take steps to obtain the aforementioned
assurances regarding the ASO’s system, particularly regarding the security of
sensitive personal information. While the contract with the ASO requires the
return or destruction of confidential information within 60 days of the contract
termination, MHIP management advised us they do not have an estimate of when
the information will be recovered since the ASO is continuing to process
outstanding claims from calendar year 2014.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHIP identify the remaining risks pertaining to the
ASO’s claims management system and take the necessary action to address
those risks, including ensuring the security of sensitive personal information
maintained by the ASO.
Finding 2
MHIP did not ensure that all bank withdrawals made by the ASO for claims
paid were valid.
Analysis
MHIP did not ensure that all bank withdrawals made by the ASO as
reimbursement for claims paid were valid by reconciling these withdrawals to
claims payment documentation. MHIP maintained a joint bank account with the
ASO for processing claims payment activity. The ASO periodically invoiced
MHIP for estimated future claim payment needs, MHIP deposited its invoice
payments into the joint account, and the ASO periodically withdrew funds from
5

--- Page 8 ---
the account to cover the paid claims. As of September 30, 2015, the balance of
the account was approximately $224,000.
MHIP management advised us that it had requested from the ASO documentation
specifically supporting withdrawals made, but that such documentation has not
been provided. Although MHIP received monthly reports from the ASO of
claims paid, these reports normally differed from amounts withdrawn by the ASO
for the same periods, and MHIP did not investigate and resolve these differences.
For example, according to reports MHIP received from the ASO for fiscal year
2015, claims paid during the year totaled $66,718,026; however, withdrawals
made by the ASO for the same period totaled $68,980,031 — a difference of
$2,262,005. MHIP further advised that such variances were caused by timing
differences between when claims were paid and withdrawals made; however,
MHIP could not support this assertion. Because of the lack of documentation for
the individual withdrawals, MHIP will need to reconcile the aggregate of
withdrawals made and claims paid since the beginning of its contract with the
ASO to verify the propriety of all withdrawals made.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHIP ensure the propriety of bank withdrawals made
by the ASO by reconciling all withdrawals made by the ASO with claims
paid, and investigate and resolve any differences noted.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Health Insurance
Plan (MHIP) for the period beginning June 6, 2011 and ending January 12, 2015.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MHIP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
6

--- Page 9 ---
addressed by the audit included MHIP’s monitoring of the administrative service
organization contracted to administer MHIP’s medical plans, and contract
procurement and disbursements. We also determined the status of the findings
included in our preceding audit report.
MHIP engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its statutory
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2013, 2014, and
2015. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that MHIP’s financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, its admitted assets, liabilities
and net assets as of June 30 and the results of its operations and cash flows for the
years then ended on the basis of accounting practices prescribed or permitted by
the Maryland Insurance Administration. We have relied on certain work of the
independent accounting firm to provide audit coverage of enrollee insurance
premiums and provider claim payments.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MHIP’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MHIP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MHIP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MHIP that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MHIP’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MHIP regarding the results of
our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
MM HH II PP
AARRYYLLAANNDD EEAALLTTHH NNSSUURRAANNCCEE LLAANN
B oard of Directors
201 E. Baltimore Street
Suite 630
SCOTT AFZAL Baltimore, Maryland 21202
Minority Business Owner
410-576-2055
February 10, 2016
DAVID R. BRINKLEY
Secretary
Thomas Barnickel, Legislative Auditor
Department of Budget &
Management Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
BRADLEY HERRING, PH.D. Maryland General Assembly
Consumer Member
Dear Mr. Barnickel,
DEBORA KUCHKA-CRAIG
Hospital Member
First, I would like to thank the audit staff that performed our audit. They were
thorough, professional, courteous, and efficient in performing the audit. We at
GREGORY MARTINO the MHIP welcome constructive criticism and suggestions and findings that are
Insurance Carrier Member
in the best interest of the citizens of the State of Maryland, and that is the
purpose of an audit.
BETHANY OLDFIELD
Insurance Producer Member
Below are the responses to the OLA audit of the Maryland Health Insurance
Plan, Agency D79.
DONNA KINZER
Executive Director
Health Services Cost Review Please feel free to contact me to further discuss any issues.
Commission
Finding 1
VAN T. MITCHELL
Secretary Although MHIP attempted to obtain an independent review of the ASO’s
Department of Health and Mental
claims management system to ensure that the related internal controls were
Hygiene
designed and operating effectively, it was unable to obtain the cooperation
of the ASO.
ISAZETTA SPIKES
Consumer Member
Recommendation 1
BEN STEFFEN
Executive Director
Maryland Health Care We recommend that MHIP identify the remaining risks pertaining to the
Commission
ASO’s claims management system and take the necessary action to address
those risks, including ensuring the security of sensitive personal
information maintained by the ASO.
FINDING 1 – MHIP RESPONSE
1) As mentioned in OLA’s narrative, MHIP has made several attempts to obtain
the SOC 2 audit. Not mentioned in the OLA report is the extensive amount of
work, effort, and time that MHIP staff spent in pursuing the ASO to obtain

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Health Insurance Plan, February 10, 2016………..Page 2 of 3
the audit. The ASO eventually agreed to obtain the SOC2 audit after the first Maryland
Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) open enrollment period (October 15, 2013 – March
31, 2014). During the open enrollment period MHIP staff obtained Board approval to
issue an RFP, placed the RFP on e-Marketplace, reviewed and evaluated responses,
selected an auditing firm, received Board Approval for the awarding of the auditing
contract, and entered into a contract to conduct the audit. After the open enrollment
period ended, the ASO notified MHIP that they would not obtain the audit. MHIP
exercised the right to cancel the audit contract before any expenses were incurred.
MHIP is appreciative and fully concurs with OLA’s recommendation to identify the
remaining risks and take the necessary action to mitigate those risks. MHIP has been and
continues to be in communication with the ASO. The ASO’s initial response to MHIP
was that “systems are continually evaluated, reviewed and audited by both internal and
external auditors”. MHIP is currently researching the ASO’s data deletion and archival
policies to determine if these can be utilized to ensure the security of the sensitive
personal information maintained by the ASO.
Finding 2
MHIP did not ensure that all bank withdrawals made by the ASO for claims paid
were valid.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHIP ensure the propriety of bank withdrawals made by the
ASO by reconciling all withdrawals made by the ASO with claims paid, and
investigate and resolve any differences noted.
FINDING 2 – MHIP RESPONSE
2) MHIP attempted to get the ASO to provide the detail for the reimbursement withdraws
during and after the 2011 OLA audit. The ASO stated that the process would be too
cumbersome and could not be done. Because we were unable to get the detail, the ASO
added a monthly reconciliation in the ASO’s “Reporting Package”. The same
reconciliation is also in the monthly claims file that is provided by the ASO. It is on the
“Summary” tab. It is detailed below:
(+) Beginning Balance of the Unfunded MHIP Claims
(+) MHIP Claims paid by the ASO for the Month
(-) MHIP Payments to reimburse ASO
(=) Ending Balance of Unfunded MHIP Claims

--- Page 13 ---
Maryland Health Insurance Plan, February 10, 2016………..Page 3 of 3
To comply with OLA’s recommendation, subsequent to OLA’s audit MHIP Staff
completed a spreadsheet with data from the inception (July 2007) of the ASO’s contract
through and including December 2015. This spreadsheet performs the same calculation as
listed above. The results of the spreadsheet are that every month is equal to the “Ending
Balance of Unfunded MHIP claims” including, most importantly, the ending balance as
of December 31, 2015.
Thank you again!
Sincerely Yours,
Anthony Armiger, CPA, MBA
Executive Director
Maryland Health Insurance Plan
410-576-2057
Anthony.armiger@maryland.gov

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Senior Auditor
Mindy R. Garrett
Staff Auditor