Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Division of Workforce Development
Date: 01/09/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744a9
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:12:03.727875
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Workforce Development
January 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 9, 2009
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation– Division of
Workforce Development (DWD) for the period beginning August 1, 2005 and
ending June 30, 2008. DWD administers various employment and training
activities, including certain workforce programs, that are primarily funded by the
federal government.
Our audit did not disclose any findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by DWD during the
course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Workforce Development (DWD) is a separate budgetary unit
within the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation. DWD administers
various employment and training activities that are primarily funded by the
federal government. In particular, DWD has oversight responsibility for the
implementation and administration of workforce programs. DWD facilitates
employment opportunities through labor exchange and training services, and
through labor market analysis information. DWD’s headquarters is located in
Baltimore City, and it has 33 local offices throughout the State. According to
DWD’s records, during fiscal year 2008, DWD’s expenditures totaled
approximately $49.9 million.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of DWD’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to DWD. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) –
Division of Workforce Development (DWD) for the period beginning August 1,
2005 and ending June 30, 2008. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DWD’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
3

--- Page 6 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of DWD’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to DWD
by DLLR – Office of the Secretary. These support services, (such as, payroll,
purchasing, and maintenance of accounting records) are included within the scope
of our audits of the Office of the Secretary.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of DWD’s compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including DWD.
DWD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Amando J. Virata, CPA
Senior Auditor
Sandra C. Medeiros
Staff Auditor