Title: Department of the Environment
Date: 11/21/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d7245606743ea
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:40:21.417500
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of the Environment
January 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Financial Statement Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Lead Poisoning Prevention Program
* Finding 1 – Procedures to Ensure Properties Were Registered and Fees Paid 9
Were Not Sufficient
Finding 2 – MDE Did Not Have a Process to Ensure That Owners With 11
Affected Properties Had a Required Inspection Certificate
Bay Restoration Fund – Septic System Program
Finding 3 – Local Jurisdictions Were Not Required to Submit Critical 13
Documentation and Certain Monitoring Processes Were Insufficient
Finding 4 – MDE Had Not Performed Documented Verifications to Ensure 14
That All Annual Operations and Maintenance Reports Were Submitted
Inspections
 Finding 5 – Inspections of Certain Construction Sites Were Not Being 16
Performed as Required
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Monitoring, Access, and Update Controls over Certain Databases 17
Were Not Sufficient
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE)
January 2015
 Adequate procedures were not established over the Lead Poisoning
Prevention Program to monitor properties affected with lead paint and to
collect related revenues. MDE did not use available reports to help
identify all owners who had failed to renew their prior year registrations
and follow-up actions, such as sending notices and assessing penalties on
property owners failing to renew, were not sufficient. According to
MDE’s records, there were 94,735 rental dwelling units in registered
properties as of June 30, 2013 and related collections for registration and
renewal fee revenue totaled approximately $2.8 million for fiscal year
2013 (Finding 1).
MDE should formalize recommended procedures over the Lead Poisoning
Prevention Program, including identifying and pursuing property owners who
fail to register affected lead paint properties and pay the annual registration
fee.
 MDE did not establish a process to ensure that registered rental
properties affected by lead paint had an inspection certificate, as required
by State regulations. MDE did not compare registration records to
certification records to ensure that owners with registered properties also
had the required inspection certificate. Our comparison of these records
disclosed 9,967 owners with one or more properties registered that did
not have a corresponding inspection certificate on file (Finding 2).
MDE should develop and implement procedures to identify owners without
the required inspection certificates and take appropriate action.
 Procedures over the Bay Restoration Fund’s Septic System Program
were not sufficient to ensure that local jurisdictions were complying with
Program requirements and guidelines. For example, critical
documentation relating to septic installations was not required to be
submitted by the local jurisdictions as part of their reimbursement
requests. In addition, MDE did not always obtain adequate bid
documentation from the local jurisdictions (Finding 3).
MDE should take the recommended actions to ensure that local jurisdictions
are complying with Program requirements and guidelines.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 MDE did not perform documented verifications to ensure that all annual
operation and maintenance reports were received on septic system
installations and did not follow up with service providers who failed to
submit required reports. Bay Restoration Funding (BRF) requirements
mandate that a five-year operation and maintenance service be
performed for septic installations. We noted that, for 528 of the 653 BRF
funded septic installations in fiscal year 2012, MDE did not indicate
receipt of the operation and maintenance report in its database (Finding
4).
MDE should ensure that its database is accurately and timely maintained by
recording and retaining annual operation and maintenance reports and should
establish a documented process to follow up with service providers who do
not submit required reports.
 Inspections of certain construction sites were not always performed as
required by State regulations designed to lessen the impact of sediment
leaving the sites and to prevent erosion, pollution, and local flooding
(Finding 5).
MDE should take action to comply with regulations regarding site inspections.
 Several security and control deficiencies were noted with regard to
MDE’s comprehensive data management system (TEMPO) and the
Public and Private Drinking Water Information System (PPDW). For
example, there was no documentation supporting the review of security
reports, and certain database users had unnecessary access to certain
powerful functions (Finding 6).
MDE should take the recommended actions to improve information systems
security and control.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) was created to protect and
restore the quality of the State’s land, air, and water resources, and to safeguard
the public from health risks associated with pollution. MDE’s duties and
responsibilities include enforcing applicable laws and regulations, conducting
long-term planning and research, and assisting industries and communities in their
efforts to handle pollution, waste disposal, and emergency spills of waste or oil.
MDE consists of the following units:
 Office of the Secretary (including the Maryland Water Quality Financing
Administration)
 Operational Services Administration
 Water Management Administration
 Science Services Administration
 Land Management Administration
 Air and Radiation Management Administration
 Coordinating Offices
The Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration administers the Water
Quality and Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund
Wastewater Treatment and Septic System grants programs.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2013, MDE’s operating and
capital expenditures totaled approximately $464.7 million. These expenditures
were funded by general funds totaling approximately $32.4 million, special funds
totaling approximately $340.7 million, federal funds totaling approximately $78
million, and reimbursable funds totaling approximately $13.6 million. MDE’s
capital expenditures primarily related to its Water Quality and Drinking Water
Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund; these capital expenditures
totaled approximately $236.5 million and $109.7 million, respectively.
Financial Statement Audits
MDE engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the Maryland
Water Quality Financing Administration’s financial statements for the Water
Quality and Drinking Water Revolving Loan Funds and the Bay Restoration Fund
for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011, 2012, and 2013. In the related audit
reports, the firm stated that the Administration’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Administration and its
changes in financial position and its cash flows for the years then ended in
7

--- Page 10 ---
accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States
of America. According to the financial statements, as of June 30, 2013, the
Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration’s net position totaled
approximately $1.3 billion.
The Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration provides a combination of
federal and State funds for low-interest loans to local jurisdictions and private
entities throughout the State for drinking water and water quality capital projects.
These projects include upgrades and expansions to wastewater treatment plants,
and pump stations and creation of storm water management facilities.
Additionally, the Administration provides Bay Restoration Fund grants for
enhanced nutrient removal upgrades to existing wastewater facilities, for sewer
infrastructure rehabilitation, and for septic system upgrades.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of nine of the ten findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated November 21, 2011. We
determined that MDE had satisfactorily resolved seven findings. The remaining
two findings are repeated in this report.
We did not review the status of the prior finding relating to hazardous materials
facilities. Due to federal regulations developed by the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security (DHS), we were not permitted access to certain
documentation critical to the finding. Specifically, this documentation is
considered to be Chemical-terrorism Vulnerability Information (CVI) which
requires special training and approval to be obtained through DHS. We
confirmed with legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly that the
aforementioned information is considered CVI and, accordingly, we did not
assess the status of this prior finding.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Lead Poisoning Prevention Program
Background
The Lead Poisoning Prevention Program was established to oversee activities
designated to reduce the incidence of childhood lead poisoning and is funded
through various fees required by State law collected by the Maryland Department
of the Environment (MDE). State law generally requires that owners of affected
lead paint properties that were constructed before 1950 to register the properties
annually with MDE, meet specific lead paint reduction standards, and pay an
annual $30 fee for each rental dwelling unit.
MDE’s Online Lead Rental Registration system (OLRR) includes all registration
and renewal information, such as property and payment information, for each
owner. This information is recorded by the owners through online registrations
and by MDE through paper registrations. According to MDE’s records, there
were 94,735 rental dwelling units constructed before 1950 in registered properties
as of June 30, 2013. During fiscal year 2013, the related registration and renewal
fee revenue totaled approximately $2.8 million.
In our preceding two audit reports, we recommended that MDE investigate
property owners who fail to register affected lead paint properties and take
appropriate action to ensure the owners register the properties and pay any
registration fees owed to MDE. In response to our preceding report, MDE
initiated a mass mailing in September 2012 to approximately 15,900 owners who
had failed to renew for one or more years between renewal years 2005 and 2012
and, as a result, collected $504,000 in registration fees.
Chapter 387, Laws of Maryland, 2012, effective January 1, 2015, will extend the
aforementioned registration and renewal requirements to properties constructed
before 1978. According to the Department of Legislative Services’ fiscal note to
the originating legislation, approximately 330,000 rental units were built between
1950 and 1978.
Finding 1
Procedures to ensure properties were registered and related fees were paid
were not sufficient.
Analysis
MDE had not established sufficient procedures to ensure affected properties were
registered and related fees were paid. For example, MDE did not identify all
9

--- Page 12 ---
owners who failed to renew their property registrations or establish a
comprehensive follow-up process, including assessing penalties.
 MDE did not establish formal procedures to identify owners who failed to
annually renew their property registrations and pay the required registration
fees so that follow-up actions could be taken. The OLRR produces a pending
payment report of owners identified by MDE who have not renewed their
registrations. However, this report was not effectively used by MDE to help
identify all owners who had not registered. For example, the pending
payment report of owners with outstanding 2013 renewals identified 8,461
owners with one or more properties who had failed to file a registration
renewal for the 2013 renewal year (due December 31, 2012) as of December
26, 2013. However, we noted that 1,136 of the 8,461 pending payments had
not been recorded in MDE’s separate database used to track the status of each
owner who had not registered and the related follow-up actions; accordingly,
MDE had not identified these owners as not filing a renewal for the 2013
renewal. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding two audit
reports.
 MDE did not establish a consistent, comprehensive follow-up process for
owners who were identified and failed to renew property registrations during
the 2013 renewal year and the aforementioned September 2012 mass mailing.
For example, MDE did not always send out periodic follow-up letters. We
reviewed 16 of the owners that were being tracked in the database and noted
that, for 6 owners, there was no indication of any follow-up actions being
taken by MDE regarding the 2013 renewal. In addition, while MDE resolved
most of the cases involving the 15,900 owners who failed to renew for one or
more years, approximately 6,600 owners still remained outstanding as of
December 2013, many of which also had not paid the 2013 renewal. Our
review of 15 of the 6,600 open cases from the mass mailing disclosed that
there was no indication of any activity by MDE after the initial letter for 9
cases.
 MDE did not establish a policy specifying when to refer owners to the
enforcement unit and when to assess civil and administrative penalties. In
addition, referrals to the enforcement unit were not recorded and tracked.
According to State law, owners who fail to file and pay their annual renewals
by the due date are liable for a civil penalty up to triple the amount of the
renewal fee. State law further states that MDE shall impose an administrative
penalty of up to $20 per property per day for owners who fail to file a
registration renewal within 90 days of the due date. Although MDE’s legal
counsel (with concurrence from the General Assembly’s legal counsel) has
advised that State agencies generally have discretion in the assessment of
penalties in consideration with other enforcement activities, MDE did not
10

--- Page 13 ---
have a defined enforcement policy that considered and incorporated the
appropriate use of such penalties for registration matters.
We noted that MDE did not assess civil and/or administrative penalties to the
15,900 owners identified during the aforementioned mass mailing and to the
610 owners who, according to the tracking database, paid their registration fee
late for the 2013 renewal year. Based on our review of 30 of these owners, we
conservatively estimated that MDE could have assessed as much as $143,775
in civil fees and more than $1.7 million in administrative penalties.
According to MDE records, 44 owners were assessed civil penalties totaling
$22,000 in fiscal year 2013 and none were assessed administrative penalties.
According to our analysis of MDE’s tracking database as of December 2013, the
cases associated with 13,598 owners have closed since September 2012, resulting
in approximately $834,000 (including the aforementioned $504,000) in
registration fee collections, and there were 8,637 owners with open cases pending
further follow-up by MDE. Subsequent to our fieldwork, MDE began drafting its
formal procedures to identify and follow up on owners who do not register.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDE
a. formalize procedures to identify and pursue property owners who fail to
register affected lead properties and pay the annual registration fee,
including effectively using the pending payment reports (repeat);
b. investigate the aforementioned property owners to determine if any fees
are owed;
c. establish a policy to determine when to make referrals to enforcement
and to assess penalties; and
d. establish a process to track cases referred to enforcement.
Finding 2
MDE did not have a process to ensure that owners with affected properties
had a required inspection certificate.
Analysis
MDE did not have a process to ensure that owners who have registered properties
affected by lead paint had the required inspection certificate. Specifically, MDE
did not compare the registered properties in OLRR to its inspection certification
database to identify missing certificates or determine whether those without an
inspection certificate are required to obtain it.
11

--- Page 14 ---
We obtained a report from OLRR, as of February 11, 2014, that included all
active properties with a construction date prior to 1950. This report included
27,111 owners with one or more affected properties. We compared this report to
a report of certificates recorded in the certification database from calendar years
2008 through 2013. Our comparison disclosed that 9,967 owners with one or
more properties in the OLRR did not have any inspection certificates recorded in
the certification database. While not all registered properties require an owner to
have an inspection certificate (for example, unoccupied properties), MDE should
investigate these owners and take appropriate actions since the database does not
designate which properties require them.
State law requires that an owner of an affected property initially satisfy the risk
reduction standard established by passing the test for lead-contaminated dust. The
owner is also required to have the property inspected at each change in occupancy
to verify that the risk reduction standard has been satisfied. State regulations
require that registered rental properties affected by lead paint have an inspection
certificate. MDE records these inspections in its certification database. State law
further allows for penalties, not to exceed $500 per day, for violations of its
provisions and procedures.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDE
a. establish procedures to ensure that owners with affected properties have
an inspection certificate when required, and
b. investigate the aforementioned 9,967 owners without any recorded
inspection certificates and take appropriate action.
Bay Restoration Fund - Septic System Program
Background
The Bay Restoration Fund (BRF) enabling legislation, which became effective
July 1, 2004, established the Wastewater Treatment Program and the Septic
System Program to further Maryland’s efforts to reduce nitrogen and phosphorus
loading in the Chesapeake Bay. The Septic System Program is funded by an
annual fee on each property served by an onsite well and septic system, which is
$60 for most users. Funds collected are to be used to upgrade or replace existing
septic systems or to install new septic systems with the best available technology
(BAT) for nitrogen removal, which reduces the septic system’s nitrogen load in
half. According to State law, funding priorities for septic upgrades are first given
to failing septic systems in the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bay Critical Area
and then to failing septic systems that MDE determines are a threat to public
health or water quality. Maryland Regulations established under the
aforementioned law further require that, effective January 1, 2013, all new
12

--- Page 15 ---
residential and non-residential construction situated outside the Critical Area also
use the BAT.
Effective July 1, 2010, MDE delegated the awarding of septic system projects to
the 24 local jurisdictions (primarily local health departments) to process septic
grant applications, to determine eligibility, to make awards, and to ensure that
qualified septic systems were installed in accordance with Septic System Program
requirements and guidelines set forth by MDE. Funding for septic systems
(including new and replacement systems) is provided directly to the vendors by
the local jurisdictions and MDE subsequently reimburses the local jurisdictions
from the BRF.
According to MDE’s records, there are approximately 421,750 septic systems in
Maryland, of which approximately 51,500 are located within the Critical Area.
As of September 30, 2013, MDE has awarded Septic System Program funding to
upgrade 4,507 septic systems, of which 2,868 systems were located within the
Critical Area. According to the MDE’s BRF Annual Status Report dated January
2014, approximately $64.8 million in septic grants have been awarded since the
Program was established. As of June 30, 2013, according to the State’s records,
the balance in the BRF related to the Septic System Program was approximately
$8.8 million.
Finding 3
MDE’s guidelines and agreements with local jurisdictions for the Septic
System Program did not require critical documentation to be submitted and
certain monitoring processes were not sufficient.
Analysis
MDE’s guidelines and agreements with the 24 local jurisdictions did not require
critical documentation, such as inspection reports, to be submitted and certain
monitoring processes were not sufficient to ensure that local jurisdictions were
complying with program requirements. According to MDE records, payments to
the local jurisdictions for the Septic System Program totaled approximately $11.4
million for 866 septic installations during fiscal year 2013.
 Although State regulations require installed septic systems to be inspected,
MDE’s guidelines and agreements with the local jurisdictions did not require
them to submit the inspection reports with their funding reimbursement
requests. The purpose of the inspection is to ensure that the septic system
installation was proper, including system type and location. Our review of 30
large grants awarded in fiscal years 2012 and 2013 totaling approximately
$621,000 disclosed that, for 15 of the awards totaling $300,000, the inspection
reports were not included in the reimbursement requests, although we
13

--- Page 16 ---
subsequently obtained them directly from the local jurisdictions. For the
remaining 15 awards, the local jurisdictions submitted the inspection reports
even though they were not required. We were subsequently advised that,
effective October 2013, MDE began making site visits to local jurisdictions to
review documentation supporting reimbursement requests for septic
installations on a test basis; however, no results were available at that time.
We continue to believe that it is more effective for MDE to obtain inspection
reports at the time the local jurisdictions submit their reimbursement requests.
However, if MDE reviews this documentation during site visits, MDE should
ensure that a sufficient number of inspection reports is reviewed and that
evidence (such as, inspection reports) is retained to substantiate the reviews
performed and results.
 MDE did not always obtain adequate bid documentation, when required, from
local jurisdictions. Three bids must be obtained according to grant guidelines
and agreements when performing a competitive procurement. During the
aforementioned review of 30 grant awards, we determined that 11 of these
awards totaling approximately $388,000 required competitive procurement
because pre-approved vendors were not used. For 9 of these awards totaling
$312,400, MDE did not obtain all three bids as required or the bids received
lacked the vendors’ signatures, providing authenticity to the bid
documentation.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDE ensure the local jurisdictions are administering
the Septic System Program in accordance with established requirements and
guidelines. Specifically, we recommend that MDE
a. establish requirements to substantiate that the local jurisdictions are
obtaining inspection reports, when required; and
b. obtain bid documentation that substantiates that a valid, competitive
process was used.
Finding 4
MDE had not performed documented verifications to ensure that all annual
operation and maintenance reports were submitted by service providers.
Analysis
MDE had not performed documented verifications to ensure that annual operation
and maintenance (O&M) reports on BRF-funded septic system installations were
submitted by service providers. The internal tracking database for O&M reports
was incomplete and, therefore, could not be used to effectively track and identify
non-filers.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 Although MDE used an internal tracking database to record septic
installations, the receipt of O&M reports was often not recorded in the
database and no other process had been established to ensure that the service
providers submitted all required annual O&M reports. As of October 7, 2013,
the database indicated that, for 528 of the 653 septic systems installed in fiscal
year 2012, no O&M reports were recorded as being received prior to the one-
year anniversary of the installation as required and there was no evidence of
any follow-up. We found similar results in our analysis for fiscal year 2011
installations. For 9 selected septic installations from fiscal year 2011, no
O&M reports were recorded in the database as being received for any of the
22 required inspection dates as of October 7, 2013. After our inquiry, MDE
was able to obtain 19 of the 22 O&M reports.
 In instances in which O&M inspection dates had been recorded in the tracking
database, MDE did not always retain the related reports and ensure the dates
were accurately recorded. We requested 35 O&M reports to support
inspection dates recorded in the database relating to 16 septic installations that
occurred during the period from August 2009 through August 2012. MDE
was unable to provide 20 of the O&M reports.
State regulations generally require that a certified service provider report on the
inspection, operation, and maintenance of septic systems to MDE on an annual
basis prior to the yearly anniversary from the date of installation. The cost of the
O&M reports for the first five years of service is included on the initial septic
installation purchase price, as required by MDE. This fee varies depending on the
size and type of septic system installed; based on our review of 21 invoices for
septic installation, the O&M fee ranged from $900 to $2,500 for the five-year
period. State regulations require that installed septic systems be inspected
annually to ensure that systems are operating effectively and efficiently to reduce
nitrogen loads. According to MDE’s records, during fiscal year 2013, MDE
provided approximately $11.4 million for 866 septic installations.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDE
a. ensure that the database is accurately and timely maintained by
recording all O&M reports in the database and retaining the supporting
reports, and
b. establish a documented process to follow up with service providers who
do not submit required reports on a timely basis.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Inspections
Finding 5
Inspections of certain construction sites were not being performed on
average of once every two weeks, as required by State regulations.
Analysis
Inspections of certain construction sites were not performed in accordance with
State regulations. Specifically, State regulations require that construction activity
that disturbs more than 5,000 square feet of land or that results in more than 100
cubic yards of earth movement must have an MDE approved erosion/sediment
control plan before construction begins. The purpose of these plans is to lessen
the impact of sediment leaving construction sites and to prevent stream channel
erosion, pollution, and local flooding. For every active erosion and sediment
control plan, State regulations also require that MDE perform on-site inspections
for compliance with these regulations on average of once every two weeks.
According to MDE records, there were 1,774 on-site inspections performed
during fiscal year 2013, resulting in 50 violations deemed significant; however, as
of June 30, 2013, there were 13,440 active plans MDE was responsible for
inspecting. We determined, based on a review of MDE’s detailed records, that
the records of approvals and inspections performed were reliable for our purposes.
We were advised by MDE management that these inspections should be frequent
because of the continuously evolving land conditions of active construction sites.
However, MDE management also advised us that it does not have a sufficient
number of inspectors to meet the inspection requirements and estimates that it
would take an additional 47 inspectors to inspect each site just once a year. As a
result, MDE stated that it prioritizes on-site inspections based on citizen
complaints and the size of the construction sites.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. MDE
responded to this recommendation that it would evaluate existing resources and
consider whether it is appropriate to propose changes to the regulatory
requirement. During the current audit, we were advised by management that
MDE did not attempt to request additional inspection positions because it did not
believe it would be approved. We were also advised that MDE did not pursue
modifying inspection regulations due to anticipated environmental community
concerns.
According to MDE’s records, during fiscal year 2013, approximately $812,000
was collected from administrative and civil penalties resulting from violations
found during inspections.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDE take action to comply with State regulations
regarding inspections of the aforementioned construction sites. If MDE
determines that the inspection requirement cannot be achieved with current
resources, MDE should either seek additional resources through the budget
process or pursue modifying the State regulations to include a risk-based
approach (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
MDE maintains an internal computer network with related servers and
workstations. Key network resources include MDE’s website, e-mail, Internet
connectivity, a firewall, and various significant applications.
MDE maintains a comprehensive data management system entitled Tools for
Environmental Management and Protection of Organizations (TEMPO), which
utilizes a unified approach to data collection and reporting. TEMPO encompasses
numerous business applications and their related data such as hazardous waste
and air quality monitoring and control. In addition, MDE operates other legacy
application database systems, such as the Public and Private Drinking Water
Information System (PPDW), which is used by the Water Management
Administration for permitting and monitoring the State’s public drinking water
supply and keeping data on drinking water sources and treatment plants.
Finding 6
Monitoring, access, and update controls over the TEMPO and PPDW
databases were not sufficient.
Analysis
Monitoring, access and update controls over the TEMPO and PPDW databases
were not sufficient.
 MDE personnel advised us that they reviewed the security reports for the
TEMPO and PPDW databases on a weekly basis; however, our review
disclosed that there was no documentation supporting these reviews.
Therefore, assurance was lacking that these reviews were performed. The
State of Maryland Department of Information Technology (DoIT) Information
Security Policy requires that information systems must generate audit records
for all security-relevant events and that review procedures be developed to
review these records for indications of unusual and suspicious activities and
report findings to appropriate officials.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 The TEMPO and PPDW databases were running database versions that were
no longer supported by the database vendor. For example, the version of the
database run for the PPDW system has not been supported by the vendor since
December 31, 2006. As a result, the database vendor was no longer
monitoring or issuing patches for newly discovered security vulnerabilities for
the respective database versions in use. Therefore, the use of these out-of-date
databases may expose MDE to security vulnerabilities discovered since their
respective end-of-support dates, which could create security and control
issues.
 A default database role that was granted to all TEMPO database users had
unnecessary access to certain powerful programs which potentially enabled
these database users to execute functions which they would not normally be
allowed to execute. These functions could be used to circumvent security
controls. The database vendor recommends that this default role not be
granted access to these powerful programs.
 An insecure service was enabled on the TEMPO database that could allow
users to run commands as a privileged user. This service was intended only to
accept requests from the database server but, local users on the server hosting
this database, could execute commands using this service without
authentication.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDE
a. properly document all reviews of database security reports and retain
this documentation for audit verification purposes,
b. ensure that its databases are fully supported by the database vendors and
kept current for all critical security related updates,
c. limit the aforementioned default database role’s access to only those
programs which are required for database operations, and
d. delete this insecure service on the TEMPO database.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of the
Environment (MDE) for the period beginning July 1, 2010 and ending July 29, 2013.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDE’s financial transactions,
records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with applicable State laws,
rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related areas
of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the
audit included certain special funded programs (such as the Bay Restoration Fund
Septic System grants); federal fund recoveries; permitting, inspections, and violation
assessments; procurements and disbursements; critical information technology systems;
accounts receivable; and payroll. We also determined the status of nine of the ten
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of MDE’s
operations and tests of transactions. We also performed various data extracts of
pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management Information System (such
as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data).
The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from MDE’s permit, registration, and enforcement systems for the
purpose of testing transactions and system access. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in
this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDE engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the Maryland
Water Quality Financing Administration’s financial statements for the fiscal years
ended June 30, 2011, 2012, and 2013. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that
19

--- Page 22 ---
the Administration’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Administration and its changes in financial position and its
cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with the accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America. We performed certain steps to
satisfy ourselves as to the reliability of the reported results of the independent audits of
the Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration. Accordingly, we have relied on
the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit coverage of certain
aspects of the Maryland Water Quality Financing Administration’s operations (internal
controls and testing for the water quality and drinking water revolving loan fund
programs). Our audit procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to
obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance. Finally, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls or an assessment of MDE’s compliance with federal
laws and regulations pertaining to federal financial assistance programs because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDE.
MDE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal
control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance that
objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency
of operations including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may nevertheless
occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of internal control to
future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may change or compliance with
policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising its
legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address activities
we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect
MDE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes
findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules,
or regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to MDE that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
MDE’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDE regarding the results of our review
of its response.
20

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) Response to the
Draft Audit Report dated November 2014
Finding 1
Procedures to ensure properties were registered and related fees were paid were not
sufficient.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDE
a. formalize procedures to identify and pursue property owners who fail to register
affected lead properties and pay the annual registration fee, including effectively using
the pending payment reports (repeat);
b. investigate the aforementioned property owners to determine if any fees are owed;
c. establish a policy to determine when to make referrals to enforcement and to assess
penalties; and
d. establish a process to track cases referred to enforcement.
MDE’s Response:
MDE partially concurs with the finding, but does not believe it should be classified as a repeat.
In 2011, the Department agreed to expand the renewal mail out in an effort to address non-
compliant property owners. This process was delayed due to the implementation and migration
of property owner registration information into a new web-based database. The new database
went live during the 2012 lead rental property registration renewal period and included
identification of prior year non-compliant owners.
Additionally, MDE mailed 15,882 letters in September 2012 to property owners who had been
registered in one or more prior years and established procedures for review of all renewals and
registrations to determine data entry accuracy and compliance with fees and registration
requirements in prior years. To date, the Department has mailed 28,926 pieces of
correspondence in an effort to collect prior year fees and to update data in the registration
database. Of the 28,926 letters mailed, 14,942 owners’ cases have been resolved, and as of
November 24, 2013, MDE had collected $876,411 from this effort. Due to staff limitations and
the complexity of the 13,984 open (unresolved) owners’ cases, which would have required
individual site visits to verify occupancy, MDE decided not to pursue any further unresolved
prior cases and shift efforts to identifying possible new cases of non-compliance based on review
of the 2012 registration data.
MDE concurs with the recommendations.
a. MDE has implemented standard operating procedures (SOP) to pursue payment for
failure to renew annually.
b. MDE completed its investigation of aforementioned property owners and invoices have
been mailed if fees were due.
1

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) Response to the
Draft Audit Report dated November 2014
c. MDE has implemented SOPs that include a process to refer any owner of five (5) or more
properties who fails to register or renew for enforcement. The enforcement process
includes a full investigation of the owner and property and may result in an
administrative or civil enforcement action by the Office of the Attorney General.
d. MDE has established a process to track cases referred to enforcement. A database has
been developed to record referrals to enforcement and flag them on the registration
database.
Finding 2
MDE did not have a process to ensure that owners with affected properties had a required
inspection certificate.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDE
a. establish procedures to ensure that owners with affected properties have an inspection
certificate when required, and
b. investigate the aforementioned 9,967 owners without any recorded inspection
certificates and take appropriate action.
MDE’s Response:
MDE partially concurs with the finding because we do not have a process in place and our
databases are not designed to perform this comparison. Additionally, this finding is based on an
inaccurate comparison described below.
We suspect OLA analysis of the 9,967 registered property owners is based on “owner number”
not “property number”. The “owner number” is a unique number assigned by MDE and the
“property number” is assigned by State Department of Assessments and Taxation and is unique
to each property.
The problem with this comparison is that the certificate is issued to the original owner of the
property at the time certificate was issued. The certificate and the original owner number
transfers with the property, therefore not reflecting the new owner number. The original owner
number stays with the certificate for the life of the certificate with all property transfers.1
1Auditor’s Comment: In its response, MDE suggested our comparison of property owners in OLRR with
certificates recorded in the certification database should have been based on “property number,” rather than “owner
number,” because the certificates are associated with the property. We evaluated this assertion and concluded that
performing the comparison using either “property number” or “owner number” supports the same conclusion that a
large number of properties lack inspection certificates. As of December 16, 2014, a comparison using “property
number” identified 7,429 owners relating to 9,229 properties that did not have certificates recorded in the
certification database. We provided our results to MDE for investigation purposes.
2

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) Response to the
Draft Audit Report dated November 2014
MDE partially concurs with the recommendations.
a. MDE is currently developing requirements for a new certificate database that will link
the certificate database to registration database and compare certificates to
registrations. This project is contingent upon the anticipated receipt of new fees related
to the new pre-1978 registration requirement and funding to support needed Information
Technology resources.
Until the new certificate database is created, MDE will commit to reviewing 10
registrations/renewals monthly to determine if valid certificates have been issued.
Properties will be referred for enforcement if there is no valid certificate on file.
b. OLA did not provide the list of 9,967 owners to MDE. The Department was provided with
a list of 1,250 owners for review, is reviewing the list that was provided and will take
appropriate action as recommended.2
Finding 3
MDE’s guidelines and agreements with local jurisdictions for the Septic System Program
did not require critical documentation to be submitted and certain monitoring processes
were not sufficient.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDE ensure the local jurisdictions are administering the Septic
System Program in accordance with established requirements and guidelines. Specifically,
we recommend that MDE
a. establish requirements to substantiate that the local jurisdictions are obtaining
inspection reports, when required; and
b. obtain bid documentation that substantiates that a valid, competitive process was used.
MDE’s Response:
MDE concurs with the finding.
MDE concurs with the recommendations.
a. Starting with the FY 2013 BAT grants, MDE established procedures to review
documentation of selected BRF septic grant applications, primarily from local health
departments, to verify that income thresholds were met and BAT installations/inspection
reports were on file. In addition, local grant recipients certify that the installed BAT has
been inspected by their staff when requesting payments from MDE. Further, MDE
2Auditor’s Comment: We recently provided MDE with the complete listing.
3

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) Response to the
Draft Audit Report dated November 2014
technical field staff also inspect 10% of the BAT installations that occur each year. MDE
views the above practices as sufficient and intends to continue reviewing income tax and
other income documentation on a selected basis.
b. There are very few cases in which bids from “outside contractors” (those not obtained
through the MDE procurement process) are used for the installation of septic systems.
When outside bids from outside contractors are necessary, MDE will ensure that local
jurisdictions follow the MDE competitive procurement procedures and the supporting bid
documentation submitted contains the appropriate signatures.
Finding 4
MDE had not performed documented verifications to ensure that all annual operation and
maintenance reports were submitted by service providers.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDE
a. ensure that the database is accurately and timely maintained by recording all O&M
reports in the database and retaining the supporting reports, and
b. establish a documented process to follow up with service providers who do not submit
required reports on a timely basis.
MDE’s Response:
MDE partially concurs with the finding based on the following:
The audit analysis indicates that the MDE’s “internal tracking database for O&M reports was
incomplete and therefore could not be used to effectively track and identify non-filers. The MDE
BAT database is not the only mechanism for tracking O&M inspections. Vendors have the option
of providing MDE with paper or email reports, or vendors can maintain their own O&M
database. A majority of O&M vendors maintain their own databases. MDE has secure access to
these databases and can verify all O&M visits.3
MDE does not agree that it is necessary to maintain paper copies of tens of thousands of paper
records entered into vendor databases. This would be an inefficient and unnecessary use of
storage space and paper. Rather, the Department intends to rely on O&M service history
documentation submitted to MDE by vendors and/or the O&M activity recorded in the vendor
databases by the service providers.
MDE concurs with the recommendations.
3Auditor’s Comment: In its response, MDE stated that, in addition to its internal tracking database, most vendors
maintain their own databases of O&M reports which MDE has access to for monitoring purposes. However, there
was no evidence that MDE was using these databases during the audit period.
4

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) Response to the
Draft Audit Report dated November 2014
a. MDE is developing a web-based database that will be the sole database used to track all
BAT installations and all O&M activities. When MDE’s web-based database goes live in
June 2015, all service providers performing O&M will be required to enter data directly
into this system. The new database will be programmed to produce regular reports on
O&M activities and to automatically generate letters to property owners and vendors
when required O&M is not performed.
b. MDE is finalizing a written standard operating procedure (SOP) to formalize the process
for following up with service providers who do not submit required reports on a timely
basis. The SOP will be implemented by January 2015.
Finding 5
Inspections of certain construction sites were not being performed on average of once every
two weeks, as required by State regulations.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDE take action to comply with State regulations regarding
inspections of the aforementioned construction sites. If MDE determines that the
inspection requirement cannot be achieved with current resources, MDE should either seek
additional resources through the budget process or pursue modifying the State regulations
to include a risk-based approach (repeat).
MDE’s Response:
MDE concurs with the finding.
Between FY 2011 and FY 2013, due to budget cuts approved by the legislature, MDE was
required to eliminate 41 budgeted, compliance related positions. MDE acknowledges that
inadequate MDE resources exist to inspect every active construction site for compliance with
erosion and sediment control plans in accordance with State regulations. For the reasons
discussed below, however, MDE has decided against modifying the regulation for the following
reasons.
The OLA analysis does not discuss the implications of new Departmental legislation that was
adopted in 2013 to provide further delegation authority for projects that require MDE inspection
under COMAR 26.17.01.90. Recognizing that new approaches to addressing site inspections for
facilities regulated directly by the Department were needed, as an alternative to revising the
regulation, the Department introduced legislation during the 2013 General Assembly Session
(House Bill 97) authorizing MDE to delegate responsibility for the review, approval, and
enforcement of erosion and sediment control and stormwater management for State and Federal
construction projects to the responsible agency, subject to MDE oversight.
5

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) Response to the
Draft Audit Report dated November 2014
This legislation was signed into law in April of 2013. Sections 4-105, 4-106 and 4-205 of the
Environment Article now provide the authority to delegate site inspection and plan approval
activities to other agencies and entities. As a result, MDE has entered into agreements with the
Maryland Department of Transportation to delegate inspections and plan approval for State
Highway and Transit Authority projects, and is working with several federal agencies on
potential delegation authority. MDE estimates that delegation of oversight responsibility for
State Highway Administration projects would address up to 50% of the current State and federal
projects in MDE’s annual project portfolio. 4
In addition, MDE has been actively working with local soil conservation districts in non-
delegated counties and municipalities to assume a greater inspection, enforcement and plan
review role for agriculturally-related site developments such as poultry farms, creameries,
wineries, commercial farm stands and equestrian centers. This effort is expected to reduce the
number of development projects in non-delegated jurisdictions that require MDE oversight.
MDE continues to work with the Department of Budget and Management to increase the number
of Environmental Compliance Specialists positions at MDE.
Finally, all construction projects that disturb more than 1 acre of land are required to obtain a
federal Clean Water Act Permit from MDE that mandates weekly erosion and sediment control
inspections by the projects’ contractors who are required to keep a logbook describing
inspections and provide the logbook for review by the MDE inspector. If the inspections and
logbook documentation are not provided, the contractor is subject to formal enforcement action
and significant penalties.
Finding 6
Monitoring, access, and update controls over the TEMPO and PPDW databases were not
sufficient.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDE
a. properly document all reviews of database security reports and retain this
documentation for audit verification purposes,
b. ensure that its databases are fully supported by the database vendors and kept current
for all critical security related updates,
c. limit the aforementioned default database role’s access to only those programs which
are required for database operations, and
d. delete this insecure service on the TEMPO database.
4Auditor’s Comment: MDE mentioned recent legislation in its response that authorizes MDE to delegate
construction site inspections to other agencies and entities. We were aware of the legislation; accordingly these
delegated construction sites were not included in the 13,440 active plans identified in our finding as being under
MDE’s inspection responsibilities.
6

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) Response to the
Draft Audit Report dated November 2014
MDE’s Response:
MDE concurs with the finding.
MDE has implemented recommendations A, C, and D. Recommendation B will be executed in
2015.
7

--- Page 31 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA
Christopher D. Jackson
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Daniel J. Caldwell
Jaime A. DeWitt, CPA
Samuel Hur
Michael A. Klausmeier
Calvin Matthews, Jr.
Staff Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditor