Title: Department of Disabilities
Date: 10/08/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743be
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:24:47.731336
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Disabilities
July 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Disabilities (DOD) is responsible for evaluating programs and
services for citizens with disabilities, and coordinating and supporting public and
private agencies serving persons with disabilities. According to the State’s
records, DOD’s expenditures were approximately $6.9 million during fiscal year
2014, which included approximately $2.0 million for grants and subsidies.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 5, 2012. We determined that DOD
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Attendant Care Program
Finding 1
DOD lacked controls to ensure that Attendant Care Program payments were
made only to eligible participants.
Analysis
Controls were not in place to ensure that Attendant Care Program (ACP)
payments were made only to eligible participants. We noted that the employee
responsible for submitting attendant service payment requests to the Executive
Department – Governor’s Finance Office for processing did not verify that
requests were only for eligible individuals. Specifically, the employee did not
ensure an eligibility determination checklist, signed by both an initial reviewer
and the ACP Program Manager, existed for the individuals for whom payments
were being requested. Consequently, improper payments could be made without
detection.
The ACP provides financial reimbursements to participants with severe chronic or
permanent physical disabilities who require attendant services. DOD determines
ACP eligibility based on specified criteria, such as the applicant’s disability
status, residency, and income. Program participants initially pay their attendants
for services then request reimbursement from DOD by submitting required
3

--- Page 6 ---
paperwork, including a certification of services provided and attendant
timesheets. According to DOD’s records, there were 182 ACP enrollees as of
February 2015, and ACP expenditures during fiscal year 2014 totaled
approximately $1.3 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DOD implement controls to ensure ACP payments are
made only to eligible participants. Specifically, we recommend that the
independent employee who submits payment requests confirm that payments
are processed only for eligible participants by sighting a properly prepared
and signed eligibility determination checklist.
Contracts
Finding 2
DOD did not monitor a case management contract to ensure services were
provided as required and payments were based on the contract terms.
Analysis
DOD did not monitor a case management services contract to ensure that required
services were provided and that payments were made according to the contract
terms. In this regard, DOD contracted with a vendor to provide comprehensive
case management services, including intervention and other individualized
services for up to 1,000 children receiving Supplemental Security Income and
their families. The vendor is required to provide staffing, as well as certain data
collection, maintenance, and reporting services. The vendor is paid for actual
expenses incurred, such as salaries, fringe benefits, and travel, not to exceed
specific rates and limits.
 DOD did not obtain and review supporting documentation from the vendor to
verify that appropriate case management services were being provided to
children and their families. Such services could include job development
plans, benefit assessments, and educational attainment plans. While DOD did
obtain progress reports on all activities, as required by the contract, these
progress reports were general in nature and were not specific to the children
served.
 DOD did not obtain and review supporting documentation, such as payroll
reports, to verify salaries, fringe benefits, and travel costs billed by the vendor.
As a result, DOD could not ensure the propriety of the invoices. Although the
contract terms did not require the vendor to provide such documentation with
4

--- Page 7 ---
the submitted invoices, the vendor was required by the contract to provide
DOD with access to all requested records. Based on payroll reports we
obtained directly from the vendor, our recalculation of 128 salary payments
totaling $189,000 from the vendor’s June and September 2014 invoices
disclosed 44 instances where the salary rates paid by the vendor and billed to
DOD exceeded the contract rates and/or included employee bonuses that were
not provided for in the contract. This resulted in overpayments totaling
approximately $8,000.
DOD contracted with this vendor for a base period of December 30, 2013 through
October 1, 2015 for approximately $5.5 million. The contract also included three
one-year renewal options totaling an additional $11.6 million. According to the
State’s records, as of January 4, 2015, payments on the contract totaled
approximately $1.5 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DOD
a. obtain and review documentation, on a test basis, to ensure individual
services were provided to children as required;
b. obtain and review documentation, such as payroll reports, to ensure
billed costs are supported and are consistent with the contract terms; and
c. review prior billings for potential overpayments and recover all
overpayments from the vendor, including those noted above.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Disabilities
(DOD) for the period beginning March 14, 2012 and ending January 4, 2015. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DOD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
5

--- Page 8 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included contracts, equipment, and the Attendant Care
Program. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DOD by the
Executive Department – Governor. These support services (for example,
processing of invoices and payroll, and maintenance of certain accounting records
and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the
Executive Department – Governor. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of DOD’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including DOD.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DOD’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DOD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
6

--- Page 9 ---
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DOD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DOD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DOD’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DOD regarding the results of our
review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation I – Attendant Care Program
We recommend that DOD implement controls to ensure ACP payments are made only to eligible
participants. Specifically, we recommend that the independent employee who submits payment
requests confirm that payments are processed only for eligible participants by sighting a properly
prepared and signed eligibility determination checklist.
MDOD’s current eligibility determination process includes an independent review and
determination of eligibility by two separate staff members. The first review and determination is
completed by ACP support staff. The second is conducted by the ACP Program Manager. Each
person completes the same steps independently. If the applicant is determined eligible through
this process, the ACP Program Manager adds the applicant to the Current Participant List. The
independent review and determination is documented in the applicant’s files in the form of an
ACP Applicant Eligibility Determination Checklist signed by both the initial Reviewer and the
ACP Program Manager.
MDOD acknowledges that an additional check to prevent unilateral approval of both participant
eligibility and payment reimbursement by the ACP Program Manager is not in place. Effective
July 1, 2015, we will initiate random participant file checks selected from the Processing
Spreadsheet, which encompasses every invoice, prior to payment and during each bi-weekly pay
period. The check will be performed by the independent employee who submits payment.
MDOD will document this process with a form signed by the independent employee at the time
the random file checks are completed.
Recommendation 2 – Contracts
We recommend that DOD:
A. Obtain and review adequate documentation, such as case notes, to ensure individual
services were provided to children as required.
MDOD concurs with the recommendation and is initiating steps to prevent recurrence. First,
MDOD will provide training to staff responsible for monitoring the contract to improve our
oversight of the provision of services under the contract. In addition, we will obtain case notes at
regular intervals to ensure that documentation of specific services provided to individuals by the
vendor is verified prior to payment. These steps will be initiated immediately and the review
process will remain in effect for the duration of the contract.
B. Obtain documentation, such as payroll reports, to ensure billed costs that support are
consistent with the contract terms.
MDOD concurs with the recommendation and is initiating steps to prevent recurrence. As
previously mentioned, MDOD will provide training to staff responsible for monitoring the
contract to improve our oversight of the provision of services under the contract. In addition, we
will obtain Labor Distribution Reports from the vendor at regular intervals to ensure that the rates
contained in the invoice are: 1) consistent with the rates paid for specific positions, and 2) that the
rate of pay matches the terms of the contract. These steps will be initiated immediately and the
review process will remain in effect for the duration of the contract.

--- Page 12 ---
Page 2
C. Review prior billings for potential overpayments and recover all overpayments from the
vendor, including those noted above.
MDOD concurs with the recommendation. We will initiate the review within the first three
months of FY16 and complete the review and recovery process prior to the close of FY16 on June
30, 2017.

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Senior Auditor