Title: Maryland Department of Aging
Date: 06/17/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674260
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:36:51.828632
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Aging
March 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT Of LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII, CPA
ExecutiveDirector LegislativeAuditor
March 9, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Maryland Department of
Aging (MDOA) for the period beginning May 14, 2013 and ending May 24, 2016.
MDOA is responsible for identifying the needs ofthe State’s elderly and for
ensuring that those needs are met through a comprehensive network ofaccessible
services at the local level. MDOA has designated 19 geographical regions within
the State and each region is served by a local Area Agency on Aging (AAA),
which is either a local government agency or a nonprofit organization. MDOA
provided State grants totaling $19.4 million to the AAAs during fiscal year 2016
for the delivery ofprogram services to older adults.
Our audit disclosed that MDOA lacked evidence to substantiate that certain
activities ofAAAs were properly monitored. MDOA’s annual financial reviews
ofAAAs were not adequately documented to provide assurance that State grant
funds were spent in accordance with grant awards. furthermore, programmatic
reviews for monitoring certain State care programs were not always performed, as
required, and there was a lack ofevidence that deficiencies noted during such
reviews were communicated to the applicable AAAs for corrective action.
Finally, MDOA did not ensure that administrative expenses incurred by AAAs
relating to Senior Care grant funds were within established limits.
301 West Preston Street• Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
MDOA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish
to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis audit by
MDOA.
Respectftilly submitted,
Thomas J. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Monitoring of the Local Area Agencies on Aging (AAA)
* Finding 1 – MDOA lacked a comprehensive policy and did not 5
adequately document annual financial reviews of AAAs it
conducted to ensure the appropriate use of State grant funds.
Finding 2 – MDOA did not conduct all required site visits of AAAs to 6
monitor certain senior care program activity, and there was a lack
of evidence that deficiencies noted during site visits conducted were
communicated to the applicable AAAs for corrective action.
* Finding 3 – MDOA did not ensure that administrative costs incurred by 8
AAAs for the Senior Care grant program were within required
spending limits.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) is responsible for providing
information and services to support older adults aging healthfully and safely in
their homes and communities. Under the guidance of the federal Older
Americans Act, MDOA has designated 19 local Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs)
within the State, based on geographical regions, to ensure that eligible Maryland
residents can easily access applicable information and services. Each regional
AAA is either a local government agency or a nonprofit organization. As
grantees of MDOA, these AAAs deliver direct services to support aging in place,
including nutrition support, chronic disease management, case management, and
elder abuse prevention, typically through State and federal grant programs.
According to the State’s records, MDOA expenditures totaled approximately
$58.1 million during fiscal year 2016, including approximately $19.4 million
related to State grants.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of six of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated July 1, 2014. We determined that
MDOA satisfactorily addressed four of these six findings. The remaining two
findings are repeated in this report. We did not follow up on a finding in our
preceding report pertaining to the Medicaid Home and Community-Based
Services Waiver for Older Adults Program because Program activity (renamed the
Medicaid Home and Community-Based Options Waiver Program) is now
performed by the State’s Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Monitoring of the Local Area Agencies on Aging
Background
The local Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs) operate in partnership with the
Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) to deliver program services to older
adults primarily through State and federal grant programs. MDOA awards grants
to the AAAs, which provide services through numerous programs, including the
State-funded Senior Assisted Living Group Home Subsidy program (SALGHS)
and the Senior Care program. SALGHS offers a subsidy to eligible seniors
(generally those aged 62 and older) to help offset the cost of assisted living
services. The Senior Care program offers services to eligible seniors (generally
those aged 65 and older) such as personal care, adult day care, home-delivered
meals, and medical transportation. MDOA’s AAA Monitoring and Assessment
Policy requires MDOA to perform annual performance and financial reviews
during site visits. These reviews focus on various programmatic aspects including
ensuring that grant funds are properly requested and spent in accordance with
grant requirements and for eligible purposes.
According to MDOA’s records, during fiscal year 2016, State grant expenditures
totaled approximately $19.4 million. Of these total expenditures, approximately
$3.0 million was for the SALGHS program, $7.2 million was for the Senior Care
program, and the remaining $9.2 million was for numerous smaller grant
programs. According to MDOA’s records, approximately 4,991 seniors received
services through the Senior Care and SALGHS programs during fiscal year 2016.
Finding 1
MDOA lacked a comprehensive policy and did not adequately document
annual financial reviews of AAAs it conducted to ensure the appropriate use
of State grant funds.
Analysis
Although MDOA conducted annual financial reviews of the AAAs to ensure that
State grant funds awarded were spent in accordance with the related award
documents and other applicable requirements, our test of the fiscal year 2015
reviews found that the reviews we tested were poorly documented and were not
approved by supervisory personnel. Furthermore, MDOA lacked a
comprehensive policy defining the scope and other critical elements of the
reviews.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our test of five financial reviews conducted by MDOA, relating to AAAs with
Senior Care and SALGHS expenditures totaling approximately $6.3 million
during fiscal year 2015, disclosed that MDOA lacked sufficient documentation
and supervisory approval to support work performed and conclusions reached for
all five reviews. For example, we noted only limited documentation of specific
expenditures tested (copies of invoices selected for testing), and of the attributes
tested and conclusions reached for each transaction. There was no detailed
documentation describing test objectives, scope, and conclusions, and the extent
to which AAA procedures were reviewed. In addition, none of the five reviews
had evidence of supervisory review and approval.
The inadequate documentation was caused, at least in part, by the lack of a
comprehensive financial review policy. MDOA’s AAA Monitoring and
Assessment Policy does not require that the work performed during the annual
financial reviews be subject to supervisory review and approval, nor does it
include specific procedures on how to conduct the financial reviews to ensure that
grant funds are properly requested and spent in accordance with grant
requirements and for eligible purposes. Similar conditions were commented upon
in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDOA
a. develop a comprehensive policy that clearly defines the objectives and
scope of its AAA annual financial reviews (repeat) and that requires
supervisory review and approval of work performed,
b. require that sufficient grant expenditures and source documents are
reviewed to provide assurance that grant funds were spent in accordance
with grant requirements and for eligible purposes (repeat), and
c. adequately document and properly review and approve work performed
and conclusions reached in accordance with the comprehensive policy
developed (repeat).
Finding 2
MDOA did not conduct all required site visits of AAAs to monitor SALGHS
and Senior Care program activity, and there was a lack of evidence that
deficiencies noted during site visits conducted were communicated to the
applicable AAAs for corrective action.
Analysis
Annual site visits to AAAs for monitoring SALGHS and Senior Care grant
program activity were not always conducted as required, and MDOA lacked
6

--- Page 9 ---
evidence that deficiencies noted during site visits that were conducted were
communicated to the applicable AAAs for corrective action. Accordingly,
MDOA lacked assurance that AAAs consistently complied with State regulations
and MDOA policies and procedures, including taking corrective action when
deficiencies were noted.
Annual site visits are performed separately for each program and include a
determination that the AAAs have adequately verified and documented that
program participants have met all program eligibility requirements. All 19 AAAs
participate in the Senior Care program and 15 AAAs participate in the SALGHS
program; therefore, 34 site visits should be conducted for each year. We
reviewed 45 of the 68 required site visits for fiscal years 2014 and 2015 and, as of
August 2016, we determined that 16 required site visits had not been conducted,
including 7 relating to fiscal year 2014 and 9 relating to fiscal year 2015. We
noted that there were three AAAs for which site visits had not been conducted for
either year for one of the two programs.
Our review of the documentation for 29 site visits conducted disclosed that, for 18
site visits, MDOA noted one or more instance in which AAAs could not provide
documentation to support their verification of certain program participant
eligibility criteria; however, these results were not formally communicated to the
AAAs. For example, according to the results of one site visit for the SALGHS
program conducted in May 2015 in which 17 participants were tested, there was
no documentation that income had been verified by the AAA for 10 participants,
no documentation that assets had been verified for all 17 participants, and no
documentation that age had been verified for 3 participants. However, these
results had not been formally communicated to the AAA for corrective action.
The annual site visits are critical to ensure that AAAs that receive Senior Care and
SALGHS grant funding are operating effectively and according to applicable
program performance standards as stipulated in State regulations and MDOA’s
AAA Monitoring and Assessment Policy. Furthermore, MDOA’s Policy stipulates
that written reports highlighting areas in need of correction should be submitted to
applicable AAA management, and the AAA is to submit a written plan for
following up and carrying out recommended actions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDOA
a. conduct all site visit reviews as required and in a timely manner; and
b. ensure that the results and conclusions of its site visit reviews are
formally documented and communicated to the AAAs, as required, and
that appropriate corrective action is taken.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 3
MDOA did not ensure that administrative costs incurred by AAAs for the
Senior Care grant program were within the required spending limits.
Analysis
MDOA did not ensure that Senior Care grant expenditures incurred by AAAs
complied with MDOA policy, which provided that administrative costs may not
exceed 10 percent of the AAAs’ Senior Care budget. Specifically, MDOA did
not have a procedure in place to identify, investigate, and resolve instances in
which AAA administrative costs exceeded the allowable 10 percent of awarded
Senior Care grant funds. The policy is intended to maximize the funding for
actual community services rather than for administrative costs.
MDOA limited administrative costs budgeted during the initial Senior Care grant
application process; however, no subsequent reviews were performed to ensure
that the AAAs’ actual administrative expenditures were within permitted limits.
In this regard, while some AAAs separately reported actual administrative
expenditures, MDOA did not require that the annual expenditure reports
submitted provide this level of detail.
Our test of administrative costs for 10 AAAs with budgeted Senior Care grant
expenditures totaling $5.4 million for fiscal year 2015, disclosed that, for 3
AAAs, expenditure reports received by MDOA did not separately identify
administrative expenditures. These 3 AAAs had budgeted Senior Care grant
expenditures of $1,562,325 for fiscal year 2015. In addition, 2 AAAs tested
reported administrative expenditures in excess of the maximum allowed.
Specifically, one AAA with a grant budget of $173,907 had administrative costs
of $30,582, approximately $13,000 in excess of the permitted 10 percent
($17,391). The other AAA, with a grant budget of $990,139, had administrative
costs of $111,261, approximately $12,000 in excess of the permitted 10 percent
($99,014).
Without adequate reporting and review of actual administrative expenditures
made by AAAs, MDOA does not have assurance that amounts allocated for
community services were spent on these services and were not spent on local
administrative costs. MDOA’s failure to investigate over-expenditures by AAAs
on Senior Care administrative costs was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDOA ensure that AAAs do not expend Senior Care
program funds on administrative costs in excess of established limits.
Specifically, we recommend that MDOA
a. require that administrative expenditures be specifically reported in the
AAA annual expenditure reports;
b. monitor expenditure data submitted by the AAAs for compliance with its
established policy and implement a procedure to identify, investigate, and
resolve instances in which administrative costs exceed the established
limit, including for those AAAs noted above (repeat); and
c. document the results of its investigations (repeat).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Aging (MDOA) for the period beginning May 14, 2013 and ending May 24, 2016.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDOA’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included State grant programs, payroll, federal fund
reimbursements, and procurements and disbursements for operating expenditures.
We also determined the status of six of the seven findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDOA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDOA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MDOA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers
risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical
audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of
the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from
which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
10

--- Page 13 ---
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MDOA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDOA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to MDOA that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
MDOA’s response to our findings and recommendations in included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDOA regarding the
results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
LaiTy Hogan Rona E. Kramer
Governor Secretary
Boyd K. Rutherford
DEPARTMENT OF AGING
Lt. Governor
March 3, 2017
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislator Auditor
State ofMaryland
Office ofLegislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
DearMr. Barnickel,
Attachedpleasefind the MarylandDepartmentofAging’s response to the draft auditreport
on the Department for the period beginning May 14, 2013 and ending May 24, 2016.
I would like to thank the members of the Office ofLegislative Audits for their assistance
and professionalism during the review. Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have
anyquestions.
I
Enclosure
301 West Preston Street Suite 1007 Baltimore, Maryland 21201-2374
• •
Local: 410-767-1100 Toll Free: 1-800-243-3425 TTY users call viaMaryland Relay
• •
FAX: 410-333-7943 www.aging.maryland.gov
•

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 1 - Response
As to the period after January 2015, the Maryland Department of Aging (“Department” or
“MDoA”) immediately took significant action to address deficiencies in the auditing/Financial
Review monitoring of the Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs). MDoA has one auditor position
and the Department took appropriate personnel action to deal with employee performance issues.
Personnel rules prevented the Department from hiring another auditor or using a contracted audit
firm to continue Financial Reviews of the AAAs, while, at the same time, pursuing the correction
of said existing personnel performance issues.
The now vacant Senior Auditor position (again, MDoA’s only auditor position) is in recruitment.
In addition, the Department hired a Deputy Director of Operations and Fiscal Services with a
strong knowledge of audit processes, risk assessment and audit programs to supervise this
section.
The finding notes that the reviews lacked supervisory approval. Supervisors did in fact attend
the on-site financial audit process and did review the Financial Reviews, however, due to the
poor quality of the work and the supporting work papers, supervisors were unable to provide
approval.
It is important to note that other processes were established and performed, within the
Department, to mitigate the personnel deficiency. In the Spring of 2015, a new payment process
was implemented which included program managers’ review of the AAAs’ Requests For
Payment against supporting financial reports.
The Audit recommendations all relate to the Department’s auditor doing the job appropriately.
Individual responses are below:
a. The Department has already developed a very detailed Financial Review plan with
emphasis on the scope; risk assessment; sampling and testing of expenditures; the content
and quality of the work papers; the format for writing and communicating the findings
and review; and signoff and approval by supervisory management. This plan will be
used in future audits and will be modified as necessary for improvements.
b. The Department is ensuring that all grants receive the appropriate level of financial
screening during our payment process, including reviewing any grant specific
requirements or unique program directives.
c. The Department will perform all future Financial Reviews in conformance with the
Financial Review plan discussed in (a).

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 2 - Response
The Department has already completed all necessary required monitoring visits through FY
2016.
a. The Department concurs with this recommendation and is establishing revised
Monitoring and Reporting Policies, which will ensure all monitoring visits are completed
in a timely manner as specified in the policy. This will be implemented by July 1, 2017.
b. The Department concurs with this recommendation and, following actions outlined in (a),
will communicate monitoring report results and conclusions to MDoA supervisors and
the local AAA. The Policies will also include procedures to ensure deficiencies are
communicated and necessary corrective actions are addressed.
Finding 3 - Response
After January 2015, the Department immediately implemented improvements in the reporting of
administrative expenditures by AAAs in the Senior Care program. This included a revised
application tool and budget to confirm administrative expenditures were within the allowed
limits. To the recommendations provided, the Department provides the following response:
a. The Department concurs with this recommendation. The Department will require that
administrative expenditures be reported in AAA Senior Care annual expenditure reports
beginning with FY 2017 end-of-year reports.
b. The Department concurs with this recommendation. The Department will include, in the
Monitoring and Reporting Policies, directives for MDoA to review expenditure data to
identify and resolve instances when administrative costs exceed the established limit.
c. The Department concurs with this recommendation and, following actions outlined in (b),
will prepare and share investigation documents with MDoA supervisors and the local
AAA.

--- Page 17 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Evan E. Naugle
Senior Auditor
Christopher J. Fowler
Staff Auditor