Title: Comptroller of the Treasury - Office of the Comptroller - Bureau of Revenue Estimates
Date: 08/11/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d72456067438e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:21:25.688175
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of the Treasury
Office of the Comptroller
Bureau of Revenue Estimates
August 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
August 11, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Comptroller of the Treasury (COT) – Office of the
Comptroller (OOC) and the Bureau of Revenue Estimates (BRE) for the period
beginning March 1, 2006 and ending March 8, 2009. OOC aids the Comptroller
of the Treasury in the general supervision of State fiscal affairs, provides certain
support services (such as payroll processing) for units of COT and the Board of
Public Works, maintains accounting records applicable to the State’s general
obligation debt and administers the State’s capital grants program. BRE studies
and analyzes State revenue sources and periodically prepares estimates of State
revenues.
Our audit disclosed that OOC’s monitoring procedures and controls over capital
grants need improvement. For example, procedures could be strengthened by
improving the supervisory review of grant expenditures. We also noted that BRE
did not prepare and submit certain reports to the Governor and General Assembly
as required.
The Comptroller of the Treasury’s response to this audit is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
during the course of this audit by OOC and BRE.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Comptroller of the Treasury has general supervision responsibilities over the
fiscal affairs of the State and is aided in this task by the Office of the Comptroller
(OOC), which provides certain support services to all units of the Comptroller of
the Treasury and the Board of Public Works. OOC maintains the accounting
records applicable to the State’s general obligation debt and administers the
State’s capital grants program. The Bureau of Revenue Estimates (BRE) studies
and analyzes State revenue sources and periodically prepares estimates of State
revenues. According to the State’s accounting records, OOC’s and BRE’s
expenditures totaled approximately $9.5 million during fiscal year 2008.
Findings and Recommendations
Capital Grants
Finding 1
Procedures and controls over the disbursement of capital grants need
improvement.
Analysis
OOC’s procedures and controls over capital grant disbursements need
improvement. Specifically, one individual was generally responsible for
maintaining grant records, ensuring grantees met statutory requirements, receiving
and reviewing grantee invoices and supporting documentation, and initiating the
grant disbursements. Although a supervisor approved the grant disbursements,
the approvals generally relied on the documentation submitted by the
aforementioned employee and the grant accounting records maintained by this
employee and did not include a review of the related expenditure documentation
submitted by the grantees.
According to its records, during fiscal year 2008, OOC disbursed capital grants
totaling approximately $99 million to State, local, and private entities for various
capital projects. The lack of sufficient procedures and controls could result in
disbursements being issued improperly and not being readily detected.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OOC improve procedures and controls over grant
disbursements by ensuring that a review of the expenditure documentation
submitted by the grantees is an integral part of the supervisory approval
process.
Bureau of Revenue Estimates
Finding 2
The Bureau of Revenue Estimates (BRE) did not prepare and submit certain
reports to the Governor and General Assembly as required.
Analysis
BRE did not prepare and submit certain reports as required. Chapter 2 of the
Laws of Maryland, 2007 Special Session effective January 1, 2008, provided for
BRE to prepare and submit a tax incidence study. Specifically, on or before
December 2008, BRE was to report to the Governor, the President of the Senate
and the Speaker of the House on the burden of all major taxes imposed by the
State and how that burden is shared among tax payers of different income levels.
Nevertheless, as of June 19, 2009, BRE had not prepared or submitted a tax
burden report.
In addition, on or before January 1 of the second year after returns are received
for a tax year, Title 10 of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires BRE to submit a statistics of income report (a compilation of
information related to activity of various tax elements) to the Governor, the
President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House. However, the statistics of
income report for tax year 2007, which was due January 1, 2009, was not
submitted until June 11, 2009.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BRE prepare and submit the aforementioned tax
burden report and, in the future, ensure all reports are prepared and
submitted within the required time frames.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Comptroller of the Treasury – Office of the Comptroller and
the Bureau of Revenue Estimates (hereinafter collectively referred to as the
Office) for the period beginning March 1, 2006 and ending March 8, 2009. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate their
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Office’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit included a review of certain support services (such as processing of
invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided by the Office to the other units of the Comptroller of the Treasury, and
the Board of Public Works. Our audit did not include certain support services
provided to the Office by the Comptroller of the Treasury – Information
Technology Division related to the procurement and monitoring of information
technology equipment and services. These support services are included in the
scope of our audits of the Information Technology Division.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations are achieved.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report include a finding related to a condition we consider to be a significant
deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect
the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and
efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report
also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Comptroller of the Treasury’s response, on behalf of the Office, to our
finding and recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Comptroller of the Treasury regarding the
results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
• The vendor(s) outlined on the disbursement transmittal have been approved
for this grant project by the BPW or DGS and a Board item or DGS letter is
on file approving this vendor.
• The amount being paid to the vendor on this invoice plus the amount that
has been paid to this vendor on previous invoices do not exceed the total
amount approved for this vendor.
• The disbursement is being charged to the proper project in the grants
accounting system.
• Verify that all vouchers posted to the grants accounting system were posted
to the proper R*STARS account.
• Ensure that the amount of the grant and balance remaining in the grants
accounting system for a grant project is the same balance that remains in the
R*STARS for that same project.
A Capital Grant & Loan Supervisory Review form has been created and will be
used to document this periodic review. The form will be completed and maintained by
the supervisor and made available to the auditor upon request.
Finding #2
The Bureau of Revenue Estimates (BRE) did not prepare and submit certain reports
to the Governor and General Assembly as required
Both the tax incidence study and new corporate reporting requirements and study
were enacted during the 2007 special session and required significant personnel and IT
resources. The legislation requiring these studies did not provide for additional resources
in the Bureau of Revenue Estimates to fulfill these requirements. BRE did not have
sufficient staff to complete all of its current work requirements and these new reporting
requirements. The tax incidence study was identified as the lowest priority, largely as a
result of the fact that it would have been a study of the incidence of a tax structure that no
longer existed, and hence would be of limited analytical value.
All reporting requirements with respect to the statistics of income had been met
prior to the audit exit conference and we have determined that we can produce the required
incidence study with the assistance of an outside contractor, before the start of the next
legislative session. A small procurement contract has been issued to a contractor to
provide guidance on some analytical issues and we have undertaken some preliminary
work, and will provide a study of the incidence of the State's major taxes for tax year
2006/fiscal year 2007. An additional position has also been assigned to the Bureau of
Revenue Estimates from elsewhere in the agency to help meet the growing demands on
this office going forward.

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
LaTeasa R. Robertson
Julia M. Keefer
Staff Auditors