Title: Comptroller of Maryland - General Accounting Division
Date: 07/27/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d724560674428
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:48:34.371131
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
General Accounting Division
September 2024
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 25, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – General Accounting Division (GAD), for the period beginning
December 2, 2019 and ending June 30, 2023. GAD is primarily responsible for
maintaining the State’s accounting records, centrally processing vendor invoice
payments, and distributing checks prepared by the State Treasurer’s Office. GAD
also administers the State’s corporate purchasing card program and prepares the
State’s annual financial statements.
Our audit disclosed that GAD did not adequately monitor corporate purchasing
card activity, which totaled $281.3 million during fiscal year 2023. We also
found that GAD did not have a current and comprehensive listing of agencies that
were granted a waiver from submitting supporting documentation to GAD for
disbursements. For example, GAD’s record of waivers provided to us included
three waivers issued to an agency that ceased to exist in 1996. We further noted
that GAD did not have formal procedures to periodically determine if waivers it
had previously granted were still warranted.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We determined that GAD satisfactorily
addressed one of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
COM’s response to this audit, on behalf of GAD, is included as an appendix to
this report. We reviewed the response and noted agreement to our findings and
related recommendations, and while there are other aspects of COM’s response
which will require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require
the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
GAD. We also wish to acknowledge COM’s and GAD’s willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The General Accounting Division (GAD), which is a unit of the Comptroller of
Maryland (COM), is primarily responsible for maintaining the State’s accounting
records, centrally processing vendor invoice payments, and distributing checks
prepared by the State Treasurer’s Office. GAD also administers the State’s
corporate purchasing card program and prepares the State’s annual financial
statements. According to the State’s accounting records, GAD’s expenditures
totaled approximately $6.5 million during fiscal year 2023 (See Figure 1 below).
Figure 1
GAD Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 45 91.8%
Vacant 4 8.2%
Total 49
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $ 4,602,155 70.3%
Technical and Special Fees 173,301 2.6%
Operating Expenses 1,772,672 27.1%
Total $ 6,548,128
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Source
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 6,548,128 100.0%
Total $ 6,548,128
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit of the State’s Financial Statements
An independent accounting firm is engaged by COM for the purpose of
expressing an opinion on the State’s annual financial statements. In the related
audit reports for fiscal years ended June 30, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023, the firm
stated that the State’s financial statements presented fairly, in all material
respects, the respective financial position of the governmental activities, the
business-type activities, the aggregate discretely presented component units, each
major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of the State, and the
respective changes in financial position and, where applicable, cash flows thereof
for the years then ended, in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 9, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2,
we determined that GAD satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The other
finding is repeated in this report.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The General Accounting Division did not monitor
agency compliance with the Board of Public Works Not repeated
Finding 1
requirement that vendors with contracts in excess of
$200,000 be paid electronically.
GAD did not have sufficient policies and procedures
Repeated
Finding 2 for its review of Statewide corporate purchasing
(Current Finding 1)
card activity.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Corporate Purchasing Card Program
Finding 1
The General Accounting Division (GAD) did not adequately monitor agency
corporate purchasing card activity.
Analysis
GAD did not adequately monitor agency corporate purchasing card (CPC) activity
as required. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Policy
and Procedures Manual requires GAD to provide overall control of agencies
using a CPC. During fiscal year 2023, 83 agencies expended $281.3 million
under the State’s CPC program.
 GAD did not conduct on-site field visits or obtain agency self-audits to help
ensure agency compliance with the terms of the CPC Program. We were
advised by GAD management that its unwritten policy1 was to conduct field
visits of approximately 20 agencies each year, and that agencies that did not
receive a field visit in a particular year would be required to conduct a self-
audit. Our review disclosed that GAD had not conducted any field visits
between August 2021 and December 2022, during which CPC spending
totaled $364.8 million2. In addition, GAD did not request or obtain self-audits
from agencies during that period. GAD started conducting field visits again in
January 2023, but we noted that, as of August 2023, 52 agencies still had not
received a field visit or been required to submit a self-audit. These 52
agencies had fiscal year 2023 CPC spending of approximately $114 million.
 GAD did not conduct reviews of questionable purchases made by agencies as
required by the Manual. Our review disclosed that GAD had not conducted
any reviews of questionable purchases between August 20212 and May 2023.
Although GAD began reviewing questionable purchases again in May 2023
and identified 111 questionable transactions totaling $675,970, GAD had only
obtained invoices supporting the propriety of two of the transactions totaling
$5,600 as of August 2023.
1 In response to our inquiries, GAD established written policies in July 2023.
2 In response to the COVID-19 State of Emergency declared in March 2020, GAD suspended
certain operational procedures, such as on-site field visits. In addition, GAD did not send out
inquiries on questionable purchases to agencies during this time. GAD should have resumed
normal monitoring activities in August 2021.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 GAD did not ensure that all 83 agencies participating in the CPC program
submitted monthly compliance certifications as required by the Manual.
Monthly certifications document that the agency has reviewed and reconciled
cardholder statements. Our review noted that as of August 2023, 14 agencies
with fiscal year 2023 CPC spending totaling $60.9 million had not submitted
any monthly certifications during calendar year 2023.
The aforementioned GAD monitoring is important because the CPC program
streamlines procurement and accounts payable functions for small purchases by
eliminating required support documentation and online approval requirements. In
addition, the State credit cards are automatically paid so it is important to have
timely reviews to ensure the transactions are proper and supported.
A similar condition regarding the lack of formal procedures was commented upon
in our preceding audit report. In response to that report, GAD indicated that
specific procedures for field visits and questionable purchases would be
augmented.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that GAD
a. establish, and adhere to, formal policies and procedures, as appropriate,
for its review of Statewide CPC activity which include the criteria to be
used for identification and review of questionable transactions (repeat),
and the frequency of field visits and questionable purchase reviews;
b. require all agencies submit self-audits if they have not received a field
review, including those noted above; and
c. ensure all agencies submit required monthly compliance certifications,
including those noted above.
Vendor Payments
Finding 2
GAD did not have a current and comprehensive listing of agencies that were
granted an exemption (waiver) from submitting support for disbursements.
Analysis
GAD did not have a current and comprehensive listing of agencies that were
granted an exemption (waiver) from submitting support for disbursements, and
did not periodically determine if waivers granted were still warranted. State
regulations generally require agencies to submit detailed supporting
documentation (such as an invoice) for all disbursements, which GAD uses to
6

--- Page 9 ---
verify the payment is proper on a test basis. GAD may grant an agency a waiver
from this requirement with respect to certain specified agency payments. For
example, GAD could waive the requirement if the invoices would contain
confidential information, such as for payments related to a program subject to the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
 GAD did not maintain a current comprehensive listing of waivers and could
only provide us with a binder of waivers it had issued since 1980. Our review
of the binder identified waivers for approximately 67 programs across
multiple agencies that were authorized by GAD during the period between
1980 and 2011, including 60 established prior to 2000. The records were not
current or comprehensive. For example, we noted three waivers granted to the
Department of Personnel, an agency that has not been in existence since 1996.
Based on the nature of the exemptions, these waivers may now relate to the
Department of Budget and Management and the Maryland Department of
Labor, but GAD could not readily provide documentation of whether they
were still being used. Another waiver was issued to Crownsville Hospital
Center, which was closed for budget concerns in July 2004.
 GAD did not have formal procedures to periodically review the waivers to
determine whether they were still warranted and could not readily document
to what extent agencies were still using the waivers.
Subsequent to our inquiries, GAD stated that they had begun reaching out to
agencies in order to determine the current status of waivers granted. However,
GAD was only able to provide an email sent to one agency to justify continuance
of its waiver.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that GAD
a. establish a current and comprehensive listing of agencies granted a
waiver from the aforementioned State regulations, and
b. establish and adhere to formal policies to periodically review waivers
granted to ensure that they are still warranted.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – General Accounting Division (GAD) for the period beginning
December 2, 2019, and ending June 30, 2023. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine GAD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included GAD’s management of the corporate purchasing
card program, vendor payment processing, vendor table maintenance, and State
agency working funds. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain other support services provided to GAD by the
COM – Office of the Comptroller. These support services (such as processing of
invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included in the scope of our audit of the Office of the Comptroller. In addition,
our audit did not include certain support services provided to GAD by COM –
Central Payroll Bureau, these support services (payroll processing) are included
within the scope of our audits of COM – Central Payroll Bureau. Our audit also
did not include certain support services provided to GAD by the COM –
Information Technology Division (ITD) related to information technology
equipment and related services. These support services are included in the scope
of our audits of ITD.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 2, 2019 and ending June 30, 2023, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
8

--- Page 11 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of GAD’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and data from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing
Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
GAD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to GAD, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding that we consider to be a significant deficiency in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Office’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Additional findings
were also regarded as a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable
laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to
the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from COM, on behalf of GAD, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise COM regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 1
Listing of Most Recent Office of Legislative Audits
Fiscal Compliance Audits of Comptroller of Maryland Divisions
As of August 2024
Most Recent
Name of Audit Areas Covered
Report Date
Office of the Comptroller,  Capital grants monitoring
Bureau of Revenue  Procurement and disbursements
1 Estimates, and Field  Support services to other divisions of the Comptroller, 05/06/24
Enforcement Bureau such as processing invoices, maintenance of accounting
records, human resources, and related fiscal functions
 Investigations, collection of delinquent taxes, and other
taxpayer compliance activities related to individual
income taxes
 Audits and investigations, collection of delinquent
2 Compliance Division 05/03/24
taxes, and other taxpayer compliance activities related
to business taxes
 Identification, collection, and distribution of unclaimed
property
 Processing, evaluating, verifying, and recording tax
Revenue Administration data as reported by taxpayers and other parties
3 01/22/24
Division  Collection of tax receipts
 Distribution of tax refunds
 Management of the State payroll system
 Non-budgeted funds maintained for payroll deductions
4 Central Payroll Bureau  Critical information systems 10/05/23
 Support services to other divisions of the Comptroller
for processing payroll timekeeping records
 Procurement
 Equipment
Information Technology  Support services to other divisions of the Comptroller
5 09/07/21
Division (Fiscal Operations) for monitoring information technology related services
and maintaining information technology equipment
inventory records
Information Technology  Maintenance and monitoring of mainframe operating
6 Division – Annapolis Data system, various security functions, and critical 07/27/20
Center Operations databases
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
Brooke E. Lierman
Comptroller
Luther Dolcar
Director
General Accounting Division
September 20, 2024
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Enclosed is the Comptroller of Maryland’s response to your fiscal compliance audit report of
the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division for the period December 2, 2019 and
ending June 30, 2023.
We have carefully reviewed each finding and believe that our written response satisfies each
recommendation in the report. If any additional information is needed, please contact me at
LDolcar@marylandtaxes.gov or by phone at 410-260-7914.
The Comptroller appreciates your objective and fair appraisal of our operations and
associated recommendations made for improvement. We would also like to commend your audit
team for their professionalism during the audit and performing a thorough review of the General
Accounting Division.
___________________________ _9_/_2_0_/2_0__2_4_______
GAD Director Date
80 Calvert Street, Annapolis, Maryland 21401 410-260-7914 (MD) www.marylandtaxes.gov
Fax: 410-974-2309 Maryland Relay 711 TTY 410-260-7157 ldolcar@marylandtaxes.gov

--- Page 15 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
General Accounting Division
Agency Response Form
Corporate Purchasing Card Program
Finding 1
The General Accounting Division (GAD) did not adequately monitor agency
corporate purchasing card activity.
We recommend that GAD
a. establish, and adhere to, formal policies and procedures, as appropriate,
for its review of Statewide CPC activity which include the criteria to be
used for identification and review of questionable transactions (repeat),
and the frequency of field visits and questionable purchase reviews;
b. require all agencies submit self-audits if they have not received a field
review, including those noted above; and
c. ensure all agencies submit required monthly compliance certifications,
including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide In 2020 due to COVID GAD suspended the monitoring methods
additional comments as previously utilized and established some mitigating controls to monitor
deemed necessary. CPC. Due to staffing constraints the mitigating controls were in place
through December 2022. GAD resumed the pre-COVID monitoring
methods in January 2023.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2023
Please provide details of In December 2022 GAD updated the CPC policy and restarted Field
corrective action or Reviews January 2023. The policy requires 15-20 reviews per year. In
explain disagreement. 2023 GAD completed 20 field reviews and has scheduled 20 for 2024 of
which 15 were completed as of 9/12/2024.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2023
Please provide details of In December 2022 GAD updated the CPC policy and restarted Self-
corrective action or Audits January 2023. In calendar year 2023 28 agencies completed the
explain disagreement. 2023 self-audits, and 5 agencies completed them by 2/14/2024. The 20
agencies that received a field review are not required to complete self-
audits. As of 9/12/2024 GAD has received 43 self-audits.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 16 ---
Comptroller of Maryland
General Accounting Division
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/2024
Please provide details of GAD has a master list of all agencies which includes the due date
corrective action or and the date monthly certifications are received. In FY2025 GAD is
explain disagreement. building an automated collection and reporting tool for monthly
certifications.
Vendor Payments
Finding 2
GAD did not have a current and comprehensive listing of agencies that were
granted an exemption (waiver) from submitting support for disbursements.
We recommend that GAD
a. establish a current and comprehensive listing of agencies granted a
waiver from the aforementioned State regulations, and
b. establish and adhere to formal policies to periodically review waivers
granted to ensure that they are still warranted.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide GAD maintained a binder of all exemption (waiver) documents both
additional comments as current and expired.
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2024
Please provide details of GAD has scanned all exemption (waiver), indexed them and filed them
corrective action or in a current or archived folder.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2024
Please provide details of GAD has drafted a policy and will finalize it by September 30, 2024,
corrective action or which includes the periodic review of waivers.
explain disagreement.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditor
Anna M. Charocopos
Yuvaraj N. Sharma
Staff Auditors