Title: Office of the Secretary of State
Date: 10/03/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1acc9d7245606746a6
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:44:02.091546
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Secretary of State
June 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
June 1, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary of
State for the period beginning December 5, 2017 and ending November 15, 2021.
Under the Maryland Constitution and State statutes, the Office performs a variety
of duties including attesting to the Governor’s signature on all public papers,
registering and regulating charitable organizations, administering the Notary
Public laws, and compiling and publishing the State’s administrative regulations.
Our audit disclosed that the Office’s Charities and Legal Services Division did not
perform independent reviews to ensure that critical information received from
charitable organizations was accurately recorded in the State’s charities database
and that proper registration fees were paid. This reported information is used to
monitor each organization’s compliance with registration and reporting
requirements and appears in the charities database on the Office’s public website.
In addition, the Office did not investigate charitable organizations that failed to
comply with the annual registration requirements of State law, and did not
monitor late registration filing fees owed by these organizations and refer
accounts with delinquent unpaid fees to the State’s Central Collection Unit for
additional collection actions. According to the Office’s records, 5,755
organizations out of over 18,000 included on the database were delinquent as of
January 2022. We estimated that the outstanding fees owed by the
aforementioned 5,755 delinquent organizations could total up to $1.8 million.
Our audit also disclosed that the Office did not establish adequate controls over its

--- Page 4 ---
cash receipts to provide assurance that all collections were subsequently
deposited.
Finally, our audit also included a review to determine the status of the two
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated June 4, 2018. We
determined that the Office did not satisfactorily address those findings;
consequently, both findings are repeated in this report.
The Office’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and, while the Office
generally agrees with the recommendations in this report, we identified certain
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included an “auditor’s
comment” within the Office’s response to explain our position. Finally, there are
other aspects of the Office’s response which will require further clarification, but
we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee’s attention to resolve.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office. We also wish to acknowledge the Office’s willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 6
Charitable Organizations
* Finding 1 – The Office of the Secretary of State did not conduct 6
independent reviews since August 2020 to ensure that critical data
obtained from charitable organizations was accurately recorded, and
that these organizations submitted the proper amount of fees.
Finding 2 – The Office did not investigate charitable organizations that 7
failed to comply with the annual registration requirements of State law.
In addition, the Office did not monitor related fees incurred by delinquent
organizations and refer accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 3 – Adequate controls were not established over cash receipts. 9
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office of the Secretary of State attests to the Governor's signature on all
public papers and documents, and is the repository for the Governor's Executive
Orders. The Office's many other duties and responsibilities include the following:
 The Charities and Legal Services Division registers, regulates, and informs the
public about charitable organizations (including foundations affiliated with
State agencies) and professional solicitors; administers the Notary Public laws
and issues Notary Public commissions; prepares and processes extraditions
and requisitions issued by the Governor; and registers public offering
statements for condominiums and timeshares.
 The Division of State Documents compiles and publishes all of the State's
administrative regulations in the Maryland Register and the Code of Maryland
Regulations (COMAR).
 The Safety and Support Services Division administers the Maryland Safe at
Home Address Confidentiality Program, which is designed to protect victims
of domestic violence by providing them with an alternate mailing address to
prevent offenders from locating them.
According to the State's records, the Office’s expenditures during fiscal year 2021
totaled approximately $3.8 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated June 4, 2018. As disclosed in
Figure 1 below, we determined that these findings were not satisfactorily
addressed and are repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Procedures and controls were not sufficient to
ensure that the Office of the Secretary of State
Repeated
Finding 1 accurately recorded critical data reported by
(Current Finding 1)
charitable organizations, and that these
organizations remitted the proper fees.
Adequate controls were not established over Repeated
Finding 2
cash receipts. (Current Finding 3)
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Charitable Organizations
Finding 1
The Office of the Secretary of State did not conduct independent reviews
since August 2020 to ensure that critical data obtained from charitable
organizations was accurately recorded, and that these organizations
submitted the proper amount of fees.
Analysis
The Office’s Charities and Legal Services Division did not conduct independent
reviews to ensure that critical information (for example, annual contributions)
received from charitable organizations was accurately recorded in the Office’s
charitable organization database, and that the proper registration fees were paid.
In response to our prior report, the Office advised that it established an
independent review process. However, as of March 2022, no reviews had been
conducted since August 2020. Accurate recordation is critical since this
information is used to determine each organization’s registration status and
reporting requirements (including the amount of the annual registration fee), and
appears on the Office’s public website.
Our test of 10 judgmentally selected charitable organizations disclosed one
organization had not submitted a required review by an independent certified
public accountant even though the database reflected that this review was
received, and a second organization overpaid its annual registration fee (by a
small amount). Since a formal review of activity posted to the database was not
performed, the Office was not aware of these discrepancies prior to us bringing
them to its attention.
As of January 18, 2022, the Office’s records showed 18,372 active charitable
organizations. The Office recorded revenue from registration fees, renewal fees,
and fines from charitable organizations totaling approximately $2.5 million during
fiscal year 2021. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office perform independent verifications, at least on
a test basis, to ensure that information reported by charitable organizations is
accurately recorded in the Office’s database and that the proper fees are
collected from each organization (repeat).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 2
The Office did not investigate charitable organizations that failed to comply
with the annual registration requirements of State law. In addition, the
Office did not monitor related fees incurred by delinquent organizations and
refer accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit.
Analysis
The Office’s Charities and Legal Services Division (Division) did not investigate
charitable organizations that failed to comply with the annual registration
requirements of State law. In addition, the Division did not monitor the related
late registration fees incurred by these organizations, and refer delinquent
accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) as required.
State law requires organizations that solicit charitable contributions within
Maryland to submit an annual registration statement (which includes certain
financial information) to the Office within six months after the end of their fiscal
year. State law also requires an organization to pay an annual registration fee (up
to a maximum of $300) depending on the total contributions received for the
reporting year, and imposes a $25 fee for each month that an organization is late
in meeting the registration requirements. According to the Office’s records, 5,755
charitable organizations were delinquent as of January 18, 2022.
Delinquent Charitable Organizations Were Not Investigated
The Division did not investigate delinquent charitable organizations to determine
whether the organizations were still operating and whether to refer the
organizations for additional enforcement action. Rather, the Division’s efforts
were generally limited to sending periodic reminder notices to delinquent
organizations.
Based on our review of available tax filings made to the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) by 20 organizations that we judgmentally selected from the aforementioned
5,755 delinquent organizations, additional investigative efforts appeared to be
warranted. Specifically, we determined that 13 of the 20 organizations submitted
filings to the IRS since becoming delinquent in Maryland, including 9
organizations that reported receiving charitable contributions between $1,340 and
$17.5 million in their most recently available filings. For example, one
organization that had been delinquent since 2007 reported that it received $1.1
million in charitable contributions during its fiscal year 2020. While there could
be reasons why organizations would not be required to register in Maryland (such
as the reported contributions occurred in another State), we believe that the
Division should establish a process to determine the reason why the organizations
did not register. State law provides that the Office may refer organizations that do
7

--- Page 10 ---
not comply with annual registration requirements to the Office of the Attorney
General for civil enforcement (for example, issuing a cease and desist order) or
the appropriate State’s Attorney for prosecution.
Registration Fees Were Not Monitored and Referred to CCU
The Division did not monitor fees incurred by charitable organizations for late
registration statements and refer organizations with delinquent registration fees to
CCU as required. Although the Division periodically recorded late fees in its
charitable organizations database, it did not generate aging reports to help monitor
delinquent accounts and, consequently, could not readily determine the amounts
due from delinquent organizations. Furthermore, the Division advised that it had
not referred such accounts to CCU for further collection activity.
Based on our analysis of the Office’s records, we estimated that as of January 1,
2022, late fees due from the aforementioned 5,755 delinquent organizations could
total approximately $1.8 million, including $1 million owed by 524 organizations
that had been delinquent for between 5 to 21 years. The Office agreed that our
analysis methodology and estimate were reasonable.
CCU regulations generally require that three written demands for payment be
made at 30-day intervals after which the account is to be sent to CCU for
collection assistance. We consulted with CCU staff, who advised us that
charitable organizations were subject to these regulations. The failure to pursue
outstanding debts may decrease the likelihood of collecting the funds.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. investigate charitable organizations that fail to comply with the annual
registration requirements of State law to determine whether the
organizations are still operating and whether to refer the organizations
for additional enforcement action as permitted by law;
b. generate periodic aging reports to assist in monitoring the late
registration fees owed by charitable organizations; and
c. refer delinquent accounts to CCU for collection assistance, as required by
State regulations.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
Adequate controls were not established over cash receipts.
Analysis
The Office had not established adequate controls over its cash receipts.
According to State records, the Office deposited approximately $11.5 million
during the period from December 5, 2017 through October 31, 2021, including
$1.5 million in payments received via credit card or wire transfer (after reviewing
Office records, we were unable to readily determine the breakdown between these
two sources). These collections primarily included fees for charitable
organization registrations and notary commissions.
 One employee had excessive control over the Office’s collections.
Specifically, the employee who verified that recorded collections were
deposited was not independent, because this employee also prepared the
deposit and had access to the cash receipts. Furthermore, this employee had
the capability to modify the initial record of collections and void transactions
without subsequent independent approval. According to the Office’s records,
this employee processed 88 percent ($329,270) of the total voided transactions
during our audit period ($373,781). Our test of 15 transactions totaling
$62,978 voided by this employee disclosed 3 voids totaling $980 were not
adequately supported.
 The Office did not verify that all credit card receipts processed by its third-
party credit card vendor were properly credited to the State’s bank account.
Our test of 10 days of credit card transactions totaling $10,486 disclosed
discrepancies between the collections processed by the credit card vendor and
the amounts deposited in the State’s bank account for 3 days totaling $410.
For example, the credit card collections processed on one day ($1,861)
exceeded the total amount deposited in the State’s bank account by $328.
While the Office advised that these variances were likely due to delays
between when the transactions occurred and when they were posted, it could
not provide support for this explanation and we could not determine whether
the collections were ultimately deposited.
Under these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could occur without timely
detection. The Comptroller of Maryland's Accounting Procedures Manual
requires that the reconciliation of the initial record of all collections to the amount
deposited be performed by an employee independent of the cash receipts function.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Additionally, the Manual requires independent supervisory review and approval
of voids.
A similar condition regarding the verification of recorded collections to deposit
was commented upon in our three preceding audit reports, dating back to October
2011. In addition, similar conditions regarding the failure to independently
review voided transactions and verify that credit card receipts were properly
credited to the State’s bank account were commented upon in our two preceding
audit reports.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts process verifies
that all collections, including credit card transactions, are subsequently
deposited and credited to the State’s bank account (repeat);
b. establish an independent supervisory review and approval of voids to
verify that voided transactions are proper (repeat) and adequately
supported; and
c. take investigative action to resolve any instances of recorded collections
not deposited to the State’s bank account.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary of
State for the period beginning December 5, 2017 and ending November 15, 2021.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included charitable organizations, cash receipts,
equipment, and disbursements. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Office by the
Executive Department – Governor. These support services (such as, maintenance
of accounting records and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope
of our audit of the Executive Department – Governor.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of December 5, 2017 to November 15, 2021, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, test of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Office’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
11

--- Page 14 ---
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the Office’s automated system used to record
information relating to charitable organizations for the purpose of testing the
Office’s procedures for ensuring compliance with certain requirements in the law
applicable to such organizations. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Office, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
12

--- Page 15 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 17 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Charitable Organizations
Finding 1
The Office of the Secretary of State did not conduct independent reviews to ensure that
critical data obtained from charitable organizations was accurately recorded, and that
these organizations submitted the proper amount of fees.
We recommend that the Office perform independent verifications, at least on a test basis, to
ensure that information reported by charitable organizations is accurately recorded in the
Office’s database and that the proper fees are collected from each organization (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We agree with Finding 1. Independent reviews were conducted for ¾
additional comments as of the audit period until the pandemic hit and required reallocation of
deemed necessary. staff resulting in the temporary suspension of the review of files on July
31, 2020.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2022
Please provide details of The new charities database is expected to produce accurate
corrective action or submissions by charities resulting in fewer errors. The new database
explain disagreement. will eliminate manual data entry and is expected to be fully operational
by Dec 2022. The improved functionality of the new database will also
help to streamline what is currently a labor intensive, manual process. In
addition, cross training of staff has been implemented to assist with
processing backlogs. However, until the new database is installed, a
strategy has been implemented to address the processing backlog
allowing the internal auditor to resume her duties. The resumption of
duties will identify errors and provide timely feedback to avoid repeat
errors.
Internal audits were consistently performed between 2017 and July
1, 2020 with an error rate of 1% or less for critical errors, such as
collecting the correct fee(s) or requiring the audit/financial review.
Clerical errors (typos, etc.) occur on occasion that do not impact the
charity’s registration status. The previous legislative audit
recommended we review 20-30 files monthly. In our commitment to
excellence, 100 files were randomly selected and reviewed monthly as
were files processed by each charity officer. This standard exceeded the
audit requirement by 233-400%.
Page 1 of 10

--- Page 18 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Monthly internal file reviews were temporarily suspended for files
processed after July 31, 2020 due to a temporary staff realignment
during the height of the pandemic. A mounting number of charity
registrations necessitated temporarily shifting our internal auditor to
support processing charity registrations. As a result, the internal file
reviews were a casualty of the pandemic
A sample of the file review is attached.
Page 2 of 10

--- Page 19 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
The Office did not investigate charitable organizations that failed to comply with the
annual registration requirements of State law. In addition, the Office did not monitor
related fees incurred by delinquent organizations and refer accounts to the State’s Central
Collection Unit.
We recommend that the Office
a. investigate charitable organizations that fail to comply with the annual registration
requirements of State law to determine whether the organizations are still operating
and whether to refer the organizations for additional enforcement action as permitted
by law;
b. generate periodic aging reports to assist in monitoring the late registration fees owed by
charitable organizations; and
c. refer delinquent accounts to CCU for collection assistance, as required by State
regulations.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide We agree with parts of Finding 2. The finding conflates charitable
additional comments as organizations who appear to be late, or delinquent, in filing requirements
deemed necessary. under the Maryland Solicitations Act with delinquent debts owed to the
State.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2022
Please provide details of We resumed these activities in the May of 2022. Further, once the new
corrective action or database is operational these reviews will be automated; relieving the
explain disagreement. current labor intensive, manual process by which we must contact
charities that appear to be late, or delinquent with annual registration
requirements.
In addition to the above actions, we are cross training staff to provide
additional support to facilitate compliance.
Emergency orders issued during the pandemic excluded charities in
good standing, who met the criteria, from being identified as delinquent.
The emergency orders resulting from the pandemic caused a temporary
extension of charity registrations beginning March 20, 2020 and ending
June 30, 2021. Of the 5,755 charitable organizations reported as
delinquent on 1/18/2022, 2,784, or 48%, became delinquent just
three (3) days earlier on 1/15/2022 (one of our 2 major filing
deadlines).
Page 3 of 10

--- Page 20 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
All charities in good standing, with a current registration at the time of
the emergency order, were not eligible to be categorized as late until 30
days after the termination of the emergency order. It was premature to
contact delinquent charitable organizations prior to June 30, 2021
when the Emergency Orders were terminated. Delinquent
charitable organizations that met this criteria were granted
extensions in the Emergency Orders. As anticipated, the termination
of the extension granted through the emergency orders, resulted in an
overwhelming increase in charity registration applications for more than
3 months after the order was rescinded on June 30, 2021. At the end of
the extension order, 1,475 charitable organizations that were covered by
the pandemic extension became delinquent, therefore adding an
additional 1,475 to the existing 1,412 delinquents, more than doubling
our delinquent count.
Prior to the pandemic, the internal auditor routinely contacted
delinquent charitable organizations, or those charities that appeared
to be late, or not compliant with their annual registration
requirements. We lowered the number of delinquent charity
registrations. The 2,909 delinquent registrations on file in July 2016
were reduced by 60% to 1,168 in December 2018. Delinquent
charities were contacted by letter, email, and phone.
Registration is cyclical, based on the organization’s fiscal year end.
Many charities become delinquent and regain compliance during the
course of a year (during this time frame, 2,764 became delinquent and
4,505 delinquencies were resolved). The internal auditor was
temporarily reassigned to relieve backlogs of processing of charity
registrations during the height of the pandemic.
Some outstanding annual registration fees and late fees have been
received but not yet processed due to the processing backlog, caused by
the pandemic. Therefore, many charitable organizations in our database
that are displayed as delinquent would be reported as current if the
application was processed the day it was received. We are working to
resolve this backlog.
We are making good progress in processing the backlog. The
delinquent count decreased 40% to 3,471 as of May 25, 2022. The
actual count is lower, and will continue to decrease as we work through
the backlog of charity registrations received but not yet processed. It’s
estimated that the actual number of delinquent charitable organizations
is 3,200 to 3,400 (~2,000 became delinquent since the emergency order
expired).
Page 4 of 10

--- Page 21 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Spring 2022
Please provide details of We requested, and DoIT has already provided, the first of the periodic
corrective action or aging reports to assist in monitoring. Further, the new charity database
explain disagreement. will generate these reports.
Recommendation 2c Disagree Estimated Completion Date: Winter 2022
Please provide details of We question whether the law obligates us to refer the collection of late
corrective action or fees from charitable organizations to the State's Central Collection Unit,
explain disagreement. and for the following reasons believe additional review is required. We
are seeking advice from the Office of the Attorney General on our legal
obligations, whether there are existing debts owed by charitable
organizations that can be referred to CCU, and if so, at what stage.
There is no definition of a delinquent charity or delinquent account in
the Maryland Solicitations Act or regulations used to administer the Act.
Rather, SOS refers to delinquent charities internally as those who do not
appear to be in compliance with SOS annual filing and registration
requirements. Research needs to be done to determine how the SOS
may identify a charity as a delinquent account that should be referred to
CCU, whether such accounts may fall under CCU’s regulation definition
of delinquent accounts, and whether special considerations are extended
regarding charities since there are a wide range and varying degrees of
delinquent filings. A formal practice would still need to be established
before referrals, if any, can be made to CCU and if they meet the
definition established by CCU.
The draft report estimates $1.8 million in late fees could be due from
charities who failed to file timely annual reports. This amount, as framed
in the report, is misleading. We take this amount seriously, and as
indicated in the previous explanation, we will begin a process to collect
and monitor this data point. However, this figure, as reported, is not a
fair representation of outstanding debt due to the State as it fails to take
into consideration the discretion that the Secretary of State has when
assessing late fees. The Secretary of State has the authority to extend the
time period for filing annual reports without limitation. Section 6-407(c)
provides the Secretary of State shall assess late fees 60 days after the end
of the organization’s fiscal year or after the period of extension that may
be granted by the Secretary of State. This law does not place any
limitation on the period of time the Secretary of State may allow for such
filings and for good reason. Charities experience high turnover,
oftentimes rely on volunteers and slim budgets that consist of restricted
charitable assets to operate. Burdening some charities, and particularly
those charities that are not engaged in any misconduct, with added fees
Page 5 of 10

--- Page 22 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
and interest penalties requires careful consideration and an established
administrative framework as it implicates the State’s interest in ensuring
charitable assets are used for their intended charitable purpose.
Additional legal review is required to determine how to lawfully and
properly refer charitable organizations to the State’s Central Collection
Unit for failing to maintain annual filing requirements.
Although the Secretary of State’s Office agrees that the methodology
analysis used to reach its figure was reasonable, the Secretary of State’s
Office cannot agree that the information presented in the draft report is
an accurate or reliable estimate of how much in late fees could be
referred to the CCU for collection assistance. This is because the SOS
has not established an internal process or procedure to identify
delinquent debt that may be collected by CCU. As there is not yet an
established definition of a delinquent account, the Secretary of State’s
Office questions whether there can be an estimate at this time as to how
much in late fees must be referred to CCU. We will work to understand
our legal obligations relating to the assessment and collection of late fees
and to establish a definition in consultation with legal counsel, CCU and
DBM.
Auditor’s Comment: Although the Office’s response disagreed with finding 2c, we
believe that the subsequent comments agree with the recommendation in principle.
Specifically, the Office acknowledged the need to establish a process to identify and refer
delinquent charitable organizations to CCU and agreed with our methodology for
estimating amounts owed by delinquent charitable organizations. However, the Office
believes the amount we included in the report was misleading because State law
authorizes the Office to extend indefinitely the time period for charitable organizations to
file their annual reports. Since the Office did not provide evidence that such extensions
were granted to the 5,755 delinquent organizations noted in our finding, we were
prevented from estimating the extent to which the amount to be collected from these
organizations might increase or decrease as a result of additional investigation efforts.
Therefore, we believe that the amount presented in our report is a fair and appropriate
estimate based on the information available at the time of our review.
Page 6 of 10

--- Page 23 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
Adequate controls were not established over cash receipts.
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts process verifies that all
collections, including credit card transactions, are subsequently deposited and credited
to the State’s bank account (repeat);
b. establish an independent supervisory review and approval of voids to verify that voided
transactions are proper (repeat) and adequately supported; and
c. take investigative action to resolve any instances of recorded collections not deposited to
the State’s bank account.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide No additional comments.
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/15/2022
Please provide details of To meet recommendation 3a the supervisor has expanded the duties of
corrective action or two staff members to include reconciling daily revenue collections
explain disagreement. including credit cards against the daily receipt reports, external
transaction reports and monthly bank statements. This process will be
reviewed by the supervisor for accuracy and modified as appropriate.
Additionally, tasks such as scanning and entering checks in our finance
database have also been assigned to a different staff member. The
division has had initial discussions with DoIT to modernize our
databases to eliminate manual processing of systems such as the
Receipts and Daily Finance.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 6/30/2022
Please provide details of The division has implemented procedures and processes to address this
corrective action or recommendation. DoIT has updated the Receipt database to allow the
explain disagreement. “Void Reason” field to be printed on the receipt. With this update, the
Assistant Secretary for Admin & Finance (supervisor) can review the
reason for the void and initial each voided receipt. The supervisor can
Page 7 of 10

--- Page 24 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
review and initial each void that is listed on the Daily Receipt Report –
Void/Non-Void. Voids are initialed and dated by the supervisor to
ensure they are proper and correct. All voided records are retained by
the division as backup.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/15/2022
Please provide details of The division confirmed that the revenue of $410 was from credit card
corrective action or transactions charged to the wrong bank. When the State Treasurer’s
explain disagreement. Office awarded a new banking and merchant services contract all credit
card companies were informed of the banking change. This office
overlooked informing one of the credit card companies of the
change. This resulted in a small number of transactions continuing to be
deposited with that company rather than with the new contractor. This
office prepared a letter to the company informing them of the change
and directed them where future deposits should be made. On April 15,
2022 the State Treasurers’ Office confirmed that the account officially
ended.
File Review Checklist: Charities & Legal Services Division, Office of the Secretary of State
Month/Year of file review: July 2020
Name/Title of person conducting the file review: Internal Auditor
Date of Record Checked Date of Findings Processing
Review (CID#) Case Note Employee’s
Name
8/26/2020 24513 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 15634 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 57 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 28247 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 24117 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/26/2020 13861 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/26/2020 12211 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/26/2020 31392 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
Page 8 of 10

--- Page 25 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
8/26/2020 20138 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/26/2020 19205 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/26/2020 18728 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 12262 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 31591 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 12059 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 20207 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 26406 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 24437 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/26/2020 18555 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/26/2020 17982 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 4376 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/27/2020 45699 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/27/2020 18805 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 28210 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 21470 7/1/2020 No Findings E1
8/27/2020 28542 7/1/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 15263 7/7/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 5023 7/7/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 1676 7/7/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 16913 7/7/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 20765 7/7/2020 No Findings E3
8/27/2020 3605 7/7/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 2171 7/7/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 38775 7/7/2020 No Findings E2
8/27/2020 5291 7/6/2020 No Findings E3
Page 9 of 10

--- Page 26 ---
Office of the Secretary of State
Agency Response Form
8/27/2020 24264 7/6/2020 No Findings E3
8/27/2020 481 7/6/2020 No Findings E3
Total Files Reviewed: 36 (15 E1, 17 E2, 4 E3)
Total Errors: 0
Page 10 of 10

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditor