Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Family Health Administration
Date: 07/18/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d724560674568
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:18:12.089922
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Family Health Administration
August 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program
Finding 1 – Proper Controls Were Not Established Over eCMS Program and 5
Database Changes
Finding 2 – FHA Did Not Establish Adequate Policies Regarding the 6
Identification and Investigation of Certain Questionable Claims
Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF)
* Finding 3 – (Policy Issue) Certain Eligibility Criteria for a CRF Program Were 8
Inconsistent Throughout the State
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Family Health Administration (FHA) protects, promotes, and improves the
health and well-being of all Marylanders and their families by working to assure
the availability of quality primary, preventive, and specialty health care services,
with special attention to at-risk and vulnerable populations. In so doing, FHA
aims to prevent and control chronic diseases, prevent injuries, provide public
health information, and promote healthy behaviors.
FHA is also responsible for administering the Tobacco Use Prevention and
Cessation Program and the Cancer Prevention, Education, Screening, and
Treatment Program, which are designed to reduce tobacco use, cancer deaths, and
tobacco-related diseases in the State. These Programs are financed by the
Cigarette Restitution Fund.
According to FHA’s records, its expenditures totaled approximately $209 million
during fiscal year 2010, including $31 million applicable to the Cigarette
Restitution Fund. FHA funding included approximately $128 million in federal
funding, which was received primarily for the Women, Infants, and Children
supplemental nutrition program. As noted in the Audit Scope, Objectives, and
Methodology section of this report, an evaluation of internal controls for federal
assistance programs and an assessment of FHA’s compliance with applicable
federal laws and regulations is not within the scope of this audit.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 18, 2008. We determined that FHA
satisfactorily addressed seven of the findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program
Background
FHA is responsible for the Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment
Program (BCCDTP) that uses an automated Electronic Claims Management
System (eCMS) to pay BCCDTP authorized medical providers for diagnostic and
treatment services provided to eligible individuals. BCCDTP, which is financed
with general and special funds, is designed for low-income individuals whose
income exceeds that which is allowable to qualify for the Medical Assistance
Program (Medicaid) and who have a qualifying medical condition. According to
FHA’s records, payments to providers in BCCDTP totaled approximately $14.6
million on behalf of approximately 3,200 recipients that received services during
fiscal year 2010.
Finding 1
FHA did not have sufficient procedures in place to ensure that only
management authorized changes were made to eCMS production programs
and related databases.
Analysis
FHA lacked sufficient procedures to ensure that only management authorized
changes were made to the eCMS production programs and related databases.
Specifically, our review disclosed the following conditions:
 Documentation (such as comparison reports) of program changes that were
made to production programs was not generated and subject to independent
review and approval by FHA supervisory personnel. In addition, although
certain system program change requests were formally documented and
recorded in a database, we were advised by FHA management personnel that
other program change requests are occasionally made verbally or via e-mail.
However, documentation of the verbal and e-mail requests was not always
maintained and these requests were not always recorded in the database.
 Although FHA had established a process to identify and report direct access to
eCMS-related databases (such as the database of authorized service providers)
by employees who did not routinely maintain the databases, our review of the
reports generated for fiscal year 2010 disclosed that reported access by certain
employees was frequently not reviewed by supervisory personnel.
Additionally, although employees who access the databases were required to
complete a report noting the reason for their access, the reports were
5

--- Page 8 ---
frequently not completed by one employee who regularly accessed the
databases, and supervisory personnel did not question the employee’s access
to the databases.
As a result of these conditions, there was a lack of assurance that only
management authorized program changes to the eCMS system have been placed
into production, and that all employee access to the related databases was
appropriate.
The eCMS payment system is an off-the-shelf program purchased from a vendor
that was implemented, with customizations, by BCCDTP. The system resides in
the BCCDTP server and references BCCDTP databases containing eligible
patient and provider information during the claims payment process. Due to the
proprietary nature of the eCMS system software, requested program changes can
only be made by the vendor.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FHA
a. ensure that documentation of program changes made is generated and
subject to supervisory review and approval, and that all requests for
eCMS program changes are documented; and
b. ensure that all direct access to eCMS-related databases is reported and
reviewed by supervisory personnel.
Finding 2
FHA did not establish adequate policies regarding the identification and
investigation of certain questionable claims.
Analysis
FHA did not establish adequate policies regarding the identification and
investigation of certain questionable claims. Specifically, FHA had not
established the frequency with which certain eCMS reports were generated to
identify questionable claims nor had it specified the extent of any follow-up to be
performed.
In this regard, as of October 2010, FHA had not generated eCMS reports to
identify questionable claim payments since November 2009. The report
generated in November 2009 identified claims paid during the period from
January 2008 to July 2009 that would appear to require multiple services, yet only
one type of service was received by the patient on the date of service. (For
example, a claim was paid for a surgical procedure with no related anesthesia or
pathology service.) Although the report identified 322 questionable claims
6

--- Page 9 ---
totaling approximately $88,000 related to 106 providers, FHA only conducted an
on-site review of one provider with questionable claims totaling approximately
$1,700 (approximately two percent of total questionable claims identified). Based
on this review, FHA determined that payments made to the provider were
appropriate.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FHA
a. establish a policy regarding the identification and investigation of
questionable claims, and
b. pursue recovery of any improper payments identified.
Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF)
Background
In November 1998, five major tobacco companies executed a settlement
agreement with numerous states, including Maryland, whereby the companies
agreed to pay the states approximately $206 billion over 25 years to settle all
outstanding litigation. The Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF) was established as a
special non-lapsing fund used to distribute funds received by the State under this
settlement for a variety of programs and initiatives. Annually, the funds are
initially received by the Department of Budget and Management and subsequently
distributed to the appropriate State agencies, including FHA.
Section 13 of the Health General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
established the Cancer Prevention, Education, Screening, and Treatment Program
(CPESTP) to be funded by the CRF. The intent was to coordinate the State’s use
of these funds to reduce tobacco use, tobacco-related diseases, and cancer deaths
in the State.
State law further provides for the distribution of grants to various entities
(including local health departments and certain academic institutions) for services
such as screening, treatment, and research, and establishes a public relations
component to counteract tobacco industry marketing and advertising efforts.
According to the State’s records, FHA’s fiscal year 2010 expenditures for the
CPESTP totaled approximately $11.5 million, including $9.5 million in grant
expenditures for screening and treatment services.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 3 (Policy Issue)
The financial eligibility criteria for CPESTP participants were not consistent
among the local health departments.
Analysis
The eligibility criteria that FHA used to determine if an individual has the
financial means to pay for services provided through CPESTP were not consistent
throughout the State. According to FHA’s records, CPESTP expenditures which
include treatment services, totaled approximately $7 million during fiscal year
2010.
Our review disclosed that, according to the grant awards, 15 local health
departments (LHDs) anticipated using a portion of their grant awards to pay for
treatment services for eligible clients and thus were required to submit eligibility
criteria to FHA for review. However, we noted inconsistencies among the LHDs
in determining maximum income levels and family unit size for purposes of
establishing a client’s financial eligibility to receive services. For example, 14 of
the 15 LHDs used annual gross income to determine income level while the
remaining LHD used net income. Similarly, two LHDs did not consider a
spouse’s income and three other LHDs did not consider certain other income
(such as worker’s compensation payments and alimony) when calculating the
income level. Additionally, when determining the family unit size, one LHD did
not include the client’s spouse or financially dependent children, and five LHDs
did not include other financially dependent relatives of the client. These
disparities occurred because State regulations require local health departments to
develop written financial eligibility criteria for their individual jurisdictions.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to our preceding audit finding, FHA issued guidance to the LHDs
instituting a maximum income level (that is, the household income level must not
exceed 250 percent of the federal poverty level) and requiring written
documentation of household income and family unit size for clients seeking
treatment services. However, this guidance did not establish statewide eligibility
criteria clarifying how to determine household income and the definition of a
family unit.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FHA establish Statewide eligibility criteria to clarify the
determination of household income and the definition of a family unit for
CPESTP (repeat).
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Family Health Administration (FHA) of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene for the period beginning November 1, 2007 and
ending August 3, 2010. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine FHA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, grants, and disbursements. Our
audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of
documents and records, and observations of FHA’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to FHA by the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s – Office of the Secretary and related
units. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of
our audits of the Department’s Office of the Secretary.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal assistance
programs and an assessment of FHA’s compliance with federal laws and
regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland engages
an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including FHA. According to FHA’s records, federal funding
received during fiscal year 2010 totaled approximately $128 million.
FHA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
9

--- Page 12 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect FHA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to FHA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of
FHA, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Family Health Administration
Legislative Audit Report: Findings and Responses
August 11, 2011
Findings and Recommendations
Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program
Background
FHA is responsible for the Breast and Cervical Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Program
(BCCDTP) that uses an automated Electronic Claims Management System (eCMS) to pay
BCCDTP authorized medical providers for diagnostic and treatment services provided to eligible
individuals. BCCDTP, which is financed with general and special funds, is designed for low-
income individuals whose income exceeds that which is allowable to qualify for the Medical
Assistance Program (Medicaid) and who have a qualifying medical condition. According to
FHA’s records, payments to providers in BCCDTP totaled approximately $14.6 million on
behalf of approximately 3,200 recipients that received services during fiscal year 2010.
Finding 1
FHA did not have sufficient procedures in place to ensure that only management
authorized changes were made to eCMS production programs and related databases.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FHA
a. Ensure that documentation of program changes made is generated and subject to
supervisory review and approval, and that all requests for eCMS program changes are
documented; and
b. Ensure that all direct access to eCMS-related databases is reported and reviewed by
supervisory personnel.
FHA Response:
The financial eligibility requirements as noted in COMAR 10.14.02.03 states the income
requirement for the BCCDT Program is < 250% of the Federal Poverty Guidelines and not
“those whose income exceeds that which is allowable to qualify for Medicaid”.
a. The Administration concurs with recommendation #1a, regarding the need to document all
eCMS program changes and that documentation needs to be subject to supervisory review
and approval. Specifically, FHA will maintain the eCMS “Change Tracking Report” and
will ensure that the eCMS vendor writes notes to indicate the solution to the problem, the
date of testing, and who tested the solution. Effective July 1, 2011, another column was
added to the report to allow the sign-off from the IT Programmer Analyst Supervisor/contract
monitor to indicate that the solution was reviewed and all changes were approved.

--- Page 15 ---
b. The Administration concurs with recommendation #1b and will ensure that all direct access
to eCMS –related database is reported and reviewed by supervisory personnel all direct
access triggers will be reviewed and updated. The eCMS Auditing Exception Report will
include more identifying information specific to the database change noted in the report.
This will make it easier for the reviewer to match the documentation justifying the database
change with the reported exception. BCCDT trained a new reviewer to question every
exception that is not documented and any documentation that is not clear. This information
is now routinely being reported to the IT Programmer Analyst Supervisor for review and
follow-up. This procedure has been in place since July 1, 2011.
Finding 2
FHA did not establish adequate policies regarding the identification and investigation of
certain questionable claims.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FHA
a. Establish a policy regarding the identification and investigation of questionable claims;
and
b. Pursue recovery of any improper payments identified.
FHA Response:
a. The Administration concurs with the finding and will establish a policy to identify and
investigate questionable claims. However, the Administration would like to point out that
the questionable claims do not necessarily represent an overpayment of services, in reality a
stand alone claim (questionable claim) may represent an underpayment of services. In
general, the policy will include:
1) Generation of the eCMS report every 6 months to identify those claims with only one
service billed, that would appear that other services/providers should also have billed for
different aspects of the same procedure(s)
2) Follow-up of the questionable claims by requesting documentation from the provider to
support the claim(s).
b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation and will pursue recovery of any
improper payments identified. Specifically, if adequate documentation is not forthcoming,
such as a surgery report, pathology report, anesthesia report, etc., the BCCDT Program will
investigate further and recoup any improper payment(s) if necessary.

--- Page 16 ---
Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF)
Finding 3 (Policy Issue)
The financial eligibility criteria for CPESTP participants were not consistent among the
local health departments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FHA establish Statewide eligibility criteria to clarify the
determination of household income and the definition of a family unit for CPESTP
(repeat).
FHA Response:
The Administration concurs with this recommendation and has established statewide eligibility
criteria that is used to determine household income and the definition of a family unit.
FHA would like to clarify the following statement, “According to FHA’s records, CPESTP
expenditures for treatment services totaled approximately $7 million during fiscal year 2010.” In
FY 2010, a total of $7,033,218 was awarded to all of the local public health programs including
the academic medical center CPEST programs. The vast majority of the $7 million was spent on
cancer screening and education, and on staff to administer the program and provide case
management services to clients at the local level. All programs are required to either pay for
treatment or “link” clients to treatment services if they are found to have cancer. Only 9 of the
25 CPESTP funded programs allocated funding to cover any treatment costs. The remaining 16
counties help link patients to treatment. The budget for treatment services among the 9 programs
was only a small percentage of their total CPESTP program funding. For FY2010, a total of
approximately 3.5% (or about $250,000) of the $7 million was budgeted for treatment services. 1
As a result of the same audit finding in the previous audit (September 14, 2004- October 31,
2007) the Department issued written guidance to the local CPESTP programs regarding
eligibility requirements for clients to receive CRF-funded services for cancer treatment. Written
guidance was issued on December 16, 2008 and again on November 24, 2009. Additionally, the
eligibility criteria was discussed on several conference calls with the local programs in 2008 and
2009. However, there was still some inconsistency among some local health departments in
determining family size and maximum income levels. Effective June 15, 2011, FHA established
statewide standard client eligibility criteria for CPESTP, for both the local health department and
academic center program(s), for clients who undergo treatment. The establishment of the
statewide criteria was communicated to the programs through Health Officer Memo #11-33, and
became effective for the Fiscal Year 2012 CPESTP grant awards.
1 Auditor’s Comment: Based on the FHA response, the report item has been modified to indicate that the $7
million total relates to all CPEST program expenditures including treatment services. The $250,000 cited by FHA is
an incomplete budget total for fiscal year 2010 because it does not include all applicable counties’ treatment
services. FHA could not provide actual expenditures for treatment services. Nevertheless, FHA has agreed to
implement the recommendation.

--- Page 17 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark A. Ermer, CPA
Audit Manager
John F. Nogel, CFE
Senior Auditor
LaTeasa R. Robertson
Alexander F. Soutar
Staff Auditors