Title: Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund - Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2015
Date: 04/18/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674264
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:37:06.776144
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) was
established to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland in Maryland.
MALPF, which is governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of 13 members,
purchases land easements with Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
(Fund) revenue and places certain restrictions on the use of the land. (For
example, the land may be restricted from subdivision for residential or
commercial purposes.) The Fund, which is administered by MALPF, generally
derives revenues from State transfer taxes, agricultural transfer taxes, and local
subdivision matching funds. In addition, MALPF uses proceeds of General
Obligation Bonds to fund easement purchases. According to its records, since
inception through June 30, 2015, MALPF had purchased 2,187 easements on
296,682 acres of land for a total cost of approximately $662 million.
Financial Information
According to State accounting records, MALPF acquired easements costing
approximately $19.6 million during fiscal year 2015. As of June 30, 2015, the
total resources available to finance future MALPF expenditures, including
easement acquisitions, were $33.8 million, consisting of funds held in a Special
Revenue Fund ($1.3 million) and General Obligation Bond funds ($32.5 million).
Available resources increased by $1.6 million compared to resources available at
June 30, 2014.
The Special Revenue Fund balance is reserved for easement acquisitions that
were approved by MALPF’s Board of Trustees, but were not yet presented to the
landowners, as well as offers accepted by the landowners that were awaiting
Board of Public Works approval or settlement at year-end. General Obligation
Bonds have also been issued to finance future expenditures.
In addition to funds available to fund future expenditures, MALPF holds other
funds committed for the payment of easements purchased by MALPF on an
installment basis which, according to State accounting records, totaled $8.0
million as of June 30, 2015.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated April 27, 2015. We determined that MALPF
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MALPF’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MALPF. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Fund (Fund) for the period beginning July 1, 2014 and ending June
30, 2015. The Fund is administered by the Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Foundation (MALPF). The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. The Fund is audited annually
as required by the Agriculture Article, Section 2-505 of the Code.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included disbursements for the purchase of easements, as
well as receipt of agricultural land transfer taxes, and compliance with easement
terms. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding
audit report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to MALPF
by the Department of Agriculture. These support services (such as purchasing,
data processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
are included within the scope of our audit of the Department.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MALPF’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MALPF management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Senior Auditor