Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Division of Racing
Date: 01/04/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745c6
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:30:50.549541
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Division of Racing
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Division of Racing (DOR)
is responsible for implementing the policies of the Maryland Racing Commission,
which operates under the provisions of Title 11 of the Business Regulation Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The Commission, which consists of nine
members who are appointed by the Governor, is responsible for regulating the
conduct of horseracing and pari-mutuel wagering in the State.
DOR is also responsible for the allocation of certain video lottery terminal funds.
Specifically, DOR distributes these funds, originally collected by the Maryland
Lottery and Gaming Control Agency, for the purposes established in the State
Government Article, Title 9 of the Annotated Code of Maryland (purse
dedication, racetrack facility renewal, and local impact grants).
According to its records, during fiscal year 2017, DOR distributed $100.3 million
in video lottery terminal funds, and its operating expenses totaled $3 million.
Findings and Recommendations
Payroll
Finding 1
The Division of Racing (DOR) did not establish adequate procedures to
ensure that hours worked by its employees were properly recorded in the
Statewide Personnel System (SPS) to support payroll expenditures.
Analysis
DOR did not establish adequate procedures to ensure that hours worked by its
employees were properly recorded in the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) to
support employee payroll expenditures. Specifically, two DOR headquarters
employees recorded employee work hours in SPS, as reflected on approved paper
timesheets, on behalf of the vast majority of its employees who worked at the
State’s race tracks. However, the employee who subsequently approved the
employee work hours in SPS did not receive and review the paper timesheets to
ensure that hours were properly recorded. As a result, employee work hours
could be recorded improperly in SPS without detection.
3

--- Page 6 ---
According to the State’s records, DOR’s calendar year 2016 payroll expenditures
totaled approximately $1.4 million for its 23 regular employees and 68 contractual
employees. This included expenditures totaling approximately $1.1 million for 18
regular employees and all 68 contractual employees who prepared paper
timesheets for submission to DOR headquarters. DOR advised us that these
employees prepared paper timesheets because they do not have access to SPS at
the racetracks.
Recommendation
We recommend that DOR implement procedures requiring the employee
who approves employee work hours recorded in SPS to review supporting
timesheets as part of the approval process.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Labor,
Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) – Division of Racing (DOR) for the period
beginning April 24, 2014 and ending June 13, 2017. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DOR’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, racing funds, distribution of video
lottery terminal funds, payroll, and certain licensee (racetrack) requirements
regarding the reporting and distribution of pari-mutuel wagering revenue.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by DLLR – Office of
the Secretary. These support services (such as purchasing, data processing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audits of the Office of the Secretary.
4

--- Page 7 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DOR’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). These extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the purpose of testing certain
payroll and leave transactions, including the conversion of employee data to SPS.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DOR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design and operation of internal that could adversely
5

--- Page 8 ---
affect DOR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and
efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit
did not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
The DLLR – Office of the Secretary’s response, on behalf of DOR, to our finding
and recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise the Office of the Secretary regarding the results of our
review of its response.
6

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Tony M. Kinsler
Staff Auditor