Title: Maryland Tax Court
Date: 05/09/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746d8
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:47:50.929517
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Tax Court
March 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 13, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Tax Court (MTC)
for the period beginning February 8, 2021 and ending November 17, 2024.
MTC’s primary purpose is to provide the final administrative hearings for appeals
of taxing authority decisions within the State, including the Comptroller of
Maryland, Property Tax Assessments Appeals Boards, and local collectors.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MTC.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Tax Court (MTC) provides the final administrative hearings for
appeals of decisions of the Comptroller of Maryland, Property Tax Assessment
Appeals Boards, local collectors, and other taxing authorities within the State.
Decisions of MTC may be appealed to the Circuit Court. MTC consists of five
judges appointed by the Governor for six-year terms. According to MTC records,
between fiscal years 2022 and 2024, MTC determined 2,797 tax appeals
comprised of 2,479 real property tax appeals and 318 special tax appeals. Real
property tax appeals consist of commercial and residential property. Special tax
appeals include other tax types such as income tax, sales and use tax, and estate
tax.
As shown in Figure 1, MTC’s fiscal year 2024 operating expenditures totaled
$930,461 (primarily salaries and wages) and were funded with State general
funds.
Figure 1
MTC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Source
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions Percent
Filled 9 100%
Vacant 0 0%
Total 9
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $844,304 90.7%
Technical and Special Fees 16,694 1.8%
Operating Expenses 69,463 7.5%
Total $930,461
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Source
Funding Percent
General Fund $930,461 100%
Total $930,461
Source: State financial and personnel records
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MTC’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to
MTC.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MTC. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Tax Court (MTC)
for the period beginning February 8, 2021 and ending November 17, 2024. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MTC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included real property tax appeals and payroll.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of February 8, 2021 to November 17, 2024, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions
and to the extent practicable, observations of MTC’s operations. Generally,
4

--- Page 7 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from MTC’s database for the purpose of testing property
tax appeals. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MTC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MTC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Owen M. Long-Grant
Senior Auditor