Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Mental Hygiene Administration
Date: 09/18/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744cf
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:17:25.625035
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Mental Hygiene Administration
September 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational Change 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
* Finding 1 – MHA Lacked Adequate Procedures to Ensure That 5
Documentation of Eligibility Was Obtained and Reviewed
for Uninsured Patients
Finding 2 – Certain Contract Deliverables Were Not Received 6
From an Independent Firm Hired to Monitor Critical ASO
Activities
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – The ASO’s Internal Network, Which Hosted MHA 8
Information, Was Not Adequately Secured
Finding 4 – The ASO Stored Sensitive Information, Relating to MHA 9
Consumers, and Did Not Adequately Restrict Access to the
Sensitive Information
Cash Receipts
* Finding 5 – Internal Controls Were Not Sufficient to Ensure All 10
Receipts Were Deposited
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The mission of the Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) is to promote the
creation and management of a coordinated, comprehensive, accessible, culturally
and age-appropriate system of publicly funded services and to support individuals
who have mental disorders. To accomplish this mission, MHA develops
comprehensive treatment and rehabilitation services for individuals with mental
illness. In addition, MHA oversees the provision of publicly funded services that
provide for the care and treatment of individuals who have mental disorders.
Finally, MHA supervises State mental health facilities and reviews and approves
local government plans for the treatment of the mentally ill through the
monitoring of Core Service Agencies.1 According to the State’s records, MHA’s
expenditures totaled approximately $788 million during fiscal year 2013 (mainly
funded by State and federal funds) and were primarily for mental health services.
Organizational Change
Chapter 460, Laws of Maryland, 2014, effective July 1, 2014, merged the Mental
Hygiene Administration and the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration to
establish the Behavioral Health Administration within the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (DHMH). According to the Fiscal and Policy Note
accompanying the related legislation, this change was prompted, in part, by
DHMH’s examination of the issue of integrating substance use disorders and
mental health care to address fragmentation in the delivery and government
financing of those services. This organizational change had no impact on our
audit since it occurred after the end of our audit period (October 7, 2013).
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report on MHA dated July 12, 2011. We determined that
MHA satisfactorily addressed six of these findings. The remaining two findings
are repeated in this report.
1 Core Service Agencies are county or multi-county authorities, such as a local health department
or private provider, designated to receive funding from MHA to provide various mental health
services to local jurisdictions throughout the State.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Administrative Service Organization
Background
The Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) contracts with an Administrative
Service Organization (ASO) to provide benefit management services, such as
ensuring consumer eligibility, authorizing consumer services, and paying provider
claims for the public mental health system. The ASO pays providers based on an
established fee schedule and payments are made from a special bank account
approved by the Comptroller of Maryland's General Accounting Division for this
purpose. As claims are paid from the account, MHA processes reimbursements to
the account.
During fiscal years 2011 through 2013, the ASO paid provider claims totaling
approximately $2 billion for mental health services, the vast majority of which
related to consumers with Medicaid coverage, who are automatically eligible for
mental health services through MHA. Medicaid covered services were eligible
for federal fund participation (reimbursement) which is normally 50 percent of the
claim payment. For its services during September 1, 2010 through August 31,
2013, the ASO contract fees totaled approximately $31 million. MHA’s current
contract with the ASO will expire in February 2015.
Finding 1
MHA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that required documentation
was obtained and verified to support patient eligibility for mental health
services paid entirely by the State’s General Fund.
Analysis
MHA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that required documentation was
obtained by the providers and verified by MHA or the ASO to support patient
eligibility for mental health services paid entirely by the State’s General Fund
(uninsured coverage). Individuals who do not qualify for Medicaid may still be
eligible for mental health services paid by the State’s General Fund if they meet
certain eligibility criteria and qualifying conditions.
Although MHA provided guidance to providers regarding documentation
requirements for uninsured coverage, our review of patients whose claims were
paid exclusively with general funds disclosed that certain required eligibility
documentation was not always on file. In this regard, we reviewed the eligibility
documentation for 25 patients who had claims paid during the period from
January through June 2013 totaling approximately $235,000 under the uninsured
coverage classification. These patients must meet six eligibility criteria and one
5

--- Page 8 ---
of several qualifying conditions. We determined that required documentation of a
verifiable social security number and State residency (2 of 6 required eligibility
criteria) was not available in 14 and 13 cases, respectively. Furthermore, we
noted two cases in which the providers indicated the existence of the qualifying
condition that the individuals had received services from the public mental health
system within the last two years; however, documentation was not available to
support this assertion.
In addition, the ASO, under its contract with MHA, is required to periodically
examine selected providers and related claims for propriety, including a review of
supporting eligibility documentation. However, the ASO’s reviews of selected
providers and related claims for propriety did not specifically target claims paid as
uninsured coverage. Rather, the claims reviewed were chosen randomly and no
statistics were kept on the number of claims paid as uninsured coverage that were
audited.
During fiscal year 2013, the ASO paid claims totaling approximately $16.4
million entirely with State general funds for patients granted uninsured coverage.
The lack of adequate procedures for obtaining and verifying documentation of
eligibility for uninsured coverage was commented upon in our two preceding
audit reports.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHA establish procedures to ensure that required
documentation supporting eligibility for individuals whose services are
funded entirely with general funds is obtained in all cases, and verified, at
least on a test basis (repeat).
Finding 2
MHA had not received all required contract deliverables from a firm which
precluded effective monitoring of certain critical ASO fiscal activities.
Analysis
MHA was not receiving required contract deliverables, in a timely manner, from
the independent public accounting firm it hired to perform reviews of certain
critical ASO financial activities. Specifically, on May 25, 2011, MHA entered
into a contract with a not to exceed value of $369,220 for the period from May
2011 through August 2014 with the firm to review provider claims processed by
the ASO and the ASO’s monthly bank reconciliations of the State bank account
used to pay those claims. The reviews of the claims and reconciliation were to be
conducted by the firm on a quarterly basis, and draft reports on the results were to
6

--- Page 9 ---
be submitted to MHA 30 days after the end of the quarter. However, as of
February 2014, the most recent report received by MHA for a claims review was
for the quarter ending June 30, 2012. This report and the two preceding reports
were received by MHA 19 to 21 months late. Similarly, the most recent report
received for the firm’s review of bank reconciliations was for the quarter ending
December 31, 2012; this report and the four preceding reports were received 12 to
21 months late.
MHA contracted with the firm to perform certain agreed-upon procedures relating
to provider claims and the ASO’s bank account reconciliations, including
ensuring proper claims authorization and record keeping, examining the
submission of claims for federal reimbursement, and verifying the accuracy and
validity of bank reconciliations and related reconciling items. These independent
reviews are one of MHA’s primary means to monitor critical functions performed
by the ASO. Consequently, it is vital that MHA ensure that they are performed
and the related reports are received timely. As of March 2014, payments to the
contractor totaled approximately $109,000 representing payments for billed
services rendered from inception of the contract through November 2012.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHA ensure that all contract deliverables, such as the
aforementioned claims and bank reconciliation reviews and resulting
reports, are performed and received within the required time frames.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
As noted, MHA contracts with an ASO to provide mental health benefit
management services. The ASO’s system processed various information related
to the provision of mental health services and captured and stored typical
demographic information for MHA consumers, including name, social security
number, address, and date of birth. The system also captured and stored sensitive
personal health information, including but not limited to, medical diagnosis codes,
prescribed medications, and physician assessments of patient risks, impairments,
and substance abuse. The system was hosted at the ASO’s national data center
facility located in a neighboring state.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 3
The ASO’s internal network, which hosted MHA information, was not
adequately secured.
Analysis
The ASO’s internal network, which hosted MHA information, was not adequately
secured.
 Several unnecessary and insecure connections were allowed to portions of the
ASO’s internal network, thereby placing various network devices at risk. For
example, we noted that three third party networks (owned by two current ASO
clients and one terminated ASO client) had unnecessary access to almost all
destinations on the ASO internal network via all ports. Best practice
guidelines from the State of Maryland Department of Information Technology
Information Security Policy require that State agency systems be configured to
monitor and control communications at external boundaries.
 We identified 61 ASO internal network addresses which could receive
encrypted traffic and did not have Host-based Intrusion Protection System
(HIPS) coverage. The absence of HIPS coverage for traffic to these network
addresses created a security risk since the ASO’s network based intrusion
detection prevention system cannot read encrypted traffic flowing into or out
of its network, whereas HIPS can read and analyze such traffic and protect
critical servers from malicious traffic. Strong network security uses a layered
approach, relying on various resources structured according to assessed
network security risks. Complete Intrusion Detection/Protection System
(IDPS) coverage includes, when there is encrypted traffic, the use of a
network-based IDPS that is supplemented with HIPS to aid significantly in the
detection/prevention of, and response to, potential network security breaches
and attacks.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MHA ensures that the ASO
a. restricts access, at the network level, to key administrative resources to
only those entities requiring such access; and
b. performs a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identifies how HIPS coverage should be best applied to its network,
and implements such coverage.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 4
The ASO stored sensitive personally identifiable information, relating to
MHA consumers, in clear text and did not adequately restrict access to
sensitive information.
Analysis
The ASO stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII), relating to
MHA consumers, in clear text and did not adequately restrict access to sensitive
information.
 The ASO stored MHA consumer PII (including full names, social security
numbers, and dates of birth for approximately 152,000 MHA consumers) in
clear text within a master file and 45 separate database tables. We further
noted that the sensitive information stored in the database tables was not
masked or truncated when system users accessed this data. This sensitive PII,
which is commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft, should be
protected by appropriate information system security controls. Best practice
guidelines from the State of Maryland Department of Information Technology
(DoIT) Information Security Policy require each State agency to “protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial
mitigating controls.”
 Users were granted unnecessary read and modification access to certain
critical ASO files containing sensitive PII for Maryland Medicaid enrollees
(including MHA consumers). For example, 15 profiles had unnecessary read
access to a critical table containing full names, social security numbers, and
dates of birth of numerous Maryland Medicaid enrollees. The DoIT
Information Security Policy requires “only authorized individuals (employees
or agency contractors) have access to confidential information and that such
access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of ‘least
privilege’ and ‘need to know.’”
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MHA request that the ASO
a. encrypt all files and database objects containing MHA consumer PII,
b. mask or truncate social security numbers applicable to MHA consumers
from online database and application users that do not need to see the full
number, and
c. restrict read and modification access to critical and sensitive Maryland
Medicaid enrollees’ information to only those personnel who require such
access.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Internal controls over cash receipts were not sufficient to ensure all receipts
were deposited.
Analysis
MHA had not established adequate procedures and internal controls over its cash
receipts to provide assurance that all collections were deposited intact.
 MHA did not verify that collections received through the mail, which totaled
approximately $741,000 during fiscal year 2013, were forwarded to and
received by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) general
accounting unit for deposit. These receipts, which related primarily to refunds
or cost settlements due from providers, were initially recorded on a check log
by MHA then forwarded to the unit for processing. Although the unit
provided a receipt to MHA for the funds, the receipt was not agreed to the
check log by independent personnel to ensure that all recorded collections
were transferred to and received by the unit. Furthermore, the employee who
first received the mail collections was responsible for maintaining the related
record of amounts due from providers.
 Collections received at MHA’s Crownsville Hospital Center were not
adequately controlled and verified to deposit.2 These collections, which
totaled approximately $251,000 during fiscal year 2013, were first received
and recorded at the Center and then forwarded to MHA headquarters for
processing and deposit. However, an independent verification of collections
received at the Center to validated bank deposit documentation was not
performed. Furthermore, the employee who received the Center’s collections
at MHA headquarters was also responsible for mailing related monthly
invoices to tenants and for recording the related payments in the accounts
receivable records.
Similar conditions regarding the verification of recorded collections to deposit
were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
2 Although the Crownsville Hospital Center is closed, certain areas of the facility are leased to
various entities. Collections received at the Center represent payments from those tenants
for their share of utility costs.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MHA
a. designate an employee independent of the cash collection functions to
verify recorded collections to the receipt from DHMH or validated bank
documentation, as appropriate (repeat); and
b. ensure that employees who receive collections do not also maintain the
related accounts receivable records.
We advised MHA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Mental Hygiene
Administration (MHA) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(DHMH) for the period beginning July 1, 2010 and ending October 7, 2013. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MHA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included claims payments for treatment and rehabilitation
services as managed by an Administrative Service Organization (ASO),
monitoring of Core Service Agencies, cash receipts, and information system
security and control. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MHA’s operations, tests of transactions, and a site visit to the ASO’s national data
center. We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the
State’s Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and
expenditure data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit. In addition, we obtained data extracted from the
ASO’s automated records for the purpose of testing selected attributes relating to
providers and provider claims paid. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MHA by DHMH’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll processing,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of DHMH - Office of the Secretary. In
addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal
financial assistance programs and an assessment of MHA’s compliance with
federal laws and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MHA.
MHA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MHA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MHA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of MHA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
Administration’s Response to Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
MHA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that required documentation was obtained
and verified to support patient eligibility for mental health services paid entirely by the
State’ General Fund.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHA establish procedures to ensure that required documentation
supporting eligibility for individuals whose services are funded entirely with general funds
is obtained in all cases, and verified, at least on a test basis (repeat).
Administration’s Response:
MHA concurs with the recommendation and has established procedures to ensure documentation
supporting eligibility for individuals whose services are paid for entirely with general funds.
With implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the number of uninsured individuals and
uninsured services is decreasing. Since the last audit, MHA has improved the requirements for
documentation which have been disseminated through four Provider Alerts. During the process
of implementing these new requirements, it was determined there are times when providers
cannot obtain the expected documentation when consumers are in crisis, either because the
individual is too ill to provide needed information or because the service provided is time limited
in nature. If MHA’s policies become too restrictive for people who are unstable or in crisis, this
may cause undue risk to consumers and public safety. When providers see a consumer on a
regular basis, they are able to obtain the needed documentation once the individual is stabilized,
but when a person is seen on a time limited basis, the cost of obtaining the documentation is
greater than the savings of requiring it in a crisis and/or the risks associated with overly
restrictive barriers to service access.
Exceptions to the documentation requirement are related to the type of crisis and type of service.
If a consumer is in immediate need for services (such as acutely suicidal) or the consumer's
symptoms prevent that person with being able to provide information and they are being seen by
an Assertive Community Treatment team, mobile crisis, residential crisis program, or other
outpatient setting documentation criteria may be waived. If the consumer is seen by the program
for more than two visits/days, all documentation must be submitted per requirements.
Documentation will be verified on a test basis. A Provider Alert clarifying the exceptions will be
disseminated in October 2014.
Additionally, the Administrative Services Organization (ASO) will undertake a number of
measures to ensure that documentation are received in a timely manner from those providers who
are rendering services for longer periods of time.
The ASO will assist MHA with education for providers and review of their documentation in
addition to the current auditing process using the following mechanisms:

--- Page 18 ---
 The ASO will host provider meetings to identify the root cause(s) of providers failing to
secure the evidence of uninsured eligibility and will follow-up with a work group to
address these obstacles. A list of recommendations will be generated for MHA review.
 Through data reporting, the ASO will identify providers with the highest volumes of
uninsured consumers. ASO staff will do on-site visits with these providers to review
their process for assuring adequate documentation and train them on best practices for
securing evidence of uninsured eligibility. The ASO will work with MHA to define the
threshold to target appropriate providers.
 The ASO will host webinars and disseminate Provider Alerts twice a year to review best
practices for obtaining and retaining all required documentation for uninsured eligibility.
 Providers of initial uninsured eligible visits who have not yet secured all necessary
documentation will be asked to provide a case management referral for the initial period
of the uninsured authorization, to help make sure that someone is available to help the
consumer with obtaining the needed documentation and entitlements.
Finding 2
MHA had not received all required contract deliverables from a firm which precluded
effective monitoring of certain critical ASO fiscal activities.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHA ensure that all contract deliverables, such as the
aforementioned claims and bank reconciliation reviews and resulting reports, are
performed and received within the required time frames.
Administration’s Response:
MHA concurs with the recommendation. When the contract was signed with the independent
accounting firm there was a backlog of audits that needed to be performed.
MHA has been working with the partner at the independent accounting firm in order to get the
reviews up to date, and has been holding payments pending promised deliverables. Currently,
the most recent draft bank reconciliation report reviewed by MHA was the September 2013
report. The Administration anticipates that the contractor will be up to date with deliverables by
December 31, 2014. The contract with the vendor has been extended until June 30, 2015. The
partner has developed a new schedule for the deliverables to bring the reporting up to date and to
meet deliverables on time in the future.

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 3
The ASO’s internal network, which hosted MHA information, was not adequately secured.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MHA ensures that the ASO
a. restricts access, at the network level, to key administrative resources to only those
entities requiring such access; and
b. performs a documented review and assessment of its network security risks, identifies
how HIPS coverage should be best applied to its network, and implements such
coverage.
Administration’s Response:
a. MHA concurs with the recommendation for restricting access, at the network level, for key
administrative resources to only those entities requiring such access. The ASO resolved these
items as they were being identified by the State auditors during the course of the fieldwork.
All access is tightly controlled and monitored. The ASO shall continue to follow a “least
privilege” security strategy to protect confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the
information with which it is entrusted.
b. MHA concurs with the recommendation to perform a documented review and assessment of
its network security risks to identify how HIPS coverage can be applied to its network. The
ASO has completed its review/assessment and based on the review/assessment findings, the
ASO is expanding its current HIPS implementation to all of its public facing resources to
monitor control communications at external boundaries. In addition, the ASO is adding an
additional safeguard for Layer 7 protection through the implementation of a network based
web application firewall to monitor both encrypted and unencrypted traffic. The ASO is
waiting on final testing to be placed in production. The estimated completion date is by the
end of 2014.
Finding 4
The ASO stored sensitive personally identifiable information, relating to MHA consumers,
in clear text and did not adequately restrict access to sensitive information.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MHA request that the ASO
a. encrypt all files and database objects containing MHA consumer PII,
b. mask or truncate social security numbers applicable to MHA consumers from online
database and application users that do not need to see the full number, and
c. restrict read and modification access to critical and sensitive Maryland Medicaid
enrollees’ information to only those personnel who require such access.

--- Page 20 ---
Administration’s Response:
a. MHA concurs with the recommendation to encrypt all files and database objects containing
MHA consumer PII. The ASO is in the process of evaluating solutions to protect PII
database objects through at rest encryption. The ASO estimates that this will be completed
by March 2015.
b. MHA concurs with the recommendation to mask or truncate social security numbers
applicable to MHA consumers from online database and application for users that do not
need to see the full number. The ASO is in the process of evaluating software changes that
will truncate/mask social security numbers during viewing. The ASO estimates that this will
be completed by March 2015. Please note the data is protected at multiple levels and is only
accessible by a select group of users who are able to generate and review the output. This
data is not, and has never been, publicly available.
c. MHA concurs with the recommendation to restrict read and modification access to critical
and sensitive Maryland Medicaid enrollees’ information to only those personnel who require
such access. The ASO resolved these items as they were being identified by the State
Auditors during the course of the fieldwork. In addition, ASO has further strengthened its
“Discretionary Role Based Access Control” to restrict access to critical and sensitive
Maryland Medicaid enrollee data by limiting access to select authorized individuals only.
Finding 5
Internal controls over cash receipts were not sufficient to ensure all receipts were
deposited.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MHA
a. designate an employee independent of the cash collection functions to verify recorded
collections to the receipt from DHMH or validated bank documentation, as appropriate
(repeat); and
b. ensure that employees who receive collections do not also maintain the related accounts
receivable records.
We advised MHA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Administration’s Response:
a. MHA concurs with the recommendation and will establish a revised segregation of duties
plan using existing personnel. MHA will utilize an existing employee in a manner to better
show segregation of duties and apply the procedures to mail receipts and making
Crownsville receipts mail receipts as well.

--- Page 21 ---
Effective immediately, mail receipts will be opened by the Administrative Assistant for the
Director of Services and record checks in a log upon receipt. MHA will ensure that an
employee independent of the cash collection functions verifies the initial record of
collections received to either the receipt from DHMH or validated bank documentation as
appropriate. Effective immediately MHA’s Accountant Advanced will verify the initial
record collections received to the receipt from DHMH.
MHA will ensure that employees who receive collections do not also maintain the related
accounts receivable records. Mail for the Director of Fiscal Services will be opened by the
Administrative Assistant and checks, if any, will be recorded by her. The Accountant
Technician will be responsible for depositing the check, and preparation of the deposit
memo to DHMH. The Director of Fiscal Services will initial the deposit memo to DHMH
to review PCA coding to FMIS. The written policies and procedures will be updated to
incorporate the new procedures.
In regard to Crownsville receipts, all checks will be received, opened, and logged by the
Administrative Assistant. The Accountant Supervisor will verify the initial record of
collections with the validated bank documentation.
b. MHA concurs with the recommendation and all incoming checks will be received by the
Administrative Assistant, deposited by the Accountant Advanced, and the Account
Technician will verify the payment with the invoice. The written policies and procedures
will be undated to incorporate the new procedures.

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Steven P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Marissa L. Eby
Sam Hur
Lauren E. McLain
Olajide S. Mustapha
Staff Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditor