Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute

NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute because the Institute was abolished and its programs were transferred to various University System of Maryland institutions.
Date: 01/12/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d15cc9d72456067450a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:33:54.166758
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
January 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
January 12, 2010
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the University System of Maryland (USM) – University of
Maryland Biotechnology Institute (UMBI) for the period beginning February 3,
2006 and ending June 30, 2009. UMBI’s primary purpose is to foster intense
scientific research of biotechnology and its application with regard to human,
health, marine environment, agriculture, and protein engineering/structural
biology.
Our audit disclosed that UMBI reported to the legislative budget committees that
statewide indirect cost recoveries of approximately $113,000 had been reverted to
the State’s general fund, even though the funds were actually retained. Our audit
also disclosed that employee payroll timesheets were not always approved, as
required.
The USM Office’s response, on behalf of UMBI, to this audit is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
by UMBI during the course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute (UMBI) is a non-degree
granting institution whose primary purpose is to foster intense scientific research
of biotechnology and its application with regard to human health, marine
environment, agriculture, and protein engineering/structural biology.
Additionally, UMBI trains graduate and post-doctoral students from various
University System of Maryland campuses. In order to accomplish its purpose,
UMBI operates five independent but interactive research centers: the Center for
Advanced Research in Biotechnology, located in Montgomery County; the Center
for Biosystems Research, located in College Park; the Center for Marine
Biotechnology, the Institute of Fluorescence, and the Medical Biotechnology
Center, all located in Baltimore City. The central administrative office for UMBI
is also located in Baltimore City at the Christopher Columbus Center. According
to UMBI’s records, fiscal year 2009 revenues totaled approximately $51.8
million, which included a State general fund appropriation of approximately $19.9
million. Those records also indicated that UMBI’s expenditures for fiscal year
2009 totaled approximately $51.8 million.
Reorganization
• In December 2006, the University System of Maryland (USM) Board of
Regents approved the transfer of the Institute of Human Virology (IHV) from
UMBI to the University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB), effective July 1,
2007. The scope of this audit includes the activities of IHV prior to the
reorganization. The activities relating to IHV subsequent to the
reorganization were included in our current audit of UMB.
• On June 19, 2009, the USM Board of Regents approved a plan to disband the
institutes and programs of UMBI. The plan anticipates that the reorganization
will be completed by July 1, 2010. All institutes and programs of UMBI will
be assigned to other USM institutions (such as University of
Maryland, College Park; University of Maryland, Baltimore County; and
UMB).
According to information provided by USM, by December 31, 2009, several
memorandums of understanding will be executed between the USM Board of
Regents and the institutions that will address, among other things, allocating
UMBI financial, personnel, and physical resources; setting transition timelines
3

--- Page 6 ---
for all tasks; and establishing accountability measures to assess the impact of
the reorganization in key areas.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 28, 2006. We determined that these
findings were satisfactorily resolved.
Findings and Recommendations
Indirect Cost Recoveries
Finding 1
UMBI inaccurately reported to the legislative budget committees that
statewide indirect cost recoveries totaling approximately $113,000 were
reverted to the State General Fund.
Analysis
Indirect cost recoveries included in the annual budget requests submitted to the
legislative budget committees were not accurate. Specifically, for fiscal years
2006 through 2008, UMBI reported to the budget committees that statewide
indirect cost recoveries, collectively totaling approximately $113,000, had been
reverted to the State General Fund. However, our review disclosed that these
recoveries had actually never been reverted. In this regard, we were advised by
UMBI management personnel that the budget forms were completed without
realizing that the reversions were being reported. Furthermore, such personnel
advised us that they were unaware of the requirement to revert statewide indirect
cost recoveries to the State General Fund.
The annual budget bill contains a provision stipulating that the amount of revenue
received by an agency from any federal source for statewide indirect cost
recoveries may only be transferred to the general fund and may not be retained in
any clearing accounts or by any other means.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMBI
a. revert the previously reported indirect cost recoveries to the State
General Fund; and
4

--- Page 7 ---
b. in the future, accurately report and revert the statewide indirect cost
recoveries to the State General Fund.
Payroll
Finding 2
Employee timesheets were not always approved by supervisors.
Analysis
Electronic employee timesheets were not always electronically approved by
supervisory personnel. Specifically, our review of all timesheets for the period
from July 1, 2006 through June 30, 2009 for two locations (with 119 employees),
disclosed that 69 timesheets for 20 employees did not contain supervisory
approval. These unapproved timesheets, which included adjustments such as
overtime, were used to prepare the payroll. We also noted that, for 8 of the 11
unapproved timesheets that included overtime, prior supervisory approval of the
overtime was not documented. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that
work time reported was proper. According to UMBI records, fiscal year 2009
payroll expenditures totaled approximately $27 million for approximately 280
employees.
The UMBI Policy and Procedure on Electronic Time Reporting for Exempt and
Non-Exempt Employees stipulates that supervisors are required to review and
approve electronic time records for employees that report to them. In addition,
the UMBI Policy and Procedures on Workweek, Work Schedules and Time
Reporting for Nonexempt Employees stipulates that overtime may not be worked
without the express written approval of the employee’s supervisor.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMBI ensure
a. that timesheets are approved by supervisors, as required; and
b. that prior written approval of overtime is obtained and properly
documented.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the University System of Maryland (USM) – University of
Maryland Biotechnology Institute (UMBI) for the period beginning February 3,
2006 and ending June 30, 2009. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMBI’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. The areas addressed by the audit
included disbursements for UMBI’s operating expenditures, as well as grant
accounting, payroll, cash receipts, and equipment inventories. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of UMBI’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services, such as processing vendor
payment transmittals and depositing cash receipts, provided to UMBI by the
University of Maryland, Baltimore, and University of Maryland, College Park.
These support services are included within the scope of our audits of these System
units. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for
federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of UMBI’s compliance
with federal laws and regulations pertaining to these programs because the State
of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including UMBI. Finally, our audit did
not include an evaluation of information systems security and control because of
the ongoing transfer of UMBI’s programs to other USM entities.
UMBI’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
6

--- Page 9 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMBI’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMBI, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the System regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
University of Maryland – Biotechnology Institute (UMBI)
February 3, 2006 – June 30, 2009
Indirect Cost Recoveries
Finding 1
UMBI inaccurately reported to the legislative budget committees that statewide indirect
cost recoveries totaling approximately $113,000 were reverted to the State General Fund.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMBI
a. revert the previously reported indirect cost recoveries to the State General Fund; and
b. in the future, accurately report and revert the statewide indirect cost recoveries to the
State General Fund.
Response
UMBI concurs with both recommendations. We will revert the previously reported indirect cost
recoveries to the state general fund by June 30, 2010, and will accurately report and revert the
statewide indirect cost recoveries in the future.
Payroll
Finding 2
Employee timesheets were not always approved by supervisors.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMBI ensure
a. that timesheets are approved by supervisors, as required; and
b. that prior written approval of overtime is obtained and properly documented.
Response
UMBI concurs with the recommendation. We will review procedures and ensure mechanisms are
in place to verify that timesheets are approved by supervisors. We will also review procedures
with supervisors to ensure that overtime is approved and documented in advance.

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Athenia M. Rock, CFE
Senior Auditor
Ramin M. Niknava
Staff Auditor