Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System


NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System due to the establishment of the DPSCS - Central Region Finance Office.
Date: 06/08/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745b2
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:28:11.096169
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services
Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System
June 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
June 8, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System (MCPRS) of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) for the period
beginning December 20, 2005 and ending December 23, 2008. MCPRS includes
a headquarters unit located in Jessup, Maryland, and several minimum security
and pre-release facilities for adult male offenders located throughout the State.
Our audit disclosed that improvements were needed to increase controls over cash
receipts, payroll, certain purchases, and materials and supplies. For example,
deposit verifications were not always performed by employees independent of the
cash receipts process.
The DPSCS response to this audit, on behalf of MCPRS, is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
during the course of this audit by MCPRS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Cash Receipts
Finding 1 – Controls Over Cash Receipts Were Inadequate and 5
Collections Were Not Always Deposited Timely
Payroll
Finding 2 – Supervisory Personnel Who Approved Time Reports 6
Did Not Review All Supporting Documentation
Purchases and Disbursements
* Finding 3 – Proper Internal Controls Were Not Established Over 6
Purchasing Transactions
Finding 4 – State Procurement Regulations Were Not Always Followed 7
and a Duplicate Vendor Payment Was Made
Materials and Supplies
* Finding 5 – Procedures and Controls Over Inventories at Certain 8
Locations Were Inadequate
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System (MCPRS) is a separate budgetary
unit within the Division of Correction of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services. MCPRS consists of an administrative headquarters unit
located in Jessup, Maryland, and several minimum security and pre-release
facilities for adult male offenders located throughout the State. The objective of
MCPRS is to provide inmates the opportunity for successful re-entry into the
community through various programs such as work release and community work
details.
Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System Facilities
Inmate Population as
Facility Security Level Location
of December 31, 2008
Brockbridge Correctional Minimum
Jessup, MD 640
Facility Security
Minimum
Central Laundry Facility Sykesville, MD 510
Security
Minimum
Toulson Boot Camp Jessup, MD 384
Security
Jessup Pre-Release Unit Pre-Release Jessup, MD 591
Eastern Pre-Release Unit Pre-Release Church Hill, MD 178
Southern Maryland Pre- Charlotte Hall,
Pre-Release 175
Release Unit MD
Other1 Pre-Release Various 10
Total 2,488
1 MCPRS contracts with the Montgomery County Pre-Release Center and the Cecil County Pre-Release Center to house
inmates.
According to the State’s records, MCPRS expenditures totaled approximately
$75.8 million during fiscal year 2008. MCPRS fiscal year 2009 appropriations
provided for 707 positions, including 518 correctional officers.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 16, 2006. We determined that MCPRS
satisfactorily addressed three of the findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Adequate internal controls had not been established over cash receipts, and
collections were not always deposited and recorded timely in the State’s
records.
Analysis
MCPRS had not established adequate internal controls over cash receipts, and did
not always deposit and record collections timely. According to the State’s
accounting records, collections totaled approximately $3.6 million during fiscal
year 2008. Our review disclosed the following conditions:
• Deposit verifications were not always performed by employees independent
of the cash receipts process. Specifically, the deposit verifications for inmate
fund and telephone commission collections were performed by employees that
had access to the related collections. Inmate fund and telephone commission
collections during fiscal year 2008 totaled approximately $1.8 million and
$800,000, respectively.
• Our test of 20 deposits made during fiscal years 2008 and 2009 totaling
approximately $113,800 disclosed that seven deposits totaling approximately
$60,400 were made four to nine days after the related collections were
received. Additionally, 18 deposits totaling approximately $108,600 were not
recorded in the State’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS)
until three to eight business days after the deposits were made.
The Comptroller of the Treasury’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires a
reconciliation of recorded collections to amounts deposited by an employee
independent of the cash receipts function. The Manual further requires that
receipts must be deposited no later than the first working day after the day of
receipt, and that cash receipts be recorded in FMIS within two business days of
the deposit. Untimely deposits increase the possibility of loss or misappropriation
of collections and results in a loss of investment income to the State.
Recommendation 1
We recommend
a. that an employee independent of the cash receipts function verify that all
recorded collections were subsequently deposited, and that such
verifications be documented; and
5

--- Page 8 ---
b. that MCPRS deposit and record collections in FMIS timely, as required
by the Accounting Procedures Manual.
We advised MCPRS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Payroll
Finding 2
Supervisory personnel who approved time reports did not review supporting
documentation for overtime adjustments.
Analysis
Proper internal control had not been established over MCPRS payroll
adjustments. Specifically, the supervisory employee who approved the payroll
exception time reports did not review documentation (such as timecards)
supporting adjustments for overtime earnings recorded on the reports. Without
verifying the propriety of overtime payroll adjustments, errors and unauthorized
adjustments could be processed without detection.
According to the State’s accounting records, payroll expenditures for regular
MCPRS employees totaled approximately $44.4 million during fiscal year 2008,
including employee overtime payments totaling approximately $4 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that supervisory personnel review, at least on a test basis,
documentation supporting adjustments for overtime earnings recorded on
the electronic payroll exception time reports, and that such reviews be
documented.
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 3
Proper internal controls had not been established over the processing of
certain purchasing transactions.
Analysis
MCPRS did not fully use the available security features of the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) to establish proper internal control over
purchases. Specifically, six Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services – Office of the Secretary employees could both initiate and approve
6

--- Page 9 ---
certain purchasing transactions without being subject to independent online
review and approval. In addition, two of these employees could add vendors to
the system. As a result, unauthorized transactions could be processed which may
not be readily detected.
According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2008, MCPRS
used FMIS to process disbursements totaling approximately $14.4 million. A
similar condition has been commented upon in our four preceding audit reports
dating back to 1997.
Recommendation 3
We again recommend that MCPRS fully use the available FMIS security
features by establishing independent on-line approval requirements for all
critical purchasing transactions.
Finding 4
MCPRS did not always follow State Procurement Regulations for the
procurement of goods and services, and a duplicate payment in the amount
of $12,760 was made to a vendor.
Analysis
MCPRS did not always follow State Procurement Regulations, and a duplicate
payment in the amount of $12,760 was made to one vendor. Specifically our test
of 10 disbursements, totaling approximately $143,300, made during fiscal years
2007 to 2009, and the related procurements, disclosed the following conditions:
• MCPRS did not obtain approval from the Board of Public Works (BPW) for
the sole source procurement of security scanners totaling $80,000.
Furthermore, MCPRS did not publish notification of this procurement in
eMaryland Marketplace. State Procurement Regulations require that sole
source procurements of goods costing up to $50,000 be approved by the
Department of General Services, and that such procurements over that amount
be approved by BPW. Those Regulations also require that sole source
procurements over $25,000 be published.
• Even though MCPRS had established invoice payment procedures that
required, for example, that original invoices be approved by independent
supervisory personnel, we noted that a duplicate payment totaling
$12,760 occurred. In this regard, MCPRS paid an invoice, related to the June
2008 housing of Division of Correction inmates at a county pre-release center,
in both July 2008 and August 2008. MCPRS management personnel were
7

--- Page 10 ---
unable to explain how this duplicate payment occurred and were unaware of it
until we brought it to their attention in March 2009. To recover the
overpayment, we noted that MCPRS reduced the amounts of subsequent
payments to this entity.
Recommendation 4
We recommend
a. that, in the future, MCPRS comply with State Procurement Regulations
by obtaining the required control agency approvals for sole source
procurements of goods and by publishing such awards in the eMaryland
Marketplace; and
b. that MCPRS reinforce its invoice payment procedures to prevent
duplicate payments.
Materials and Supplies
Finding 5
Procedures and controls over MCPRS materials and supplies inventories at
certain locations were inadequate.
Analysis
MCPRS had not established proper internal controls over materials and supplies
at certain locations. MCPRS maintains a central warehouse as well as a
storeroom at each of its six units. According to the State’s accounting records,
MCPRS expenditures for materials and supplies during fiscal year 2008 totaled
approximately $4.7 million. As of June 30, 2008, the book value of the materials
and supplies for the central warehouse and the six storerooms reported to the
Department of General Services totaled approximately $1.5 million. Our review
of the central warehouse and one storeroom, whose combined book value totaled
approximately $693,000 at that date, disclosed the following conditions:
• Requisition forms for goods issued from the central warehouse could be
altered allowing additional items to be removed from stock by the storeroom
custodians without detection. Specifically, the requisition forms used to
record withdrawals to the inventory records were not compared to the copies
of the forms signed by the employees who received the supplies. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit reports dating back to
1990.
8

--- Page 11 ---
• The fiscal year 2008 physical inventory for the storeroom tested was not
adequate. Specifically, certain inventories (such as housekeeping and
maintenance supplies) were conducted by the custodians of the inventories.
Furthermore, although MCPRS management personnel advised us that the
results of the physical inventory for this storeroom were reconciled to the
perpetual inventory records, there was no documentation available to
substantiate this assertion.
The Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual requires that the
inventory record keeper compare copies of completed requisitions forms, and that
the duties of inventory record keeping, inventory custody, and conducting
physical inventories be segregated. The Manual also requires that the results of
the physical inventory be compared to the perpetual inventory records and that
differences identified be investigated.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPRS comply with the requirements of the
Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we
recommend
a. that the inventory clerk compare, at least on a test basis, the requisition
copies received for inventory postings to the copies provided to the
employees receiving the goods (repeat);
b. that physical inventories be performed by employees who are
independent of physical custody responsibilities; and
c. that the reconciliations of the physical inventories to the perpetual
inventory records be documented and retained for future reference.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System (MCPRS) for the
period beginning December 20, 2005 and ending December 23, 2008. The audit
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCPRS’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of MCPRS’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
MCPRS’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
1 0

--- Page 13 ---
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCPRS’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This report also includes conditions relating to significant instances
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to MCPRS that did not warrant inclusion
in this report.
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services’ response to our
findings and recommendations, on behalf of MCPRS, is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the
results of our review of its response.
1 1

--- Page 18 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark A. Ermer, CPA
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Shalom N. Warburg
Staff Auditor