Title: Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Office of the Secretary - Division of Administration - Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2008, the scope of our audit of DLLR's Office of the Secretary includes the Division of Workforce Development, which was subsequently renamed the Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning.
Date: 10/04/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744a7
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:11:51.196343
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
October 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Organizational Changes 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 1 – Sensitive Information for Unemployment Insurance Claims 9
Was Not Adequately Protected
* Finding 2 – Proper Security Measures Were Not Established Over the 11
Electronic Licensing Application
* Finding 3 – Electronic Licensing Application Was Not Properly Monitored 13
Or Protected
* Finding 4 – Adequate Controls Had Not Been Established Over a Critical 14
Server and Database
Cash Receipts
Finding 5 – Sufficient Controls Were Not Established Over Certain 15
Collections
Finding 6 – Controls Over Processing Cash Receipts Using Remote Deposit 17
Need Improvement
Finding 7 – Reconciliations of Electronic Licensing Collections With 18
Amounts Allocated to Boards or Recorded Were Not Adequate
Payroll
Finding 8 – Controls Over Personnel and Payroll Transactions Were Not 19
Adequate
Equipment
* Finding 9 – Proper Controls Were Not Established Over DLLR’s Equipment 20
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 23
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary, Division of Administration, and Division of Workforce
Development and Adult Learning (DLLR)
October 2011
 The Office of Information Technology (OIT), within the Division of
Administration, operates and maintains a Department website that
provides several online services. Sensitive personal and financial
information relating to unemployment insurance claims submitted through
the Department’s website and processed by DLLR’s Division of
Unemployment Insurance was not adequately protected. For example, files
containing sensitive personal and financial information, including names,
social security numbers, and dates of birth, transferred from the Annapolis
Data Center to a DLLR server, were not encrypted, and access to the
claims records stored on the file server was not properly restricted.
DLLR should take the recommended actions to adequately protect sensitive
personal and financial information related to unemployment insurance claims,
including encrypting unemployment insurance claim records in transit and
restricting access to the file transfer server.
 Proper security measures were not established over the electronic licensing
application administered by the Divisions of Occupational and Professional
Licensing and Financial Regulation. For example, controls over the credit
card service provider account used to process occupational and
professional license fees were inadequate and appropriate controls were not
established over credit transactions. Furthermore, personal information of
new licensees on the web server was not sufficiently protected and the
website’s logged activity was not reviewed to identify unusual activity.
DLLR should improve security over the electronic licensing application by
taking the recommended actions, including improving controls over the credit
card service provider account, implementing controls over credit transactions,
adequately protecting sensitive personal information of new licensees, and
reviewing web server logs and taking appropriate follow-up action.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Cash receipts of two DLLR offices, which totaled $1.2 million during fiscal
year 2010, were not adequately controlled. For example, certain collections
were not restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon receipt,
and verifications of deposits were not always performed or were not
performed by personnel independent of the cash receipts process.
Furthermore, although a remote deposit process was implemented, related
controls need to be strengthened.
DLLR should establish adequate controls, as recommended, over its cash
receipts and should establish procedures over the remote deposit process
consistent with guidance issued by the Office of the State Treasurer.
 Internal control and record keeping deficiencies were noted with respect to
DLLR’s payroll and equipment. For example, individuals who approved
online personnel transactions and payroll adjustments did not review
related supporting documentation when doing so.
DLLR should take the recommended actions to improve controls and record
keeping in these areas.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) consists of the Office
of the Secretary and the following seven operating divisions:
 Administration
 Workforce Development and Adult Learning
 Unemployment Insurance
 Financial Regulation
 Labor and Industry
 Occupational and Professional Licensing
 Racing
The Office of the Secretary, the Division of Administration, and the Division of
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (as of July 1, 2008) are included in the
scope of this audit. The Office of the Secretary and the Division of Administration
provide executive oversight, general administration, public information, fiscal
services, information technology support, and comprehensive planning for the other
DLLR divisions. The Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
administers various employment and training activities, including certain workforce
programs that are primarily funded by the federal government.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2010, these three units had
operating expenditures totaling approximately $135.3 million. The remaining
Divisions, which are addressed in separate audits, had operating expenditures
totaling approximately $108.2 million.
Organizational Changes
Chapter 134, Laws of Maryland 2008, effective July 1, 2008, transferred the
responsibility for Adult Education and Literacy Services, and Education Programs
for Correctional Facilities from the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE) to DLLR’s Division of Workforce Development. Furthermore, the law
transferred the special fund used for the operation of educational programs in
correctional institutions, as well as related federal appropriations, from MSDE to
DLLR’s Division of Workforce Development. The scope of our audit of DLLR
includes these programs beginning July 1, 2008. In the past, these programs were
included in the scope of our MSDE audit. Finally, Chapter 309, Laws of Maryland
7

--- Page 10 ---
2009, renamed the Division of Workforce Development to the Division of
Workforce Development and Adult Learning, effective July 1, 2009.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained in
our preceding audit report, dated November 21, 2008, of the Office of the Secretary
and the Division of Administration. We determined that DLLR satisfactorily
addressed five of these findings. The remaining four findings are repeated as five
items in this report. Our preceding audit report of the Division of Workforce
Development, dated January 9, 2009, had no findings.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation’s (DLLR) Office of
Information Technology (OIT), within the Division of Administration, provides
information technology support for the DLLR divisions. In that capacity, OIT
operates and maintains various servers and applications, including a Department
website that provides several online services, including occupational and
professional licensing registration and renewal, and unemployment insurance
applications and ongoing claim submissions. Connectivity for DLLR’s
applications is provided by an internal computer network and a wide area network
for its headquarters locations and several branch offices. DLLR’s internal
network includes a firewall to provide protection from connections to untrusted
networks, including the Internet.
Finding 1
Sensitive information relating to unemployment insurance claims was not
adequately protected.
Analysis
Sensitive personal and financial information relating to unemployment insurance
claims processed by DLLR’s Division of Unemployment Insurance was not
adequately protected. In support of the Division of Unemployment Insurance,
DLLR’s OIT transferred records of initial unemployment insurance claims from a
mainframe computer on the State’s Annapolis Data Center to a DLLR file transfer
server on a daily basis. Two commercial payroll service providers periodically
retrieved records from the file transfer server, updated the records, and transferred
the records back to the DLLR file transfer server.1 Files were also transferred
from the DLLR file transfer server to a major financial institution to support debit
card replenishment for approved unemployment claimants. These files included
records containing sensitive personal and financial information (including the
1 These commercial payroll service providers provide payroll services to numerous employers and,
as agents for these employers, report employee separation information to DLLR’s Division of
Unemployment Insurance (DUI) as required by Maryland law. Periodically, DLLR places
separate files of unemployment insurance claims on its file transfer server. The payroll providers
extract these files, update the separation information, and submit the files back to DUI for claims
processing.
9

--- Page 12 ---
claimants’ names, social security numbers, dates of birth, addresses, and income
amounts). We noted the following conditions:
 The records for unemployment insurance claims that were retrieved from the
State mainframe computer, over the Statewide Intranet network, were
transmitted to the DLLR file transfer server in clear text. Specifically, these
records were not encrypted even though the mainframe computer software
was capable of providing such encryption. This condition was commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
 DLLR did not encrypt records for unemployment insurance claims while the
information was stored on its file transfer server. This condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Records transferred over the Internet from the DLLR’s file transfer server to
two commercial payroll service providers and from these providers back to
the file transfer server were encrypted. However, the encryption level used
was not adequate for encrypting critical information transmitted across the
Internet, increasing the risk that the information could be converted into
readable text. This condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 DLLR did not properly restrict access to the unemployment insurance claim
records stored on the DLLR file transfer server. Accordingly, each of the two
payroll service providers had unnecessary read access to the unemployment
insurance claim records pertaining to the other service provider. This
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In addition,
numerous employee accounts on the State mainframe computer had
unnecessary access to the DLLR file transfer server.
 The DLLR file transfer server was not properly protected from unauthorized
Internet access. Specifically, traffic from the Internet to this server was not
filtered by any device and the server was not located behind the DLLR
firewall.
This sensitive personal and financial information is commonly sought by
criminals for use in identity theft. Accordingly, appropriate information system
security controls, as required by the Department of Information Technology’s
(DoIT) Information Security Policy, need to exist to ensure that this information is
safeguarded and not improperly disclosed.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLLR
a. encrypt unemployment insurance claim records in transit and on the
DLLR network in compliance with the DoIT’s Information Security Policy
(repeat),
b. allow each payroll service provider access to only its unemployment
insurance claim information (repeat),
c. restrict access to the DLLR file transfer server to only those accounts
which require such access, and
d. locate the DLLR file transfer server on the internal network behind the
DLLR firewall and properly filter all traffic destined for this server.
Finding 2
Proper security measures were not established over the electronic licensing
application.
Analysis
Proper security measures were not established over the electronic licensing
application administered by the Divisions of Occupational and Professional
Licensing and Financial Regulation. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
 Controls over the credit card service provider account used to process credit
card payments for license fees for the Occupational and Professional
Licensing Division were inadequate. A credit card service provider account
was used for service management (that is, to manage credit card verification
and payment settings), as well as to process credit card payments. Rather,
separate accounts should be established for credit card payment transaction
processing and service management to provide for an adequate separation of
duties and to limit security risks. In addition, the use of this account was not
limited to specific Internet addresses. Limiting such access to specific
Internet addresses enhances security over who could attempt to use these
accounts. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 For the Occupational and Professional Licensing Division, the credit card
provider account and its password were stored on the web server in plain text,
exposing the name and password to anyone capable of accessing these files.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 Appropriate controls were not established over credit (refund) transactions.
Specifically, a maximum credit transaction amount was not established, credit
transactions could be greater than the original transaction amounts, and credits
could be issued without an original transaction.
 New Occupational and Professional licensees’ personal information, including
names, addresses, dates of birth, and social security numbers, were
unnecessarily stored in plain text log files on the DLLR web server supporting
the electronic licensing function. According to DLLR records, during fiscal
year 2010, personal information for 19,918 individuals was recorded in these
log files. This information is commonly sought by criminals for use in
identity theft. This condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 The electronic licensing web server account was granted unnecessary
modification access to critical files. Such unnecessary access included
modification access to the host server’s system registry that contains the
settings for the server and resident applications. Proper internal control
requires that web server accounts be granted limited access to sensitive system
resources, to reduce security risks and attacks. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 The electronic licensing web application account and passwords settings were
not in compliance with DoIT’s Information Security Policy requirements.
Specifically, account lockout was not enabled, password complexity was not
enforced, and the password minimum length was set at only four characters.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DLLR
a. use separate credit card service provider accounts for credit card
payment processing and service management (repeat);
b. restrict the use of its credit card service provider service management
account to only authorized Internet addresses (repeat);
c. either encrypt the credit card provider account name and related
password on the web server or remove them from the web server
(repeat);
d. limit credit amounts and require that credits be less than, or equal to,
previous transaction amounts;
e. either encrypt the plain text log files containing new licensee personal
information or remove the log files from the web server (repeat);
f. limit the electronic licensing web server account’s access to critical files to
only those files needed to perform required operations (repeat); and
12

--- Page 15 ---
g. ensure that the electronic licensing web application account and
password settings are in compliance with the DoIT’s Information Security
Policy requirements.
Finding 3
The electronic licensing system was not properly monitored or protected
from external threats.
Analysis
The electronic licensing system was not properly monitored or protected from
external threats. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Reviews of the website’s logged activity to identify any unusual events and
trends in activity were not performed. The only reviews performed were to
monitor the extent of website usage, and these reviews were only performed
on a monthly basis and were not documented. A similar comment was made
in our preceding audit report.
 Web application security tools were not used to help protect the electronic
licensing application and backend database. Specifically, web application
vulnerability scanning software had not been used to help identify the
existence of potentially serious security vulnerabilities within the application’s
program code, and although basic firewalls were used for the network, a web
application firewall was not used to provide enhanced protection over the
application and backend database.
 There were unusually high levels of website traffic originating from
suspicious sources (traffic from Latvia). This suspicious traffic occurred
during August 2010, March 2010, and September 2009 and was also
identified during our prior audit. Since the application’s logging was limited,
the exact nature of this traffic could not be determined. Because DLLR did
not use web application security tools, as mentioned above, the application’s
vulnerability to a web-based attack is unknown. During a web-based attack,
sensitive information residing on the backend database could be subject to
modification or disclosure.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLLR
a. perform weekly, documented reviews of web server log files, expanded to
include unusual events and trends in activity (repeat);
13

--- Page 16 ---
b. pursue any unusual events or trends identified to ascertain if there has
been any system compromise and take all actions necessary if a
compromise has occurred;
c. enhance application logging capabilities to help identify the nature and
specifics of any attacks;
d. assess the costs and benefits of using a web application firewall to help
protect the electronic licensing system;
e. periodically utilize web application security tools to help identify any web
application software vulnerabilities and remediate all confirmed critical
vulnerabilities; and
f. for past suspicious website traffic, consider obtaining the services of a
computer system forensic expert to determine if any sensitive information
has been compromised.
Finding 4
Adequate controls had not been established over a critical server and
database.
Analysis
Adequate controls had not been established over a critical server and database.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Account, password, and access controls over the professional licensing
application server were not sufficient to properly secure the server and did not
comply with DoIT’s Information Security Policy. In this regard, users’
workstations allowed for automatic connection to the server with the system
rights of a workstation’s owner. Accordingly, anyone with physical access to
a workstation could access the server with the workstation owner’s rights,
such as to add or modify accounts. In addition, 7 accounts were using default
passwords (where the userids were the same as the passwords), 21 accounts
had not been used for periods up to 603 days, and 7 accounts belonged to
terminated employees.
 For the professional licensing application server, two individuals had
conflicting duties regarding security functions and programming. As a result,
these two individuals had complete system access and control over this server.
 For the professional licensing application server, certain security-related
operations were not logged (for example, the creation and deletion of master
file records). In addition, for events that were logged, DLLR did not have
14

--- Page 17 ---
documentation of the reviews performed for these events. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 For a critical database, certain key system security and audit-related events
(for example granting a privilege) were not logged, although the capability to
perform such logging existed. Furthermore, documentation did not exist to
support DLLR’s review and investigation of the database server’s failed logon
attempts. Therefore, significant database security violations could go
undetected, thus permitting unauthorized or inappropriate activities to
adversely affect the integrity of the production database. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
DoIT’s Information Security Policy establishes the minimum security standards,
including access, account, password, and monitoring controls, for information
technology systems in the State.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLLR comply with DoIT’s Information Security Policy
and establish adequate access, account, password, and monitoring controls
over the aforementioned professional licensing application server and
database. We made detailed recommendations, which if implemented,
should provide for adequate controls in these areas (repeat).
Cash Receipts
Background
According to the State’s records, DLLR’s collections totaled approximately $22.6
million during fiscal year 2010, consisting of $3.3 million collected through the
DLLR lockbox account, $10.3 million collected by DLLR divisions and DLLR’s
Office of Budget and Fiscal Services, and $9 million in credit card receipts from
electronic licensing activity.
Finding 5
Sufficient controls were not established over certain collections.
Analysis
DLLR had not established adequate accountability and control over collections
received at DLLR’s Office of Budget and Fiscal Services (OBFS) and the
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL). OBFS cash
receipts generally consisted of vendor and grantee refunds and DWDAL cash
receipts were for General Education Development (GED) exam fees and
15

--- Page 18 ---
transcript release fees. According to DLLR’s records, these two locations directly
collected and deposited cash receipts totaling approximately $1.2 million during
fiscal year 2010 (approximately $761,000 at OBFS and approximately $459,000
at DWDAL). Specifically, our review disclosed the following deficiencies:
 Mail-in check receipts and walk-in collections received by OBFS and
DWDAL were not always restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt.
 DWDAL collections were not recorded immediately upon receipt and were
not timely deposited. Before recordation, these collections were stored in a
locked cabinet awaiting deposit. We were advised that the collections were
often not recorded for up to a month after receipt. In addition, our test of 10
days of collections, totaling approximately $21,000, disclosed that all
collections were deposited between 13 and 31 business days after recordation.
 Deposit verifications were not performed for DWDAL collections, and the
deposit verifications at OBFS were not adequately documented, were not
performed by personnel independent of the cash receipts process, and were
not made using the initial record of receipt. Although our limited testing at
both locations did not disclose any improprieties, because of DLLR’s failure
to perform adequate deposit verifications, one instance was disclosed during
the audit period in which DWDAL receipts totaling $1,130 were not deposited
until five months after being recorded.
 Six DWDAL employees had the ability to waive the $45 GED exam fee and
the $5 transcript fee on DLLR’s Maryland General Educational Testing
System (MGETS) and also had access to GED exam fee collections.
Furthermore, exam fee waivers recorded on MGETS were not subject to an
independent verification. The lack of segregation of duties over these
functions could result in the misappropriation of funds.
According to the Comptroller of Maryland—General Accounting Division’s
Accounting Procedures Manual, checks and money orders are to be restrictively
endorsed immediately upon receipt. Furthermore, cash receipts are to be recorded
immediately upon receipt and should be deposited no later than the first working
day after the day of receipt. Finally, a verification of cash receipts from initial
recordation to deposit is to be performed by an employee independent of the cash
receipts function.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DLLR
a. restrictively endorse all checks and money orders immediately upon
receipt;
b. record collections immediately upon receipt and deposit collections within
a one working day;
c. perform documented deposit verifications of collections from the initial
receipt document to deposit by an employee independent of the related
collections; and
d. remove the capability to waive GED exam and transcript fees from
employees with access to cash receipts, and verify waived fees for
propriety on a test basis.
Finding 6
Controls over processing cash receipts using remote deposit need
improvement.
Analysis
Controls over processing cash receipts using remote deposit need improvement.
The remote deposit process allows DLLR to electronically scan the images of
cash receipts (that is, checks and money orders) and electronically transmit the
images to the State’s bank for deposit instead of physically taking the receipts to
the bank for deposit. With approval from the State Treasurer’s Office, DLLR
began implementing the remote deposit process in November 2009 and, by
February 2010, the remote deposit process was fully implemented in all divisions.
For example, our review noted the following conditions:
 Cash receipts deposited through the remote deposit system in the Office of
Budget and Fiscal Services (OBFS) were not safeguarded after being
processed and awaiting destruction. In this regard, these cash receipts were
maintained in an unsecured file folder located under an employee’s desk,
instead of being locked in a secure location, such as a safe.
 Cash receipts deposited remotely in the Division of Workforce Development
and Adult Learning (DWDAL) were not voided after they had been processed
and, as of October 25, 2010, DWDAL had not destroyed any cash receipts
processed through remote deposit system since it began using it in February
2010.
 DLLR has not developed formal written procedures outlining the proper
controls over the use of the remote deposit system by DLLR’s divisions.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services
by Maryland State Agencies establishes controls that State agencies should have
in place over the remote deposit process. For example, cash receipts should be
secured both before and after scanning until the checks are destroyed, scanned
and transmitted cash receipts should be marked as void after the bank has
accepted the scanned images, and the accepted cash receipts should be stored no
longer than 30 days before they are destroyed. Although the aforementioned
policy was not formally issued until June 2010, DLLR should have consulted with
the Office of the State Treasurer to implement proper controls.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DLLR
a. comply with the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit
Services by Maryland State Agencies; and
b. establish written procedures, consistent with the State Treasurer’s Policy,
describing the proper controls over the use of the remote deposit system
by each DLLR division.
Finding 7
Reconciliations of electronic licensing collections with the amounts allocated
to the various boards or recorded in State records were not adequate.
Analysis
Electronic licensing collections received through the DLLR website were not
properly reconciled to the amounts allocated to the various boards or recorded in
State’s records. Specifically, our review disclosed the following conditions:
 DLLR did not adequately reconcile electronic licensing receipts of the
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing (DOPL) with the
allocation of the receipts among its various boards. According to DLLR’s
licensing records, approximately $9 million was collected during fiscal year
2010 and approximately $9.2 million was allocated to the DOPL boards.
Although DLLR performed a monthly reconciliation of the amounts received
and allocated, supporting documentation for these reconciliations was not
maintained, and DLLR could not adequately explain this difference.
 DLLR did not reconcile electronic licensing receipts collected by DLLR’s
Division of Financial Regulation (DFR) with the amounts recorded in the
State’s records. During the period September 2007 to June 2010,
18

--- Page 21 ---
approximately $14.1 million was recorded as DFR electronic licensing
revenue.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DLLR
a. maintain documentation to support a proper reconciliation of DOPL
electronic licensing receipts with amounts allocation to the boards,
b. perform monthly reconciliations of electronic licensing revenues collected
by DFR to ensure all revenues were properly accounted for in the State’s
records, and
c. investigate the aforementioned difference and take appropriate corrective
action.
Payroll
Finding 8
Controls over personnel and payroll transactions were not adequate.
Analysis
DLLR had not established adequate controls over its personnel, payroll, and time
and leave transactions. According to State records, DLLR employed
approximately 1,675 regular and 311 contractual employees as of June 30, 2010,
and payroll expenditures totaled approximately $122.8 million during fiscal year
2010 for all DLLR units. Specifically, our review disclosed the following
conditions:
 The individuals responsible for approving online personnel transactions (such
as adding or deleting employees, and salary adjustments) and the individuals
responsible for approving payroll adjustments (such as payments for overtime
and unused sick leave) did not review supporting documentation. Rather,
these individuals relied on the reviews performed by the individuals
responsible for initiating these transactions. As a result, there is an increased
risk of improper transactions being processed.
 Although DLLR received quarterly reports from the Comptroller of
Maryland’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) of DLLR employees that appeared
on multiple State payrolls (for example, worked for both DLLR and another
State agency), DLLR did not investigate employees appearing on the reports
to ensure the propriety of the payroll payments. During the period from April
2008 to June 2010, a total of 60 employees appeared on CPB’s multiple
payroll reports; payments made by DLLR to these employees during this
19

--- Page 22 ---
period totaled approximately $599,000 and payments made by other state
agencies totaled approximately $545,200. While our limited test of these
payrolls disclosed no overlapping hours, without a thorough review, DLLR
cannot ensure these payments are proper. CPB requires State agencies to
investigate all employees appearing on these reports to ensure the employees
are not claiming hours for multiple jobs during the same time periods.
 Certain employees had the capability to electronically approve their own
timesheets on DLLR’s time and leave accounting system. Specifically, during
the period from January 2009 through June 2010, 28 employees prepared and
approved their own timesheets. Six of these employees approved their own
timesheet between 11 and 40 times. Additionally, there was no independent
approval of timesheet adjustments and leave adjustments processed by six
other employees who had full system access to DLLR’s time and leave
accounting system. These employees had the ability to modify their access, as
well as other employees’ access to the system; initiate and approve
timesheets; and process adjustments to leave records.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DLLR
a. ensure that the individuals responsible for approving personnel
transactions and payroll adjustments review supporting documentation,
at least on a test basis;
b. review the quarterly CPB reports, properly investigate all employees on
multiple State payrolls, and take appropriate action when overlapping
hours are identified;
c. ensure that the individuals cannot both prepare and approve timesheets
on DLLR’s electronic time and leave accounting system; and
d. ensure that time and leave transactions processed by employees with full
system access are independently reviewed, at least on a test basis, and
that such review is documented and retained for future reference.
Equipment
Finding 9
Proper controls were not established over DLLR’s equipment.
DLLR had not established adequate controls over its equipment and related record
keeping functions, nor did its physical inventory procedures comply with certain
provisions of the Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control
Manual. As of June 30, 2010, the book value of DLLR’s equipment reported on
20

--- Page 23 ---
the State’s records totaled approximately $18.3 million. Our review disclosed the
following conditions:
 Proper separation of duties was not established over the record keeping and
equipment custody functions. Specifically, three employees had custodial
responsibilities over certain DLLR equipment and also had the ability to
update the automated detail equipment records.
 DLLR did not maintain an independent control account as required.
Specifically, activity posted to DLLR’s control account for equipment
additions, disposals, and adjustments was obtained from the detail equipment
records and not from an independent source. A control account is a
continuous summary of transactions and serves as a total dollar value control
over amounts in the detail equipment records.
 We were advised that physical inventories were conducted annually by
various equipment officers who are responsible for equipment in their
respective locations, along with a representative from DLLR’s Office of
General Services; however, inventory count sheets did not contain
documentation of who conducted the physical inventories. Additionally, our
test of four locations, with equipment totaling approximately $2.3 million,
disclosed that adequate documentation did not exist to determine if the most
recent inventory counts were reconciled to the related detail records;
furthermore, any related missing items were not reported to the Department of
General Services (DGS). According to the detailed records, as of September
29, 2010, we determined that equipment items totaling approximately
$174,800 from these four locations had not been inventoried in the past year,
indicating items may be missing. Furthermore, inventory count sheets to
support the inventory results were not available for one location with
equipment totaling approximately $806,300.
Similar conditions related to the control account and physical inventories have
been commented upon in our preceding audit reports on DLLR since 1996. The
Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual requires that
the duties of inventory record keeping, custodian, and physical inventory taking
be segregated. In addition, the Manual requires that a control account and detail
records be properly maintained for equipment and that the control account be
reconciled at least quarterly with the aggregate balance of the detail records. The
inventory results should be reconciled to the detail records, and discrepancies
should be investigated and resolved. Based on the inventory results, equipment
items that cannot be resolved should be reported to DGS following proper
investigation.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DLLR
a. establish proper segregation of duties between the functions of record
keeping and equipment custody;
b. establish and maintain an independent control account, periodically
document a reconciliation of the account to the related detail records,
and investigate any discrepancies (repeat);
c. reconcile the physical inventory counts to the detail records in a timely
manner;
d. maintain support of the physical inventories including count sheets,
documentation of who performed the inventories, and the reconciliation
of the counts to the detail records; and
e. investigate and resolve discrepancies between the inventory results and
the detail records, including the reporting of missing or stolen items to
DGS and the removal of the items from the detail records, as necessary
(repeat).
We advised DLLR on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Office of
the Secretary and Division of Administration for the period beginning September
1, 2007 and ending June 30, 2010, as well as the Division of Workforce
Development and Adult Learning for the period beginning July 1, 2008 and
ending June 30, 2010. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DLLR’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included information system security, cash receipts,
payroll, federal funds, purchasing and disbursement activities, and equipment.
Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of
documents and records, and observations of DLLR’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit included a review of certain support services (for example, payroll, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided by DLLR to its divisions.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of DLLR’s compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including DLLR.
DLLR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
23

--- Page 26 ---
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect DLLR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our
report also includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to DLLR that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DLLR’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DLLR regarding the
results of our review of its response.
24

--- Page 28 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Sensitive information relating to unemployment insurance claims was not adequately
protected.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DLLR
a. encrypt unemployment insurance claim records in transit and on the DLLR network in
compliance with the DoIT’s Information Security Policy (repeat),
b. allow each payroll service provider access to only its unemployment insurance claim
information (repeat),
c. restrict access to the DLLR file transfer server to only those accounts which require
such access, and
d. locate the DLLR file transfer server on the internal network behind the DLLR firewall
and properly filter all traffic destined for this server.
Response: We concur. DLLR will increase protection of sensitive information relating to
unemployment insurance claims. Specifically:
a. DLLR will encrypt UI claim records in transit and on the DLLR network in compliance
with DoIT’s Information Security Policy. This is scheduled to be implemented 12/11.
b. DLLR will allow each payroll service provider to be able to access only their own UI
claim information. This is scheduled to be implemented 12/11.
c. DLLR restricted access to the file transfer server to only those accounts requiring access.
This recommendation was implemented.
d. The file transfer server will be moved behind the firewall by 12/11. All traffic destined to
this server is now properly filtered.
Finding 2
Proper security measures were not established over the electronic licensing application.
1

--- Page 29 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DLLR
a. use separate credit card service provider accounts for credit card payment processing
and service management (repeat);
b. restrict the use of its credit card service provider service management account to only
authorized Internet addresses (repeat);
c. either encrypt the credit card provider account name and related password on the web
server or remove them from the web server (repeat);
d. limit credit amounts and require that credits be less than, or equal to, previous
transaction amounts;
e. either encrypt the plain text log files containing new licensee personal information or
remove the log files from the web server (repeat);
f. limit the electronic licensing web server account’s access to critical files to only those
files needed to perform required operations (repeat); and
g. ensure that the electronic licensing web application account and password settings are
in compliance with the DoIT’s Information Security Policy requirements.
Response: We concur. DLLR will establish proper security measures over the electronic
licensing application. Specifically:
a. Separate credit card service provider accounts for credit card payment processing and
service management are now used.
b. The use of its credit card service provider service management account is now restricted to
only authorized Internet addresses.
c. The credit card provider account name was removed from the web server.
d. Credit amounts are limited and credits must be less than, or equal to, the previous
transaction amounts.
e. The plain text log files containing new licensee personal information were removed from
the web server.
f. The electronic licensing web server account’s access to critical files was limited to only
those files needed to perform required operations.
2

--- Page 30 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
g. DLLR is currently investigating the ramifications of making the electronic licensing web
application account and password settings in compliance with the DoIT’s Information
Security Policy requirements.
Finding 3
The electronic licensing system was not properly monitored or protected from external
threats.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DLLR
a. perform weekly, documented reviews of web server log files, expanded to include
unusual events and trends in activity (repeat);
b. pursue any unusual events or trends identified to ascertain if there has been any system
compromise and take all actions necessary if a compromise has occurred;
c. enhance application logging capabilities to help identify the nature and specifics of any
attacks;
d. assess the costs and benefits of using a web application firewall to help protect the
electronic licensing system;
e. periodically utilize web application security tools to help identify any web application
software vulnerabilities and remediate all confirmed critical vulnerabilities; and
f. for past suspicious website traffic, consider obtaining the services of a computer system
forensic expert to determine if any sensitive information has been compromised.
Response: We concur. DLLR will improve the monitoring and protection of the electronic
licensing system. Specifically:
a. Weekly, documented reviews of web server log files, expanded to include unusual events
and trends in activity are now performed.
b. Unusual events or trends identified and necessary actions are taken.
c. Logging capabilities were improved to help identify the nature and specifics of any
attacks.
d. DLLR is in the process of assessing the costs and benefits of using a web application
firewall to help protect the electronic licensing system.
3

--- Page 31 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
e. DLLR will periodically utilize web application security tools to identify any web
application software vulnerabilities and will remediate all confirmed critical
vulnerabilities.
f. DLLR now uses IBM as computer system forensic expert to determine whether any
sensitive information was compromised.
Finding 4
Adequate controls had not been established over a critical server and database.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DLLR comply with DoIT’s Information Security Policy and establish
adequate access, account, password, and monitoring controls over the aforementioned
professional licensing application server and database. We made detailed
recommendations, which if implemented, should provide for adequate controls in these
areas (repeat).
Response: We concur. DLLR improved the controls over a critical server and database. DLLR
implemented the detailed recommendations made by OLA. DLLR established adequate access,
account, password, and monitoring controls over the professional licensing application server
and database.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Sufficient controls were not established over certain collections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DLLR
a. restrictively endorse all checks and money orders immediately upon receipt as required
by GAD;
b. record collections immediately upon receipt and deposit collections in a timely manner
as required by GAD;
4

--- Page 32 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
c. perform documented deposit verifications of collections from the initial receipt
document to deposit by an individual independent of the related collections; and
d. remove the capability to waive GED exam and transcript fees from employees with
access to cash receipts, and verify waived fees for propriety on a test basis.
Response: We concur. DLLR will provide training to appropriate personnel in order to ensure
the current written policies are understood and incorporated into the Division’s policies and
procedures. Further, we emphasized the critical need to process items more quickly and
promptly forward the paperwork to Accounting. Specifically:
a. We reissued the procedural memo to all cash receipts personnel & directors, reiterating
the need to restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt
b. We advised the Division of the GAD requirement to record all collections within two (2)
business days of receipt. Also, “a.” above addresses this issue.
c. Deposit verifications are now performed and documented by staff independent of the
cash receipt process. Also, DWDAL explored additional funding and implemented
procedural changes to assist with GED staffing issues. This ensures compliance with
cash receipts processing time requirements and improves processing time for cash
receipts.
d. The GED staff involved in processing cash receipts no longer have the authority to
process fee waivers in the MGETS System. Fee waivers are now handled by the GED
Staff Specialists, based on the authorization of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Adult
Education and the Director of the GED program. The waiver of exam fees is now
verified by staff independent of the waiver process.
Finding 6
Controls over processing cash receipts using remote deposit need improvement.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DLLR
a. comply with the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services by
Maryland State Agencies; and
5

--- Page 33 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
b. establish written procedures, based on the aforementioned State Treasurer’s policy,
outlining the proper controls over the use of the remote deposit system by each DLLR
division.
Response: We concur. We will comply with the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote
Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies policy issued on 06/15/10. We will modify our
written procedures, provided to the auditors during the audit, outlining the proper controls over
the use of the remote deposit system by each DLLR division, based on the aforementioned State
Treasurer’s policy. Specifically:
a. We are in the process of establishing the approval hierarchy necessary to be in
compliance with the Treasurer’s policy.
b. The aforementioned DLLR formal written policy was drafted and issued to ALL remote
deposit users. It will be reissued after inclusion of the recommended modifications.
Finding 7
Reconciliations of electronic licensing collections with the amounts allocated to the various
boards or recorded in State records were not adequate.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DLLR
a. maintain documentation to support a proper reconciliation of DOPL electronic
licensing receipts with amounts allocation to the boards,
b. perform monthly reconciliations of electronic licensing revenues collected by DFR to
ensure all revenues were properly accounted for in the State’s records, and
c. investigate the aforementioned difference and take appropriate corrective action.
Response: We concur. DLLR will provide training to appropriate personnel in order to ensure
current written policies are understood and incorporated into the division’s policies and
procedures. Recent staffing and procedural changes greatly improved the process by which these
accounts are reconciled and validated. In addition, we will confer with the legislative auditors as
we move forward with measures to streamline and better document the process. Specifically:
6

--- Page 34 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
a. We will ensure identified discrepancies are properly noted and documented when
performing the reconciliation.
b. In the future, General Accounting will work with IT to obtain the necessary reports and
begin performing the reconciliation of the Financial Regulation e-licensing receipts to
ensure all receipts collected are properly allocated and posted to R*STARS.
c. We will comply with the auditors’ recommendation and investigate the aforementioned
difference and take appropriate corrective action.
Payroll
Finding 8
Controls over personnel and payroll transactions were not adequate.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DLLR
a. ensure that the individuals responsible for approving personnel transactions and
payroll adjustments review supporting documentation, at least on a test basis;
b. review the quarterly CPB reports, properly investigate all employees on multiple State
payrolls, and take appropriate action when overlapping hours are identified;
c. ensure that the individuals cannot both prepare and approve timesheets on DLLR’s
electronic time and leave accounting system; and
d. ensure that time and leave transactions processed by employees with full system access
are independently reviewed, at least on a test basis, and that such review is documented
and retained for future reference.
Response: We concur:
a. Our Office of Human Resources will continue to approve personnel transactions and
payroll time reports. The Office of Human Resources initiated changes in the process to
ensure individuals responsible for approving personnel transactions (such as, adding or
deleting employees, and salary adjustments) review supporting documentation, at least on
a test basis. In addition, they will continue to work with DBM to improve the processes
and systematic programming errors within MD Time.
7

--- Page 35 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
b. The Office of Human Resources will review the quarterly CPB reports, investigate all
employees on multiple State payrolls and take appropriate corrective action when
overlapping hours are identified;
c. The Office of Human Resources will continue to work with supervisors and programmers
to ensure individuals cannot both prepare and approve timesheets on DLLR’s electronic
time and leave accounting system;
d. The Office of Human Resources will ensure time and leave transactions processed by
employees with full system access are independently reviewed, at least on a test basis and
such reviews are documented and retained for future reference.
Equipment
Finding 9
Proper controls were not established over DLLR’s equipment.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DLLR
a. establish proper segregation of duties between the functions of record keeping and
equipment custody;
b. establish and maintain an independent control account, periodically document a
reconciliation of the account to the related detail records, and investigate any
discrepancies (repeat);
c. reconcile the physical inventory counts to the detail records in a timely manner;
d. maintain support of the physical inventories including count sheets, documentation of
who performed the inventories, and the reconciliation of the counts to the detail
records; and
e. investigate and resolve discrepancies between the inventory results and the detail
records, including the reporting of missing or stolen items to DGS and the removal of
the items from the detail records, as necessary (repeat).
We advised DLLR on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Response: We concur.
8

--- Page 36 ---
Department of Labor Licensing and Regulation
Office of the Secretary
Division of Administration
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning
Draft Legislative Audit Report, Dated August 2011
Responses to Draft Legislative Audit
September, 2011
a. As of June 2010, two employees in the Inventory Unit of OGS were able to update
records. The Property Manager could view but not update records. Another employee,
who moved to the Deputy Director position within OGS, still had the update ability for
technical support, but did not have custodial responsibilities over DLLR equipment.
Custodial responsibilities for equipment are delegated to the accountable officers in the
various DLLR units, and these individuals do not have access to the detail records
residing in the ATRACK system.
b. The Office of Budget and Fiscal Services will confer with the legislative auditors to
ascertain the appropriate method to maintain a control account which is independent
from the detail records. In addition, we will ensure these accounts are reconciled on at
least a quarterly basis and all discrepancies are resolved and documented.
c. DLLR will develop a sign-off sheet for accountable officers who assist the OGS
Inventory personnel in performing physical inventories. This sign-off sheet will become
part of the count sheet documentation. The accountable officer’s name is currently in
the ATRACK system associated with each equipment item.
d. DLLR will develop a system to maintain support of the physical inventories including
count sheets, documentation of who performed the inventories, and the reconciliation of
the counts to the detail records; and
e. OGS recognizes follow-ups to physical inventories need to be standard operating
procedure in order to reconcile the detailed records. Our efforts in the past proved the
data acquired through an initial physical inventory yields a list of possible missing items,
but a follow-up inventory significantly decreases or eliminates this list. OGS is
aggressively setting procedures in place to perform follow-up inventories to enable
yearly reconciliation.
9

--- Page 37 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Rick E. Pyles
Senior Auditors
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Albert E. Schmidt, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Eoghan J. Doherty
Alexander M. Prodey
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors
Eric Alexander
Michael K. Bliss
Christopher D. Jackson
Jeffrey T. Zankowitz
Information Systems Staff Auditors