Title: Department of General Services - Office of Procurement and Logistics
Date: 12/07/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067456e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:19:08.800052
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
December 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT Of LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE Of LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Desehenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII,CPA
ExecutiseDirector LegislativeAuditor
December 7,2016
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Department ofGeneral
Services (DOS) Office ofProcurement and Logistics (OPL) for the period
—
beginning August 20, 2012 and ending October 27, 2015. OPL responsibilities
include managing the centralized procurement ofcertain goods and services for
State agencies; overseeing the State’s Automated fuel Management Program; and
monitoring providers with procurement preferences.
Our audit disclosed that OPL did not adequately review and follow up on the
results ofcertain monitoring procedures which had been established to ensure the
propriety oftransactions incurred and the quality offuel provided under the
State’s $305 million fuel contract. for example, OPL did not verify the accuracy
ofthe vendor’s quarterly fuel usage reconciliations, which were used to adjust the
billings for fuel purchased by State agencies. In addition, there was a lack of
adequate follow-up by OPL when fuel at State dispensing locations failed 40 of
291 quality control tests conducted by the Comptroller ofMaryland during our
audit period.
Our audit also disclosed a lack ofadequate oversight for certain procurements
delegated by OPL to State agencies, including procurements ofcommodities and
maintenance services, which totaled $210 million and $38 million, respectively,
during our audit period. furthermore, we noted deficiencies relating to OPL’s
Statewide procurements, including the failure to publish all contract awards on
ei’IaiylandMarketplace as required, and to ensure the collection ofall
administrative fees that OPL is permitted by law to assess vendors on certain
Statewide contracts.
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fix 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll free in l\Iarvland 877-486-9964 fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, we found that OPL did not properly monitor providers that, by State law,
receive procurement preferences for State agency purchases. For example, OPL
did not establish comprehensive procedures for determining the fair market prices
ofgoods and services available from Maryland Correctional Enterprises.
DGS s response to this audit, on behalfofOPL, is included as an appendix to this
‘
report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course
ofthis audit by OPL.
Respectfully submitted,
72 )4a_L(
Thomas i Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Pricing and Selection Committee for Blind Industries and Services of 5
Maryland and the Employment Works Program
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Statewide Fuel Contract
Finding 1 – OPL did not verify the accuracy of periodic fuel usage 8
reconciliations, sufficiently address failed fuel quality tests, and
ensure State agencies were reviewing monthly fuel variance reports.
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
* Finding 2 – OPL did not adequately monitor certain State agency 11
procurements that were specifically subject to its oversight and did
not review and update State procurement regulations and the DGS
manual for commodity procurements as needed.
Statewide Procurements
Finding 3 – OPL did not publish contract awards totaling $5.9 million 13
on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Finding 4 – OPL did not always provide prices for products available 14
from Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements to
State agencies.
Finding 5 – OPL did not ensure that it received all administrative fees 15
due from vendors providing goods and services to State agencies
under Statewide contracts, and our review of selected contracts
disclosed uncollected fees of approximately $222,000.
Monitoring of Providers with Procurement Preferences
* Finding 6 – OPL did not establish comprehensive procedures for 16
determining the fair market prices of goods and services available
from MCE. Furthermore, OPL did not publish fair market prices
of items available for purchase from MCE and BISM as required.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
* Finding 7 – OPL did not adequately monitor the coordinating entity for 18
EWP to ensure that it met its responsibilities under the law and that
fees it collected from EWP preferred providers were reasonable.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 20
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of General Services (DGS) – Office of Procurement and
Logistics (OPL) manages the centralized procurement of certain goods and
services for State agencies, including the procurement of contracts for the design
and construction of certain State facilities. OPL also oversees the State’s
Automated Fuel Management Program and printing and graphic services;
manages State records, inventories, and surplus property; and administers DGS’
minority business enterprise program. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2015, the value of Statewide procurements awarded by OPL totaled
approximately $191 million, and OPL’s operating expenditures totaled
approximately $7 million.
Pricing and Selection Committee for Blind Industries and
Services of Maryland and the Employment Works Program
State laws and regulations provide that State aided or controlled entities give
procurement preferences to benefit disadvantaged individuals or representative
organizations when goods and services provided by those individuals and
organizations can be supplied at prices that do not exceed prevailing market
prices. These organizations include Blind Industries and Services of Maryland
(BISM) and community service providers through the Employment Works
Program (EWP). State law stipulates certain requirements for the pricing of
goods and services provided by BISM and EWP at fair market value as
determined by various established pricing committees, of which the Secretary of
DGS is a member.
In our preceding audit report dated November 8, 2013, we commented upon
certain deficiencies relating to the determination of fair market pricing for goods
and services offered by BISM and through the EWP. Finding 8 in that report
stated, in part, that, although OPL advised us that BISM’s prices reflected fair
market value as determined by the BISM pricing committee, we noted that the
committee only reviewed prices for new items and for price changes submitted by
BISM, and that these reviews were not independent since they were based on data
provided by BISM. Finding 9 in the report also stated that OPL could not
document that the separate pricing and selection committee for EWP had
determined the fair market prices for goods and services provided by the EWP
providers. In our report, we recommended that OPL, in conjunction with the
BISM pricing committee, determine the fair market prices of BISM’s goods and
5

--- Page 8 ---
services, and ensure that the EWP pricing and selection committee determines the
fair market value of EWP goods and services.
During our current audit of OPL, we noted similar deficiencies relating to the
determination of fair market prices for goods and services offered by BISM and
through the EWP. This same condition with respect to BISM goods and services
was also included in our recent performance audit of certain operational aspects of
BISM for which we issued a report dated February 1, 2016.
Chapter 415, Laws of Maryland 2015, effective July 1, 2015, merged the
functions of the BISM pricing committee and the EWP pricing and selection
committee to establish the Pricing and Selection Committee for Blind Industries
and Services of Maryland and the Employment Works Program. By law, the five
members of the Committee are the Secretaries of the Departments of
Transportation; General Services; Public Safety and Correctional Services; and
Labor, Licensing, and Regulation; as well as the Assistant Secretary for
Vocational Rehabilitation within the Department of Education. Similar to its
predecessor committees, the law requires the Committee to set BISM’s prices for
its goods and services to reflect fair market prices, and to determine the fair
market prices for goods and services offered through the EWP. DGS continues to
be responsible for making pricing data determined by the Committee available to
State agencies.
The law has established the Committee’s membership; however, it did not assign
specific responsibility for Committee duties to the Secretary of DGS or to any
particular member or State agency. In this regard, we were advised by legal
counsel to the Maryland General Assembly that legislative action would likely be
required to affix responsibility for ensuring that the Committee’s duties were
carried out.
While in the past, DGS traditionally provided some support and accepted some
responsibility for the previous Committee’s work, we have been advised that due
to the lack of a legal mandate, DGS will not commit staff resources to provide
administrative support for the current Committee. Accordingly, we have not
repeated the aforementioned conditions regarding the determination of fair market
pricing in this OPL audit report.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 13 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 8, 2013. We determined that OPL
6

--- Page 9 ---
satisfactorily addressed 10 of these findings. The remaining 3 findings are
repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Statewide Fuel Contract
Background
The Department of General Services (DGS) – Office of Procurement and
Logistics (OPL) procured a new Statewide fuel contract effective August 1, 2012.
The total value of the five-year contract was estimated at $305 million (fuel costs
of $304 million, and equipment installation and maintenance of $1 million), and
the contract contained a provision for two additional two-year extensions. Based
on State records, during the period between August 1, 2012 and June 30, 2016,
payments to the fuel vendor totaled approximately $221.6 million.
Motor fuel supplied under the contract was purchased either in bulk or on a
consignment basis. There are 101 fuel dispensing locations for consigned fuel
throughout the State and, according to the fuel vendor’s records, there were
approximately 14,000 active fuel dispensing cards issued to State agencies, as of
April 2016, to distribute to their employees. State agencies are invoiced directly
by the vendor for their consigned fuel usage, based on data generated by the
pumps’ fuel card reading equipment, and are responsible for verifying the
propriety of and paying these invoices. OPL is responsible for monitoring the
vendor’s overall contract performance to ensure, for example, that quality fuel is
being delivered.
Finding 1
OPL did not verify the accuracy of periodic fuel usage reconciliations,
sufficiently address failed fuel quality tests, and ensure State agencies were
reviewing monthly fuel variance reports.
Analysis
OPL did not verify the accuracy of periodic fuel usage reconciliations performed
by the vendor, sufficiently address failed fuel quality tests, and ensure State
agencies were reviewing monthly fuel variance reports.
Fuel Usage Reconciliations
OPL did not verify the accuracy of quarterly reconciliations of fuel usage
performed by the fuel vendor for consigned fuel which were used to adjust vendor
billings, nor did it take steps to identify and correct the causes for the variances
identified. Furthermore, since the new fuel management equipment was installed
by the vendor in 2012, OPL had not taken action to ensure the State’s fuel pumps
were accurately calibrated. Proper calibration of the fuel pumps is critical for
ensuring the accuracy of the vendor’s billings; questions regarding the accuracy
8

--- Page 11 ---
of the pump calibration heighten the importance of the reconciliation process for
identifying variances.
OPL did not verify to supporting documentation, such as records of fuel deliveries
and inventories on hand, the accuracy of the fuel reconciliations performed by the
vendor which resulted in additional billings of $490,000 and credits of $143,000
during the period from August 2012 through December 2015. Furthermore, OPL
did not have on file relevant supporting documentation from the fuel vendor for
periods prior to September 2015. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance as
to the propriety of the additional billings and credits issued to State agencies for
variances noted, and that the cause of any variance was identified and corrected.
The contract requires the vendor to periodically reconcile the quantity of fuel
dispensed by each pump, based on records of fuel deliveries and fuel inventories,
with the quantity of fuel dispensed according to the fuel pump card readers on
which vendor billings to State agencies are based. Variances may be caused, for
example, by equipment malfunction, such as improper calibration, or theft. The
contract stipulates that the vendor bill the State agency responsible for the pump
location when fuel usage, according to the aforementioned records, is greater than
the amount dispensed according to the card reader and issue a credit if the
reconciliation shows less usage than the card reader.
Fuel Quality Tests
OPL was notified that fuel at various State fuel dispensing locations failed 40 of
291 quality control tests conducted by the Comptroller of Maryland (COM)
during our audit period, but did not take appropriate action. While we were
advised that the COM took action to stop fuel from being dispensed at these
locations, OPL did not ensure that additional testing was performed to determine
if deficient fuel from the same source had been delivered to other untested
locations, and did not determine and address the cause of the failed tests. Fuel
may fail testing for various reasons, including contamination with other fuel types
during delivery, and could lead to damage in State vehicles.
The fuel contract requires the vendor to provide high quality fuel, allows the State
to conduct independent testing of the fuel, and states that if substandard fuel
product is identified, deliveries will be suspended and all damages incurred by the
State will be charged to the contractor. This is also grounds for contract
termination.
Fuel Variance Reports
OPL did not conduct monthly audits of selected State agency reviews of monthly
fuel variance reports generated by the automated fuel management system, as
9

--- Page 12 ---
required by OPL’s internal written procedures. The reports include, for example,
instances of multiple fueling with the same fuel dispensing card on the same day,
and off-hour fueling which could indicate a possible misuse of fuel. The DGS
Handbook for Fleet Managers requires that State agencies review available
reports that list potential improper fuel usage.
The monthly fuel variance report issued in July 2015, for example, identified
more than 30,000 instances of potentially improper fueling. Instances identified
on the reports do not necessarily represent improper fueling. Certain State
agencies require vehicle use at irregular hours, such as at night and on holidays,
and may require refueling at those hours. The reports must be reviewed in
conjunction with explanations from applicable agencies to determine if there were
instances of improper fuel usage.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OPL
a. verify the accuracy and validity of periodic fuel reconciliation reports by
reviewing supporting documentation, including evidence of fuel deliveries
and fuel inventories, and ensure that these verifications are documented
and retained;
b. ensure that the cause of variances noted through the reconciliation
process are determined and corrected;
c. ensure that fuel pumps at the State’s dispensing locations are properly
calibrated;
d. ensure that the vendor takes all necessary corrective action when a State
fuel dispensing location fails a fuel quality control test, including ensuring
that other State locations do not have deficient fuel from the same source,
and determining and correcting the cause of the failed test; and
e. comply with its written procedures to audit monthly reports for select
agencies with potentially improper fueling and fuel usage and ensure that
the audits are documented and retained.
10

--- Page 13 ---
State Agency Procurement Monitoring
Finding 2
OPL did not adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that
were specifically subject to its oversight and did not review and update State
procurement regulations and the DGS manual for commodity procurements
as needed.
Analysis
OPL did not adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that were
specifically subject to its oversight. In particular, OPL’s responsibility for
managing the centralized procurement of goods and services for the State includes
monitoring State agency procurements for which, as permitted by State
procurement regulations, OPL has delegated its authority for up to a specified
dollar amount. OPL also lacked procedures to ensure that it had approved
printing service contracts procured by State agencies as required. Requirements
for delegated procurements are established in State procurement regulations and
DGS’ Commodity Procurement Operations Manual For Using Agencies;
however, these guidance documents had not been reviewed to correct language
that was incorrect, unclear, or out-of-date.
Delegated Commodity and Maintenance Procurements
OPL did not conduct audits of State agencies’ delegated procurement activity to
ensure that procurements were properly bid and awarded and that appropriate
documentation was maintained. As permitted by State procurement regulations,
OPL has delegated its authority for commodity purchases costing up to $25,000
and maintenance service contracts costing up to $50,000 to individual State
agencies. According to OPL’s records, State agencies made 59,802 procurements
for commodities and maintenance services totaling approximately $210 million
and $38 million, respectively, during our audit period (generally excluding
purchases made with the State’s corporate purchasing card).
The regulations permit OPL to audit State agency delegated commodity
procurements to ensure, for example, that a proper competitive procurement was
conducted, a deficiency often cited in our fiscal compliance audits of State
agencies. Although OPL had established written procedures to conduct audits of
delegated commodity procurements on a two-year rotating basis, as of January
2016, no audits had been conducted since fiscal year 2011. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Neither the regulations nor OPL’s audit procedures specifically address delegated
maintenance services procurements. However, State procurement regulations
11

--- Page 14 ---
grant OPL the authority to establish policies regarding all delegated
procurements, and we believe those policies should include conducting audits of
delegated maintenance service procurements.
Printing Service Procurements
OPL did not have an effective means for ensuring that State agencies submitted
printing service contracts for its approval as required by State law. OPL had
previously designated, through a memorandum of understanding, Maryland
Correctional Enterprises (MCE) as a preferred provider for printing services,
thereby allowing agencies to procure printing services from MCE without OPL
approval. However, the memorandum of understanding with MCE expired in
December 2014, and had not been renewed as of the time of our audit. MCE
reported that its sales of printing services to State agencies from January 2015 to
June 2015 totaled approximately $1.7 million, none of which had been approved
by OPL. Furthermore, we tested eight purchases of printing services made by
agencies during fiscal years 2014 through 2016, totaling $693,016, that were not
made through MCE. Our test disclosed four of these purchases totaling $246,567
that were not approved by OPL.
We were advised by Department of Information Technology (DoIT) personnel
that approval paths could be created for these purchases to require them to be
reviewed and approved by OPL before being finalized. The use of approval paths
would help to ensure that procurements of printing services were subject to OPL
review and approval.
Procurement Regulations and Manual
OPL had not conducted a review of State procurement regulations and the DGS
Commodity Procurement Operations Manual For Using Agencies (Manual) to
identify any corrections, clarifications, or other changes that may be necessary.
Our review disclosed instances in which the guidance in the documents was out-
of-date. For example, State procurement regulations currently state that agencies
may make commodity purchases of up to $10,000 without OPL approval;
however, this total was raised to $25,000 in May 2005 via a memorandum that
was issued to all procurement officers.
We also noted that the procurement regulations do not clearly convey the
requirement for agencies to purchase commodities through Statewide contracts.
While the Manual states that agencies are required to use Statewide contracts
unless there is a valid justification for not doing so, the regulations state that
agencies are required to use “scheduled purchases,” which is an uncommon form
of contracting. These documents provide direction and guidance to State agencies
12

--- Page 15 ---
regarding their procurement activity, and therefore should reflect only current and
accurate information.
OPL management advised us that its ability to properly oversee agency
procurements has been negatively impacted by significant and prolonged staffing
shortages.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPL
a. supplement its audit procedures to include delegated maintenance service
procurements, and conduct audits of delegated procurements in
accordance with its procedures, ensuring the results of the audits are
documented (repeat);
b. implement procedures to ensure that State agencies submit printing
service procurements for its approval as required, including working
with DoIT personnel to establish appropriate approval path
requirements; and
c. take immediate steps to revise State procurement regulations and the
DGS Manual to identify and resolve passages that need correction,
clarification, or other changes, and periodically review this guidance for
accuracy.
Statewide Procurements
Finding 3
OPL did not publish contract awards totaling $5.9 million on eMaryland
Marketplace as required.
Analysis
OPL did not always publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM)
as required by State laws and regulations. eMM is an Internet-based, interactive
procurement system managed by OPL.
We tested 20 commodity and facilities maintenance contract awards made by
OPL during the period from December 2012 through September 2015, totaling
approximately $30.5 million. As of February 2016, 10 of these contract awards,
totaling approximately $5.9 million, had not been published on eMM as required.
Individually, these 10 contracts, which were awarded during the period from
April 2013 through September 2015, ranged in value between $42,000 and $2
million. Furthermore, 5 of the 10 awards, valued at $4.4 million, were sole source
contracts.
13

--- Page 16 ---
State laws and regulations generally provide that eMM is to be used by State
agencies, counties, municipalities, public institutions of higher education, public
schools, and other entities to publish solicitations for goods and services greater
than $15,000 and to publish awards greater than $25,000 within 30 days of the
award.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OPL comply with State law and procurement
regulations by publishing contract awards on eMM within 30 days of the
contract award.
Finding 4
OPL did not always provide prices for products available from
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements to State agencies.
Analysis
OPL did not always provide State agencies with prices for products that were
available to them through Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements
(ICPAs) and, in these instances, agencies cannot be assured they are paying the
agreed-upon prices. ICPAs are procured by one or more federal, state, or local
government agency and consolidate the procurement of specified goods and
services on behalf of multiple users. State law allows agencies to participate in
ICPAs that are entered into in a manner consistent with the purposes set forth in
State procurement law, including fostering effective broad-based competition.
For each ICPA, OPL created one or more Statewide blanket purchase order
(BPO) for State agencies to use when making purchases, but certain BPOs did not
provide pricing for the available item. We reviewed OPL’s participation in seven
ICPAs for which the BPOs had an estimated value of approximately $21.8 million
and found that two ICPA contracts, totaling $7.8 million, did not include contract
pricing on the BPO. Agencies purchasing items from ICPAs when the related
BPO did not include contract pricing would likely contact the vendors for pricing
information when preparing their purchase orders. As a result, State agencies
could not be assured that the prices paid for items obtained from these ICPAs
were proper. State agency purchases from these two contractors totaled
approximately $6.1 million during calendar year 2015.
OPL surveys State agencies to determine their needs and then researches group
purchasing organization websites to see if OPL can use an existing ICPA to
obtain needed items. OPL enters into a contract with the ICPA vendor and issues
one or more BPOs for State agencies to use to access the items available through
14

--- Page 17 ---
the ICPA. OPL participated in ICPA contracts with 21 entities during the period
from August 20, 2012 through October 27, 2015, from which OPL issued 35
BPOs with a total estimated value of $67.6 million, for use by State agencies.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that OPL independently publish contract prices for items
available from ICPAs for use by State agencies.
Finding 5
OPL did not ensure that it received all administrative fees due from vendors
providing goods and services to State agencies under Statewide contracts,
and our review of selected contracts disclosed uncollected fees of
approximately $222,000.
Analysis
OPL did not ensure that it received all administrative fees due from vendors under
Statewide contracts. Although vendors were required to periodically remit the
fees collected to OPL, along with supporting sales reports, OPL did not always
follow up when the required fees and reports were not submitted, and did not
verify sales data reported by vendors. Based on our review of selected contracts
for which fees were assessed, we identified approximately $222,000 in fees that
were not remitted to OPL and which had not been pursued by OPL.
As allowed by State law, OPL assessed specified administrative fees on certain
Statewide contracts, which were typically based on the vendor’s sales revenue or
volume. For example, OPL assessed an administrative fee on the State’s fuel
vendor equal to one percent of vendor sales and was also permitted to charge an
additional administrative fee because the contract was electronically procured
through DGS using eMaryland Marketplace. Vendors included the fees in the
prices of goods and services purchased by State agencies and were required to
periodically remit the fees collected to OPL, along with supporting sales reports.
Our review of nine contracts for which administrative fees had been assessed
disclosed that required fees and/or sales reports were not remitted by seven
vendors, and OPL did not follow up with the vendors. Specifically, one vendor
submitted sales reports for the period from May 2014 through December 2015,
but had not remitted the corresponding fees, which totaled approximately
$219,000. Six other vendors did not submit required sales reports and fees for the
period from October 2012 through February 2016. The State’s records disclosed
that sales associated with these six vendors totaled approximately $282,000 for
this period. Based on our calculation, related fees of approximately $2,800 were
15

--- Page 18 ---
due for the period. Furthermore, our review of the fuel contract disclosed that
OPL did not verify the accuracy of the detailed reports of fuel sales provided by
the vendor by comparing them to supporting documentation (such as invoices
paid). According to State records, OPL collected approximately $618,000 in
administrative fees from the fuel vendor in fiscal year 2015.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that OPL
a. ensure that all required sales reports and related contract fees due are
received,
b. verify reported sales to supporting documentation, and
c. pursue for collection the aforementioned unremitted fees.
Monitoring of Providers With Procurement Preferences
Background
State laws and regulations provide for procurement preferences to benefit
disadvantaged individuals or representative organizations. Specifically, State law
provides that, when goods or services can be supplied at prices that do not exceed
the prevailing market prices, State aided or controlled entities shall give
procurement preferences to Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE), Blind
Industries and Services of Maryland (BISM), the Employment Works Program
(EWP), and individuals with disability-owned businesses (collectively referred to
as preferred providers). State laws and regulations also place certain requirements
on OPL for determining and publishing fair market prices for products and
services offered by providers with procurement preferences.
Finding 6
OPL did not establish comprehensive procedures for determining the fair
market prices of goods and services available from MCE. Furthermore,
OPL did not publish fair market prices of items available for purchase from
MCE and BISM as required.
Analysis
OPL’s procedures for determining fair market prices of items available for sale
from MCE were not comprehensive, and OPL did not always comply with the
procedures it did have in place. Furthermore, OPL did not publish fair market
prices of items available from MCE and BISM as required.
16

--- Page 19 ---
According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2015, State
agencies spent approximately $22.5 million on purchases from MCE and $4.6
million on purchases from BISM.
 OPL’s procedures for reviewing MCE prices required a verification of the fair
market prices of MCE products submitted for OPL’s approval, but only
included new items and existing items for which MCE was requesting a price
change. The procedures did not otherwise require a review of catalog pricing
for existing items. OPL had not independently determined the fair market
prices of all MCE products since 2003.
 OPL frequently did not comply with its aforementioned procedures to
determine the fair market prices for new MCE items and existing items that
had a price increase. During the period from August 2013 through October
2015, MCE submitted new pricing requests showing comparative retail
pricing for 72 separate items. OPL did not review and verify the comparative
prices or otherwise determine fair market prices for 68 of these items.
 OPL did not independently publish the fair market prices of goods and
services available from MCE or BISM as required. Rather, agencies
purchasing items were required to use the MCE and BISM websites to obtain
the pricing information.
State laws and regulations require OPL to independently determine the fair
market prices of MCE products, and to compile, publish, and distribute a listing of
those products and fair market prices, at least annually, for State agency personnel
to compare with MCE’s established prices when making procurement decisions.
OPL is also required to publish the fair market prices of items available from
BISM, as determined by the Pricing and Selection Committee for Blind Industries
and Services of Maryland and the Employment Works Program.
Similar conditions regarding the verification and publishing of MCE pricing have
been commented upon in our three preceding audit reports, and the failure to
publish fair market prices for BISM products was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that OPL
a. establish and adhere to comprehensive procedures to independently
determine and publish the fair market prices of all of MCE's goods and
services (repeat), and
b. publish the fair market prices of BISM’s goods and services as
determined by the Pricing and Selection Committee for Blind Industries
and Services of Maryland and the Employment Works Program (repeat).
Finding 7
OPL did not adequately monitor the coordinating entity for EWP to ensure
that it met its responsibilities under the law and that fees it collected from
EWP preferred providers were reasonable.
Analysis
OPL did not monitor the coordinating entity (CE) for the EWP to ensure it was
appropriately fulfilling its duties under State law, did not adequately describe
those duties in the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the CE, and did
not ensure the compensation fees the CE charged were reasonable. State law
established the EWP under DGS to facilitate the distribution of State agency
procurement contracts for goods and services among community service
providers1 and businesses owned by individuals with disabilities (collectively
referred to as preferred providers). The law further provides that DGS is to
designate a CE to identify potential contracts for procurement, establish
procedures for the selection of preferred providers, provide training and assistance
to participating providers, and monitor EWP preferred providers.
 Although provided for under the January 2014 MOU, OPL had not monitored
or performed any oversight of the CE to ensure that the CE was fulfilling all
of its responsibilities required under State law. Furthermore, the MOU did not
specify how the CE’s responsibilities should be carried out. For example, the
MOU did not fully address the CE’s responsibilities to identify potential
contracts for procurement, establish procedures for the selection of preferred
providers, and provide training and assistance to participating providers.
 OPL could not document that the compensation fees collected by the CE from
EWP preferred providers were reasonable based on program costs. The CE
generally collected a 3.2 percent fee from the providers on all sales under
1 Community service providers are not-for-profit entities accredited by the State Department of
Education’s Division of Rehabilitation Services for participation in the EWP and are operated in
the interest of individuals who have a mental or physical disability, including blindness.
18

--- Page 21 ---
EWP contracts and such fees were ultimately passed on to State agencies that
procured goods and services from the providers. However, the MOU did not
address the appropriate level of compensation for the CE based on program
costs. While OPL could not readily provide us with the amount paid to the
CE, our review of the CE’s most recent publicly available federal tax return
disclosed that the CE collected approximately $1.1 million in EWP fees
during calendar year 2014. Based on the aforementioned 3.2 percent fee, we
estimate that associated sales under EWP contracts totaled approximately
$34.4 million.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of monitoring of the CE and the lack of
documentation that fees collected by the CE were reasonable were commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that OPL
a. monitor the CE to ensure that it is providing the goods and services
required by State law and the MOU (repeat), and
b. establish the responsibilities of the CE and specify the compensation fee
that may be charged by the CE after determining the appropriate level of
compensation based on program costs.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of General
Services - Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL) for the period beginning
August 20, 2012 and ending October 27, 2015. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OPL’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included commodity and maintenance procurement, the
Statewide fuel management system, eMaryland Marketplace, OPL’s use of the
State’s Financial Management Information System for performing Statewide
procurement functions, equipment, and State property oversight. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OPL by the
Department’s Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll
processing) are included within the scope of our audit of the Department of
General Services - Office of the Secretary. Our audit also did not include
activities related to the operation and maintenance of Government House.
Although the Department receives an appropriation for these activities and OPL is
responsible for maintaining the equipment inventory for the Department, these
activities are audited as part of the Executive Department - Governor.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OPL’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
20

--- Page 23 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
OPL’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OPL’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OPL that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Department of General Services, on behalf of OPL, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our
review of its response.
21

--- Page 24 ---
_____________________________________
APPENDIX
Larry Hogan Eltington E.Churchill, Jr.
Gat’enwr Secretary
Boyd K. Rutherford
U.Got’ernor
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES
OFFICE OFTHE SECRETARY_____________________________________
December 6, 2016
Mr. Thomas J. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office ofLegislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Bamickel;
Enclosed are the Maryland Department ofGeneral Services (DGS) responses to the Audit Report on
the Department ofGeneral Services Office ofProcurement and Logistics for the period beginning
—
August 20, 2012 and ending October 27, 2015. As required, a copy ofour responses will be sent
electronicallyto your office.
Ifyou should have any questions or require additional information, please contact Lauri A.
McGuire, Assistant Director ofProcurement and Logistics, Department ofGeneral Services at
410.767.7522 or via e-mail at lauri.mcguiremaryland.gov.
ncer
Ellingto E. Churchill, Jr.
Secretary
Cc: Nelson Reichart, Deputy Secretary, DGS
Lauri A. McGuire, Assistant Secretary ofProcurement and Logistics, DGS
301 West Preston Street Tott Free 1-800-449-4347
Baltinwre, Maryland 21201-2305 e-mail: EttingtonChurchilt@mcirytand.gov
(410) 76749o0 TPY users 1-800-735-2258
FAX (410) 333-5480

--- Page 25 ---
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
Audit Report
August 20, 2012 to October 27, 2015
Finding 1: OPL did not verify the accuracy of periodic fuel usage reconciliations,
sufficiently address failed fuel quality tests, and ensure State agencies were reviewing
monthly fuel variance reports.
a. DGS concurs with the finding to be implemented by June 2017. DGS will verify
the accuracy and validity of periodic fuel reconciliation reports and ensure
that these verifications are documented and retained.
b. DGS concurs with the finding to be implemented by June 2017. DGS will
ensure that the variances noted through the reconciliation process are
determined and corrected.
c. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS will coordinate with the Department
of Agriculture and State Agencies to ensure that fuel pumps at the
State’s dispensing locations will be included for calibration testing by
June 2017.
d. DGS concurs with the finding to be implemented by June 2017. DGS will
work with the vendor and the Comptroller’s Office to ensure that all
necessary corrective actions are taken when a State fueling location
fails a fuel quality test, follow-up to ensure that other State locations
do not have deficient fuel from the same source, determining and
correcting the cause of the failed test.
e. DGS concurs with the finding to be implemented by June 2017. DGS will
comply with its written procedures to audit monthly reports for select
agencies with potentially improper fueling and fuel usage. DGS will
also ensure that the audits are documented and retained.
Finding 2: OPL did not adequately monitor certain State agency procurements that were
specifically subject to its oversight and did not review the update State procurement
regulations and the DGS manual for commodity procurements as needed.
a. DGS concurs with the finding. Although DGS is still under staffed, DGS will continue to
review workload demands on current staff and develop a schedule to conduct audits of
delegated procurement activity that pose a greater risk of agency noncompliance. An
additional unit will be required to comply with this mandate to review the procurement
activity of all delegated purchases on a routine basis and will seek approval for these staff
position.
b. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS will coordinate with DoIT and MDOT and explore
the most appropriate way to establish approval path requirements for State agencies and
DGS to follow for approval of printing services.

--- Page 26 ---
c. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS is in the process of revising all of its Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) and will update its Procedures Manuals accordingly.
Finding 3: OPL did not publish contract awards totaling $5.9 million on eMaryland
Marketplace (eMM) as required.
DGS concurs with the finding to be implemented on or before 2/1/2017. Under DGS policy,
Procurement Officers are currently publishing contract awards within the 30 day time period.
DGS procurement staff has been directed to ensure the proper notification of awards occurs
within 30 days. Additional training will be implemented and specific eMM reports will be
developed to monitor and ensure staff is complying as required.
Finding 4: OPL did not always provide prices for products available from
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements (ICPA) to State agencies.
DGS concurs with the finding. DGS is currently modifying its Terms and Conditions to require
and enforce that ICPA vendors supply within 30 days of award a contract e-catalog for use on
eMaryland Marketplace.
Finding 5: OPL did not ensure that it received all administrative fees due from vendors
providing goods and services to State agencies under Statewide contracts, and our review
of selected contracts disclosed uncollected fees of approximately $222,000.
a. DGS concurs with the finding. Standard Operating Procedures are currently being
revised to ensure all administrative fees are collected in a timely fashion.
b. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS will reconcile all available supporting
documentation against reports for accuracy.
c. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS will track and monitor required vendor sales reports.
State of Maryland Central Collection Unit has been engaged to collect and enforce
against aged receivables.
Finding 6: OPL did not establish comprehensive procedures for determining the fair
market prices of goods and services available from MCE. Furthermore, OPL did not
publish fair market prices of items available for purchase from MCE and BISM as
required.
a. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS has met with MCE and developed
comprehensive procedures that will ensure that DGS independently determines and
publishes the fair market prices of MCE’s goods and services. All processes will be
implemented by June 2017.
b. DGS concurs with this finding. DGS has required a Master Price List to be published
on eMarylandMarket place by June 2017.

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 7: OPL did not adequately monitor the coordinating entity (CE) for EWP to
ensure that it met its responsibilities under the law and that fees it collected from EWP
preferred providers were reasonable.
a. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS will monitor the CE and develop additional
reporting requirements to ensure that the CE is providing the goods and services as
required by State law and the MOU.
b. DGS concurs with the finding. DGS will work with the Office of Attorney General
and Employment Works Program (EWP) to modify the MOU to be more specific and
fully address the specific responsibilities of the parties. DGS is developing Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for determining whether the fees collected by the
coordinating entity (CE) from EWP are reasonable and appropriate.
.

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Joseph J. Burke, III
Kathryn A. Jones
Staff Auditors