Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, College Park
Date: 05/11/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d724560674746
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:58:14.238846
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, College Park
May 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Faculty Research Monitoring
Finding 1 – Faculty Summer Research Activities Were Not 5
Adequately Documented to Support Related Compensation
Disbursements
Finding 2 – Disbursement Transactions Lacked Sufficient 6
Approval Requirements
Cash Receipts
Finding 3 – Certain Collections Were Not Sufficiently Controlled and 7
Accounted For
Student Financial Aid
Finding 4 – Certain Financial Aid Transactions Were Not Subject 8
to Independent Review
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 5 – Non-cash Credit Adjustments Were Not Sufficiently 9
Controlled
Dining Services
Finding 6 – Sufficient Controls Were Not Established to Ensure the 10
Accuracy of Meal Plan Records
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 – Access and Monitoring Controls Over Critical Production 11
Data Files and Databases Were Not Sufficient
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) is a comprehensive research
university for the State of Maryland and is the flagship institution of the
University System of Maryland (USM). It offers baccalaureate, master’s, and
doctoral programs in the liberal arts and sciences and selected professional fields.
For the Fall 2014 term, enrollment totaled 37,610.
UMCP’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, fiscal year 2014
revenues totaled approximately $1.8 billion, including a State general fund
appropriation of approximately $413 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 14, 2011. We determined that UMCP
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Faculty Research Monitoring
Finding 1
Faculty summer research activities, for which payments totaling
approximately $17 million were made in 2014, were not adequately
documented to support the related payments.
Analysis
The University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) did not require faculty to
submit documentation to substantiate summer research work performed to support
the related compensation payments. In general, faculty received approval from
their academic department chairs to conduct summer research and such approval
was used to authorize payment. However, there was no University-wide
requirement that the faculty members document their research proposals or the
work performed. According to its records, UMCP paid approximately $17
million and $16 million to faculty members for summer research during the
summers of 2014 and 2013, respectively.
Our test of nine faculty members, who received additional compensation
payments totaling $595,000 for research activity during the summer of 2013,
disclosed that UMCP could not provide documentation, such as approved
research proposals and reports of work performed, to support the activities of
seven of these faculty members who received $392,000. For the other faculty
members, the academic department chairs provided us with documentation of the
research activity. UMCP advised us that certain documentation, such as “effort
reports,” is required to verify research work supported by contracts and grants;
however, not all summer research work is funded in this manner. In this regard,
only one of the seven previously mentioned research activities had federal
funding, totaling $37,000, and no such additional documentation could be
provided. As a result, UMCP lacked assurance that additional compensation
payments for research activities were proper.
The University Policy on Faculty Appointment Letters and Summer
Compensation allows faculty members on a nine-month academic year
appointment to earn up to one-third of their academic year salary as additional
compensation for research, administrative assignments, and teaching.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMCP require appropriate documentation, such as
approved proposals and reports of work performed, be submitted to
substantiate faculty summer research activities and that this documentation
be reviewed to help confirm the work performed before payments are made.
Disbursements
Finding 2
UMCP lacked sufficient approval requirements for disbursement
transactions.
Analysis
UMCP had not established independent online approval requirements for
disbursement transactions processed in its automated financial system, and
numerous employees were assigned system access capabilities that allowed them
to process and release such transactions for payment without approval.
Specifically, 38 employees had the capability to process disbursement
transactions without independent approval, including 6 employees of other
University System of Maryland units. Thirty-six of these employees could also
add or modify vendors in the system, and 6 employees could release disbursement
batches to the State’s financial system for payment. Without a requirement for
independent online approval, unauthorized disbursements could be processed
without detection.
Although UMCP had established certain alternative procedures to obtain approval
for disbursements processed, these procedures were ineffective because the
procedures could be bypassed or were performed by three of the aforementioned
six employees with access to process and release disbursement transactions.
UMCP processed disbursements totaling $397 million during fiscal year 2014
according to the State’s accounting records.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMCP establish independent online approval
requirements for all disbursement transactions.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
UMCP did not sufficiently control and account for certain collections.
Analysis
UMCP did not sufficiently control and account for certain cash, check, and credit
card collections totaling approximately $395 million during fiscal year 2014.
 Procedures used by the Bursar’s Office to verify collections were deposited
did not include all credit card receipts. Our review of credit card collections
received through the Bursar’s Office during fiscal years 2013 and 2014
totaling $528,599, disclosed that $479,957 of this total had not been verified
to deposit.
 Two employees in the Bursar’s Office had the ability to process voids on the
cash register system without independent approval and had access to
collections. One of these employees was also responsible for reviewing
cashier close-out reports, which included voids, and for reconciling those
reports to the related collections.
 The deposit verification procedures used by UMCP’s Dining Services were
inadequate since the initial record of collections was not used in this process,
and the employee who performed the verifications also served in a back-up
capacity for receiving and recording collections. In addition, checks received
for facility rental fees and catering services were not restrictively endorsed
immediately upon receipt. Rather, these checks were forwarded to other
employees for processing before they were restrictively endorsed.
As a result of these conditions, there was a lack of assurance that all collections
were properly accounted for and deposited. The Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual requires that checks be restrictively endorsed
upon receipt and that receipts recorded on initial source documents be traced to
deposit by an employee independent of the cash receipts process. The Manual
also requires State agencies to segregate cash handling duties from cash receipts
accounting functions. According to UMCP’s records, during fiscal year 2014,
credit card collections received through the Bursar’s Office totaled approximately
$8 million, while cash and checks received by the Office totaled $382 million.
During the same period, collections by UMCP’s Dining Services totaled $5
million.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMCP
a. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts functions,
using the initial record of receipt, verifies that all collections, including
credit card receipts, are subsequently deposited;
b. ensure that employees with access to cash receipts do not have the ability
to void transactions; and
c. restrictively endorse all collections immediately upon receipt.
We advised UMCP on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 4
Certain financial aid transactions posted to student accounts were not
subject to a documented, independent review.
Analysis
Financial aid awards and adjustments that were manually posted to student
accounts were not subject to a documented, independent review. Although
UMCP advised us that awards and adjustments manually posted to its automated
financial aid records were reviewed on a test basis to ensure they had been
properly authorized, the specific awards and adjustments selected for review, as
well as the results of the reviews were not documented. Furthermore, the
employee responsible for performing these reviews had the capability to modify
student financial aid awards in the automated records. A total of 10 employees
had the capability to manually adjust student financial aid in the automated
records. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that all awards and
adjustments that were manually posted were valid.
Manual recording of financial aid awards and adjustments was necessary
primarily for non-federal grants and scholarships. According to UMCP’s records,
non-federal grants and scholarships totaled approximately $114 million during
fiscal year 2014.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMCP
a. ensure that the reviews of financial aid awards and adjustments manually
posted to student accounts, including the selection process and results,
are fully documented; and
8

--- Page 11 ---
b. ensure that supervisory personnel without the capability to manually
record financial aid awards and adjustments perform the reviews.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 5
Non-cash credit adjustments posted manually to student accounts receivable
records were not sufficiently controlled.
Analysis
Non-cash credit adjustments posted manually to UMCP’s automated student
accounts receivable records by Bursar’s Office and Dining Services employees
were not adequately controlled. Although employees reviewed system output
reports of non-cash credit adjustments posted to student accounts receivable
records to ensure the adjustments had been properly authorized, the employees
who performed these reviews also had the ability to record adjustments in the
records. As a result, unauthorized adjustments could be made without detection.
Our review of system access disclosed that 18 employees in the Bursar’s Office
and 3 employees in Dining Services had the capability to unilaterally process
certain non-cash credit adjustments in the accounts receivable records because the
system did not have the capability to require independent on-line supervisory
approval.
A significant amount of non-cash credit transactions relate to nonresident tuition
(such as to adjust nonresident to resident tuition) and meal plans. According to
UMCP’s records, during the period from January 2013 through February 2014,
UMCP posted approximately $72 million in these types of non-cash credit
adjustments to the accounts receivable records.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMCP ensure that supervisory personnel independent
of the accounts receivable process within each applicable UMCP unit verify,
at least on a test basis, that manually processed non-cash credits posted by
the unit were properly authorized.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Dining Services
Finding 6
UMCP had not established controls to ensure the accuracy of meal plan
records in its automated system.
Analysis
UMCP’s Dining Services had not established adequate controls to ensure the
accuracy of its student meal plan records. Specifically, UMCP had not performed
a review of the propriety of the access capabilities assigned to users on the Dining
Services automated system during our audit period. According to UMCP records,
28 accounts were assigned capabilities that allowed the users to adjust student
meal plan information in the automated Dining Services records without
independent approval. Six of these accounts were generic accounts that had not
been assigned to specific individuals. UMCP could not demonstrate that all users
assigned to these accounts needed those access capabilities to perform their job
duties. Additionally, although student meal plan records were periodically
reconciled with UMCP’s student accounts receivable records, the employee who
performed the reconciliations also had the capability to record transactions, such
as additional meal purchases and refunds, in both systems without approval. As a
result, improper or unauthorized adjustments, such as to increase student meal
points, could be processed without detection.
Each semester, student meal plan purchases are uploaded from the student
accounts to the Dining Services automated records and credited to student UMCP
identification cards which track student meal plan points usage. Additional meal
plan purchases made by the students during the semester are manually recorded in
the accounts receivable and Dining Services systems. According to UMCP’s
records, meal plan revenue in fiscal year 2014 totaled approximately $33 million.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMCP
a. routinely review the access capabilities assigned to users on the Dining
Services system for propriety and eliminate unnecessary user access as
well as generic user accounts, and
b. ensure that the individual responsible for performing the reconciliation of
board meal plan records in the Dining Services system with the student
accounts receivable records is independent of the related recordation
functions.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
UMCP’s Division of Information Technology (DIT) manages the development,
maintenance, and support of UMCP’s information technology infrastructure
including related networking, telecommunications, and business information
systems. DIT maintains a campus-wide network, supporting both administrative
and academic operations at UMCP. DIT also maintains critical UMCP
applications such as the student administration and payroll and human resources
application systems.
Finding 7
Access and monitoring controls over critical production data files and
databases were not sufficient.
Analysis
Access and monitoring controls over critical production data files and databases
were not sufficient to protect the related data.
 Mainframe security software access rules allowed numerous users
unnecessary and unlogged direct modification access to critical production
data files (for example, files that could be used to alter student accounts
receivable account balances). As a result of this condition, unauthorized
changes to these critical production data files could be made without
detection.
 A report, reviewed by management, which identifies direct, logged changes
made to mainframe data files, did not include any direct changes made to 29
critical data files used by the student accounts receivable system and the
student information system. As a result of this condition, any unauthorized
changes made to these critical production data files would not be subject to
management’s review.
 Direct changes to critical data and security tables in the financial and
payroll/human resources databases were not logged. In addition, the use of
numerous critical privileges (for example, alter any role) in these databases
was not logged. As a result of these conditions, the use of the aforementioned
privileges and any unauthorized changes made to these databases’ security
settings and data would not be subject to management’s review.
11

--- Page 14 ---
The University System of Maryland’s IT Security Standards state that institutions
must implement authentication and authorization processes that appropriately
control access to systems. Furthermore, the University System of Maryland
Security Council Guide for Security Event Logging requires each institution to
maintain appropriate audit trails of events and actions related to critical
applications and data, as required by State and federal laws/regulations. Further,
these significant actions and events must be reviewed and documented.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMCP
a. restrict access to critical production data files to only those users
requiring such access;
b. log all direct modifications to critical production data files;
c. amend the management report to include direct changes to all critical
data files, including the aforementioned 29 files; and
d. log the use of all critical privileges and direct changes to data and security
tables in the financial and payroll/human resources databases.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP) for the period
beginning July 6, 2010 and ending March 4, 2014. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMCP’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements related to UMCP’s
operations, student accounts receivable, cash receipts, payroll, auxiliary
enterprises/services, information security over UMCP computer applications, and
student financial aid. Our audit also included certain support services (such as the
processing of vendor payment transmittals) provided by UMCP on a centralized
basis for several other units of USM. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include the computer operations of the UMCP Division of
Information Technology (DIT) as it relates to services primarily provided to other
USM institutions. A separate audit of the DIT is conducted. Our audit also did
not include certain support services (such as bond financing) provided to UMCP
by the USM Office. These support services are included within the scope of our
audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of
internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal
financial assistance programs and an assessment of UMCP’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including UMCP.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, observations of
UMCP’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
13

--- Page 16 ---
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from UMCP’s financial systems for the purpose of testing certain
areas, such as student accounts receivable and financial aid. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UMCP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMCP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMCP that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
14

--- Page 17 ---
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMCP, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
15

--- Page 19 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK
JULY 6, 2010 TO MARCH 4, 2014
Faculty Research Monitoring
Finding 1
Faculty summer research activities, for which payments totaling
approximately $17 million were made in 2014, were not adequately
documented to support the related payments.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMCP require appropriate documentation, such as
approved proposals and reports of work performed, be submitted to
substantiate faculty summer research activities and that this documentation
be reviewed to help confirm the work performed before payments are made.
University response
The university agrees to implement institution-wide procedures including
documentation requirements to ensure that academic units properly document
summer research activities and substantiate payments. It is important to note the
$16 and $17 million referenced in the analysis includes both sponsored and non-
sponsored funds, and the university has a federally approved effort reporting
system to document faculty effort on sponsored research. The institution will
review and enhance compliance processes to ensure that procedures for
documenting research activities are being adhered to by academic units.
Disbursements
Finding 2
UMCP lacked sufficient approval requirements for disbursement
transactions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMCP establish independent online approval
requirements for all disbursement transactions.
University response
The University concurs with this recommendation.
UMCP will review and amend processes on disbursement transactions within the
accounts payable functions at UMCP, including segregating roles and clarifying

--- Page 20 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK
JULY 6, 2010 TO MARCH 4, 2014
functionality within our electronic systems. This will ensure that proper internal
controls are in place for independent online approval of all critical transactions. In
addition, UMCP will work closely with the other USM unit to achieve appropriate
controls for the six employees processing disbursement transactions at that
institution.
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
UMCP did not sufficiently control and account for certain collections.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMCP
a. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts functions,
using the initial record of receipt, verifies that all collections,
including credit card receipts, are subsequently deposited;
b. ensure that employees with access to cash receipts do not have the
ability to void transactions; and
c. restrictively endorse all collections immediately upon receipt.
We advised UMCP on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
University response
The university agrees with the need to properly control and account for
collections, as recommended by the auditors. During implementations of two
critical financial systems, the university acknowledges that there were limited
periods in which there were minor deviations from the normal control processes.
UMCP believes it has adequate segregation of duties in cash handling and cash
accounting functions and will ensure that procedures are followed to maintain a
sound control environment.
a. The Office of the Bursar has an independent review of cash, check, and
credit card receipts outside of our cashiering functions within the
accounting unit. The nine week period identified (1/23-3/31/14) was the
initial implementation of the university’s new accounting system. During
this timeframe, reports needed to perform the independent review were
delayed. The independent review process for cash, check and credit card
receipts is being conducted on a regular basis. Additionally, all receipts for
the period identified have been confirmed and no exceptions were noted.

--- Page 21 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK
JULY 6, 2010 TO MARCH 4, 2014
b. The Office of the Bursar acknowledges there was a very limited period
where two employees were given access to void transactions during the
implementation of a new cashiering system in April 2014. After system
stabilization of four months, access was removed for the second employee
in early August 2014. Void capabilities now belong to the manager who
does not have access to process batches within the system.
c. UMCP agrees with the recommendations related to deposit verifications
and restrictive endorsement in Dining Services. The unit has enhanced
their verification process to include additional independent business office
staff in the review process. All remote offices have the necessary
endorsement stamp and have been trained to restrictively endorse all
collections received.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 4
Certain financial aid transactions posted to student accounts were not
subject to a documented, independent review.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMCP
a. ensure that the reviews of financial aid awards and adjustments manually
posted to student accounts, including the selection process and results,
are fully documented; and
b. ensure that supervisory personnel without the capability to manually
record financial aid awards and adjustments perform the reviews.
University response
The university concurs with the recommendation and has already modified
documentation procedures to ensure complete compliance. The report generated
from the automated awarding system has been enhanced to allow online
documentation of the review process. This review process includes documentation
of selected students and results, and is verified by an employee independent of the
process.

--- Page 22 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK
JULY 6, 2010 TO MARCH 4, 2014
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 5
Non-cash credit adjustments posted manually to student accounts receivable
records were not sufficiently controlled.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMCP ensure that supervisory personnel independent
of the accounts receivable process within each applicable UMCP unit verify,
at least on a test basis, that manually processed non-cash credits posted by
the unit were properly authorized.
University response
The university agrees with the need to provide adequate controls over manually
processed non-cash credits as recommended by the auditors. It should be noted
that this audit found no actual instances of improper transactions of non-cash
credits adjustments. The Office of the Bursar will review and modify, as
necessary, procedures and processes including the documentation requirements
for these transactions to ensure adequate segregation and control. In addition, a
financial management employee outside the processing unit will provide
additional periodic and documented reviews for all non-cash credits to ensure
proper authorization.
Dining Services
Finding 6
UMCP had not established controls to ensure the accuracy of meal plan
records in its automated system.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UMCP
a. routinely review the access capabilities assigned to users on the Dining
Services system for propriety and eliminate unnecessary user access as
well as generic user accounts, and
b. ensure that the individual responsible for performing the reconciliation of
board meal plan records in the Dining Services system with the student
accounts receivable records is independent of the related recordation
functions.

--- Page 23 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK
JULY 6, 2010 TO MARCH 4, 2014
University response
UMCP Dining Services agrees with the recommendations given. Dining Services
has established a report to be periodically reviewed by management to evaluate
access capabilities assigned to users in the automated system. Additionally,
Dining Services will work with the service provider to establish usage reports for
reconciliation purposes through our card management system (CS Gold) to ensure
that all meal plan adjustments are properly reviewed by an employee independent
of the recordation functions.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7
Access and monitoring controls over critical production data files and
databases were not sufficient.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UMCP
a. restrict access to critical production data files to only those users
requiring such access;
b. log all direct modifications to critical production data files;
c. amend the management report to include direct changes to all critical
data files, including the aforementioned 29 files; and
d. log the use of all critical privileges and direct changes to data and security
tables in the financial and payroll/human resources databases.
University response
The university concurs with this finding.
The Division of Information Technology has modified processes to provide
additional reviews and has improved existing reports to standardize classification
in order to ensure that access and controls surrounding critical resources are
appropriate. The implemented changes have successfully restricted access of
critical production file to only users who require such access; capture into a log
any direct modifications to critical production data files; report direct changes to
all critical data files through an existing management report; and log the use of all
critical privileges and direct changes to data security tables in the financial and
payroll/human resources database.

--- Page 24 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
John C. Venturella, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Donald J. Rodis, III, CPA
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Staff Auditor