Title: University System of Maryland - University System of Maryland Office
Date: 05/06/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d724560674750
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:59:00.106889
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland Office
May 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Audit of the System’s Financial Statements 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – Network Workstations and Servers Were Not 5
Sufficiently Protected Against Malware
Finding 2 – The Office’s Network Was Not Adequately Secured 6
Affiliated Foundations
Finding 3 – The Office Did Not Ensure Compliance With Certain 6
Reporting Requirements to Monitor Affiliated Foundations
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University System of Maryland Office develops system-wide policies and
procedures; monitors academic, financial, and administrative performance;
provides system-wide financing through the issuance of bonds; and provides
management information for planning and decision-making to the 12 institutions
and 2 regional higher education centers of the University System of Maryland.
The Office oversees the development and management of the University System
of Maryland’s two regional higher education centers: the Universities at Shady
Grove and the University System of Maryland at Hagerstown. The Office also
serves as the staff to the Board of Regents.
The Office operates a local area network in support of its operations. In addition,
the Office is the host institution for the Maryland Research and Education
Network (MDREN) Operating Unit, which maintains and operates the MDREN.
MDREN is a telecommunications network with connections to University System
of Maryland (USM) institutions and other Maryland public and private colleges,
universities, and community colleges. MDREN provides Internet access,
connections for research activity, access to USM institutions’ online library
systems, and connectivity for distance learning.
According to the State’s records, the Office’s expenditures totaled approximately
$30.5 million during fiscal year 2014.
Audit of the System’s Financial Statement
An independent accounting firm is engaged by the Office for the purpose of
expressing an opinion on the System’s financial statements each year. In the
related audit reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011, 2012, 2013, and
2014, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the System, and the respective changes in
financial position and cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated January 17, 2012. We determined
that the Office satisfactorily addressed these findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Network workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
Analysis
The University System of Maryland Office’s network workstations and servers
were not sufficiently protected against malware.
• The Office did not have an enterprise-wide management tool to administer
and manage the anti-malware software on its 237 workstations and 49 servers.
Furthermore, the Office did not manually monitor its workstations and servers
to ensure that the anti-malware software was installed and functioning
properly and that this software and related anti-malware signatures were kept
up to date on all workstations and servers. According to the Office’s records,
43 servers did not have any anti-malware software installed. In addition, the
anti-malware software installed on all eight workstations tested was at least
one year out of date.
• According to the Office’s records, 48 employees were improperly assigned
administrator rights on their workstations. Administrator rights are the
highest permission level that can be granted to users and allow users to install
software and change configuration settings. As a result, if these workstations
were infected with malware, the malware would run with administrator rights
and expose these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights. In addition, as a
result of the administrator rights assigned, these users had the ability to
disable the malware protection software on their workstations.
• Computers tested had not been updated with the latest releases for software
products that are known to have significant security-related vulnerabilities,
such as malware. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, the Office had not
updated its workstations for these patches.
The USM IT Security Standards states that agencies, at a minimum, must protect
against malicious code by implementing protections that, to the extent possible,
include a capability for automatic updates.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. use an enterprise-wide management tool to ensure that anti-malware
software is installed on the Office’s workstations and servers;
b. regularly confirm that all workstations and servers are configured with
anti-malware software that is operating properly, up to date and has
current anti-malware signatures, document these efforts and retain this
documentation for future reference;
c. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to
network administrators; and
d. promptly install all critical security-related software updates.
Finding 2
The Office’s network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic.
Analysis
The Office’s network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic.
Specifically, we noted that two critical firewalls allowed untrusted traffic from
various sources to numerous devices on the internal network and to a trusted
neutral network zone containing critical servers. For example, untrusted guest
wireless users had unnecessary network-level access to numerous servers over
various ports. In addition, we noted 10 outdated firewall rules that were no longer
needed.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office improve its network security by updating the
aforementioned firewalls’ rules to implement a “least privilege” security
strategy to better protect critical network devices, including those devices
and servers in the neutral network zone.
Affiliated Foundations
Finding 3
The Office did not ensure compliance with certain reporting requirements
intended to help monitor affiliated foundations.
Analysis
The Office did not ensure compliance with certain reporting requirements
intended to help the Office monitor affiliated foundations as detailed in the Board
of Regents’ Policy on Affiliated Foundations.
6

--- Page 9 ---
• The Office’s procedures to ensure affiliated foundations submitted all required
reports were not effective, as our audit disclosed that it did not obtain certain
required reports from affiliated foundations for fiscal years 2012 and 2013.
(At the time of our audit, the fiscal year 2014 reports were not yet required.)
Furthermore, the reports that were received were not submitted to the General
Assembly’s Legislative Reference Office, as required. The aforementioned
Policy requires that System-wide foundations submit reports of financial
activity and other critical information to the University System of Maryland
(USM) Chancellor within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year. For
institution-specific foundations, the Policy requires the reports to be submitted
to the president of the applicable institution. The Policy also requires the
Office to submit these reports to the Legislative Reference Office within 180
days of USM’s fiscal year end.
Our review of nine affiliated foundations disclosed that the Office did not
obtain 30 of the 90 reports required (10 for each foundation) for fiscal year
2012 and did not obtain 35 of the 90 reports required for 2013. Some of the
required reports that were not submitted include financial audit reports,
audited reports of the transfer of funds to USM, reports of USM employees
who received compensation from the foundation, and reports of the
foundation’s major activities. While the Office advised us that, according to
the applicable foundations, some of the reports that were not submitted were
not applicable to those foundations, there was no documentation that the
Office had verified the foundations’ assertions.
• The Office advised that foundation reports received were reviewed to identify
any matters reflecting potential violations of Board policies; however, the
review was not formalized nor was it documented. These reviews are
important given a finding reported upon in our recent audit report of
University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES). Specifically, in our
November 7, 2014 audit report, we noted several questionable foundation
activities. For example, as more fully explained in the aforementioned audit
report, UMES provided grant funding to a foundation without obtaining
documentation from the foundation to account for the use of the grant funds to
ensure they were spent for purposes consistent with the intent of the grant
agreements. Furthermore, a UMES management employee, who also served
as the foundation’s executive director, was involved in business activities with
the foundation that were not disclosed to UMES and that raised questions
regarding a potential conflict of interest. The audit report also noted that
UMES had not obtained certain of the aforementioned required reports from
its affiliated foundation for fiscal years 2011, 2012, and 2013. Our
aforementioned test confirmed that the foundation had also not submitted
7

--- Page 10 ---
these reports to the Office for the years tested. Had those reports been
obtained and adequately reviewed, the Office may have become aware of and
may have taken action to address the questionable activities included in the
audit report.
• The Office had not issued an annual report to the General Assembly’s Joint
Audit Committee regarding the operations of the affiliated foundations for
fiscal years 2012 and 2013. The Policy requires the report to be issued within
180 days after the end of the fiscal year.
The USM Board of Regents may recognize as an affiliated foundation an
organization that is created and operated in support of the interests of USM or a
constituent institution and has the following purposes: facilitating fund-raising
programs; managing and investing private gifts or property; and/or promoting,
sponsoring, and implementing educational, scientific, research, charitable, or
cultural activities for the benefit of the System. According to the Office’s
records, there were 20 affiliated foundations in fiscal year 2014.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. obtain all required reports from affiliated foundations, including those
from fiscal years 2012 and 2013, and verify and document any reports
that are not submitted because the reports are not applicable to the
foundation;
b. submit foundation reports to the Legislative Reference Office within 180
days of USM’s fiscal year end;
c. formalize and document its review of the foundation reports and any
related follow-up action, and
d. annually issue the required report of the operations of affiliated
foundations to the General Assembly’s Joint Audit Committee.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland Office for the period beginning March 31, 2011 and ending June 30,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, payroll, corporate purchasing cards,
endowment funds, revenue bonds, and information technology systems. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit included support services (that is, endowment accounting and bond
financing) provided by the Office on a centralized basis for other units of the
University System of Maryland. Our audit did not include certain support
services provided to the Office by the University of Maryland, College Park.
These support services (such as purchasing and processing vendor payments) are
9

--- Page 12 ---
included within the scope of our audits of the University of Maryland, College
Park. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over
compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of the Office’s compliance with those federal laws
and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
the Office.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 14 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND OFFICE
MARCH 31, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2014
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Network workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. use an enterprise-wide management tool to ensure that anti-malware
software is installed on the Office’s workstations and servers;
b. regularly confirm that all workstations and servers are configured with
anti-malware software that is operating properly, up to date and has
current anti-malware signatures, document these efforts and retain this
documentation for future reference;
c. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to
network administrators; and
a. promptly install all critical security-related software updates.
University response
The University System Office agrees with this recommendation.
We are in the process of implementing centralized management for Anti-Virus
and Anti-Malware updates, have begun removing administrative rights for those
users who had them, and are expanding the automatic push of operating system
patches to include other software which requires frequent updates.
Finding 2
The Office’s network was not adequately secured from untrusted traffic.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office improve its network security by updating the
aforementioned firewalls’ rules to implement a “least privilege” security
strategy to better protect critical network devices, including those devices
and servers in the neutral network zone.
University response
The University System Office agrees with this recommendation.
The Firewall rules referenced in the finding were adjusted or removed by
December 2014, and the level of access which the neutral network zone grants to

--- Page 15 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND OFFICE
MARCH 31, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2014
the untrusted guest wireless network was reduced to the same level of access as
the public Internet in January 2015.
Affiliated Foundations
Finding 3
The Office did not ensure compliance with certain reporting requirements
intended to help monitor affiliated foundations.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Office
a. obtain all required reports from affiliated foundations, including those
from fiscal years 2012 and 2013, and verify and document any reports
that are not submitted because the reports are not applicable to the
foundation;
b. submit foundation reports to the Legislative Reference Office within 180
days of USM’s fiscal year end;
c. formalize and document its review of the foundation reports and any
related follow-up action, and
d. annually issue the required report of the operations of affiliated
foundations to the General Assembly’s Joint Audit Committee.
University response
The University System Office agrees with the finding, though in review of
materials submitted by the UMES affiliated foundation there was no indication of
the matters raised by the Legislative Auditor with respect to the interactions,
transactions, and lack of controls noted in any of the materials received prior to
October 2014, when the financial statements first included a note on ‘related party
transactions’. In that context, acknowledging the severity of the issues and
concerns associated with that affiliated foundation, the System Office is
reviewing the Board of Regents Policy on Affiliated Foundations to determine
whether or not any gaps in oversight exist that do not compromise the necessary
independence of these separate, but critical, separate entities that support the
mission and objectives of System institutions.
a. The System Office has conducted a second, comprehensive review of
documents received for fiscal years 2012 through 2014, and is seeking any
missing reports the foundations do not indicate are ‘not applicable’.

--- Page 16 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND OFFICE
MARCH 31, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2014
b. Once all appropriate materials have been collected, the System Office will
submit the foundation reports to the Legislative Reference Office. The
System Office will routinely submit the materials as policy requires in the
future.
c. The Office of Administration and Finance will review the documents,
itemize any concerns that might arise from a review of the materials in the
context of compliance with System and state policies and requirements,
and in collaboration with the Office of Advancement, agree upon and
pursue whatever appropriate follow-up is required.
d. The Office of Advancement will annually issue the required report of the
operations of affiliated foundations to the General Assembly’s Joint
Audit Committee.

--- Page 17 ---
AUDIT TEAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Brian S. Han, CPA
Michael A. Klausmeier
Senior Auditors
Christopher D. Jackson
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Megan A. Axenfeld
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors