Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Baltimore Region


NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Baltimore Region due to the establishment of the DPSCS - Central Region Finance Office.
Date: 10/29/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d72456067459e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:25:20.379333
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Baltimore Region
October 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
October 29, 2010
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Baltimore Region of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services for the period beginning February 1, 2006 and ending June
30, 2009. The Region comprises the Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center,
the Metropolitan Transition Center, the Maryland Reception, Diagnostic, and
Classification Center, the Baltimore City Correctional Center, and the Baltimore
Pre-Release Unit.
Our audit disclosed serious procedural and record keeping deficiencies relating to
the Region’s general and inmate working funds, including several unsupported
and/or questionable transactions. For example, critical accounting records were
not maintained, resulting in the Region being unable to account for certain funds
and paying unnecessary bank fees because checks were issued with insufficient
funds on account. Additionally, inmate fund reconciliations were not being
performed of the Region’s records to the corresponding State records; as of May
31, 2009, the two records differed by $227,000. Furthermore, the Region
periodically transferred money between the two working funds, thereby mixing
State funds with funds belonging to inmates. Disbursements and cash
withdrawals, including salary advances, were often unsupported and questionable
in nature.
Our audit also disclosed that critical controls over cash receipts, payroll, and
purchasing transactions were not sufficient. In addition, we noted certain record
keeping and procedural deficiencies relating to the Region’s equipment, and
materials and supplies.

--- Page 4 ---
An Executive Summary of our findings can be found on page 5. The Department
of Public Safety and Correctional Services’ response, on behalf of the Region, is
included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us during our audit by the Region.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Working Funds and Inmate Funds
* Finding 1 – Critical Accounting Records Were Not Maintained and 10
Certain Funds Could Not be Accounted For
* Finding 2 – The Region’s Records of Inmate Funds Were Not 11
Reconciled With the Corresponding State Records
Finding 3 – Procedural Controls Necessary for Ensuring the Propriety 12
of Working Fund Transactions and Records Were Not Sufficient
Finding 4 – Funds Transferred Between the General Working Fund 14
and the Inmate Working Fund Impaired Accountability and
Circumvented the Comptroller’s Approval Process
Finding 5 – Unsupported and Questionable Check Disbursements 15
and Cash Withdrawals Were Made From the Working Funds
Cash Receipts
* Finding 6 – Procedures and Controls Relating to the Accountability 17
and Verification of Cash Receipts Were Not Sufficient
Payroll
* Finding 7 – Certain Controls Over Payroll Had Not Been 18
Established
Purchasing Transactions
Finding 8 – Proper Internal Controls Were Not Established Over the 19
Processing of Certain Purchasing Transactions
Equipment
* Finding 9 – Equipment Records Were Not Adequately Maintained 19
and Physical Inventories Were Not Completed as Required
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Materials and Supplies
* Finding 10 – Procedures and Controls Over Materials and Supplies 21
Were Not Adequate
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 23
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services – Baltimore Region
October 2010
 The Region did not maintain critical accounting records for its
general working fund (GWF) and inmate working fund (IWF), such
as not maintaining a checking account balance on a current basis and
not preparing bank reconciliations and fund compositions accurately
or at all. Consequently, funds were unaccounted for in the GWF and
IWF, and the Region incurred significant bank fees totaling $23,000
primarily related to checks written with insufficient funds.
The Region should maintain critical accounting records, such as its
checking account balances, on a current basis and should ensure that bank
reconciliations and fund compositions are completed timely and accurately
and are approved by supervisory personnel.
 The aggregate balance of inmate funds recorded on the Region’s
records were not reconciled with the corresponding total on the
Comptroller of Maryland’s records. As of May 31, 2009, total inmate
funds per the Region’s records exceeded the related balance per the
Comptroller’s records by $227,000. This is of particular concern
considering the deficiencies noted associated with the IWF.
The Region should periodically reconcile its records with the State’s
records for inmate funds and resolve any significant differences.
 Procedural controls necessary for ensuring the propriety of working
fund transactions and records were either not in place or were
ineffective. For example, employees had access to both the blank
GWF checks and the signature plate and access was not limited only
to authorized employees. For IWF disbursements, one employee
exercised complete control over cash that was withdrawn from the
IWF for inmates upon their release.
The Region should establish controls and segregate duties as appropriate.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Several transactions initiated by the Region related to the GWF and
IWF impaired accountability over the funds including periodic
unauthorized transfers of funds between the GWF and IWF that
circumvented the Comptroller’s approval process. In addition,
unsupported and questionable disbursement transactions were also
noted. Based on the matters noted, we referred these issues to the
Criminal Division of the Office of the Attorney General.
The Region should ensure that adequate accountability is established over
the GWF and IWF by ensuring that all transfers are properly authorized by
the Comptroller and that all other transactions affecting the funds are
properly supported and approved.
 Procedures and controls relating to the accountability and verification
of cash receipts, which totaled $4.1 million in fiscal year 2009, were
not sufficient, and chargeback transactions totaling $174,000 were not
resolved on a timely basis.
Adequate procedures and controls should be established over cash
receipts, and chargeback transactions should be investigated and resolved
in a timely manner.
 Payroll adjustments, such as processing overtime worked, were not
adequately verified and frequently lacked required supporting
documentation. Furthermore, certain purchasing transactions were
not adequately controlled.
The Region should implement adequate controls over payroll adjustments
and purchasing transactions.
 Certain procedural and record keeping deficiencies existed with
regard to the Region’s equipment, and materials and supplies.
The Region should comply with the applicable requirements of the
Department of General Services Inventory Control Manual.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore Region is a separate budgetary unit within the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) and comprises the following
maximum, minimum, or multi-level security institutions for male offenders:
 Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center
 Metropolitan Transition Center
 Maryland Reception, Diagnostic, and Classification Center
 Baltimore City Correctional Center
 Baltimore Pre-Release Unit
In a budget amendment dated August 27, 2007 and approved October 12, 2007,
the Region’s Home Detention Unit was eliminated through a transfer of the Unit’s
funding to the newly established Community Surveillance and Enforcement
Program of the DPSCS Division of Parole and Probation.
According to its records, as of June 30, 2009, the Region had a total population of
3,202 inmates. According to the State's records, total Region expenditures were
approximately $132.8 million during fiscal year 2009. The Region's fiscal year
2009 appropriation provided for 1,406 employee positions, including 1,167
correctional officers.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 10 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 27, 2006. We determined that the
Region satisfactorily addressed 4 of these findings. The remaining 6 findings are
repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Working Funds and Inmate Funds
Background
The Region maintains a general working fund (GWF) and an inmate working
fund (IWF). Working funds are normally established using an initial advance or
deposit of a specified amount, and are generally used to make smaller one-time
expenditures when other disbursement methods, such as the State’s transmittal
process, are not warranted or required. The Region’s GWF and IWF were
initially established by advances received from the Comptroller of Maryland and
consist of funds on deposit in a checking account for each fund, as well as certain
cash on hand.
According to the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual, the
GWF should only be used for emergency purchases in nominal amounts, or for
travel and emergency payroll advances. The IWF is used to disburse funds
belonging to inmates. Disbursements from both working fund checking accounts
can be made by cash withdrawal directly from the account or by issuing a
working fund check. Direct cash withdrawals are used to replenish cash on hand
which may be used for small disbursements or when issuance of a check is not
called for. As disbursements are made from the working funds, the checking
accounts must be replenished by the Region through the State transmittal process.
GWF disbursements totaled $283,000 during the period July 1, 2006 through
October 31, 2009, and IWF disbursements totaled $1.5 million during the period
July 1, 2007 through October 31, 2009.
Inmate funds are non-budgeted funds which are initially deposited with the State
Treasurer and recorded in the inmate’s personal account on the Maryland
Offenders Banking System (MOBS). MOBS serves as a record of each inmate’s
account activity, including funds received and disbursed, as well as the available
balance. Inmate funds can be saved, provided directly to inmates in certain
circumstances, such as upon their release, or inmates can direct the Region to
disburse these funds to third parties. Disbursements of inmate funds are made
using a check or cash withdrawal from the aforementioned inmate working fund
checking account, and the applicable inmate accounts on MOBS are charged.
The Accounting Procedures Manual establishes certain controls and procedures
governing agencies’ working funds and petty cash. These include limiting
disbursements for only authorized purposes and requiring reconciliation of
records (for example, checkbook) to bank statements and State accounting
records. To aid in this process, the checkbook should be maintained on a current
basis and provide a balance of funds available.
9

--- Page 12 ---
During the course of our audit, we became aware of certain unusual activities,
including the improper commingling of GWF and IWF transactions. As a result,
we expanded our work related to these working funds. Our findings regarding the
working funds and inmate funds indicate serious control weaknesses; a lack of
proper record keeping, documentation, and oversight for these funds; as well as
questions regarding specific fund transactions. The conditions described below in
Findings 1 through 5, when taken as a whole, indicate almost a complete lack of
control and accountability over the GWF and IWF by the Region. Based on the
matters noted, we referred these issues to the Criminal Division of the Office of
the Attorney General.
Finding 1
The Region did not maintain certain critical accounting records relating to
the two working funds, could not account for certain funds, and incurred
significant bank fees for overdrafts and checks written with insufficient
funds on account.
Analysis
The Region did not adequately maintain certain critical accounting records
associated with the working funds. Specifically, checking account balances for
both working fund accounts, which reflect all transactions, such as deposits,
disbursements, and cash withdrawals, were not maintained on a current basis.
Consequently, the daily fund balances were not readily available and
reconciliations of the Region’s records to bank statements (to ensure
completeness and accuracy) were difficult or impractical to perform. As a result,
for the GWF, we found that the bank reconciliations and fund compositions, when
prepared, were unreliable. For the IWF, the Region discontinued preparing bank
reconciliations and fund compositions after July 2009. In both cases,
reconciliations and compositions, when prepared, lacked documentation of
supervisory review and approval. A similar condition regarding the lack of
adequate reconciliations and compositions for the IWF was commented upon in
our preceding audit report.
We asked the Region to prepare a composition of the GWF as of October 31,
2009. Our request was made in early November 2009, but the composition was
not provided to us until January 2010. The composition disclosed unaccounted
for funds totaling approximately $14,400. In addition, although we asked the
Region to provide a similar composition of the IWF, we were never provided with
the requested documents. Therefore, using the Region’s records, we prepared an
analysis of the IWF’s cash activity for the period July 3, 2008 to November 2,
2009. Based on our calculations, funds totaling $15,500 were unaccounted for.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Furthermore, we noted that the Region had incurred significant bank fees
($23,300 between October 2006 and September 2008) primarily related to
overdrafts and checks written with insufficient funds on the account applicable to
the IWF. Such charges are often indicative of a lack of adequate record keeping
and monitoring including the preparation of proper bank reconciliations, and
possibly other discrepancies. We noted that in a written communication to the
Region, the Region’s bank expressed concern regarding the continued overdrawn
position of the IWF account, and specifically asked the Region to not issue checks
unless adequate funds were in the account. The Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services’ (DPSCS) Financial Operations Manual, and as previously
mentioned the Comptroller’s Accounting Procedures Manual, require the
preparation of periodic working fund bank reconciliations and fund compositions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Region
a. maintain for both funds critical accounting records, such as a working
fund checking account balance, on a current and complete basis and use
these records to prepare bank reconciliations and fund compositions on a
monthly basis (repeat);
b. ensure that independent supervisory personnel review and approve all
reconciliations and compositions including verifying that all adjustments
and reconciling items are adequately supported; and
c. investigate the disposition of any unaccounted for funds, and refer any
questionable activities to the Office of the Attorney General.
Finding 2
The Region had not reconciled its records of inmate funds with the
Comptroller of Maryland’s records.
Analysis
The Region had not reconciled the aggregate balance of inmate accounts recorded
on its records (MOBS) with the corresponding records of the Comptroller of
Maryland. As of July 2009, the most recent reconciliation attempted was as
of July 31, 2008. That reconciliation indicated an unresolved difference of
$314,132. As of May 31, 2009, the total balance of the individual inmate
accounts recorded on MOBS of $698,556 exceeded the Comptroller's balance of
$471,807 by $226,749. This difference is of particular concern considering the
other deficiencies associated with the IWF noted in this report, and implies that
inmate funds on deposit with the Comptroller may not be sufficient to cover the
aggregate balance of inmate accounts in MOBS.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Collections received by the Region on behalf of inmates totaled approximately
$2.4 million in fiscal year 2009. A similar condition has been commented upon
in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Region
a. periodically reconcile the aggregate balance of the individual inmate
accounts with the corresponding records of the Comptroller of Maryland
(repeat), and
b. investigate and resolve all differences and that these actions be
documented and retained for future reference (repeat).
Finding 3
Controls necessary for ensuring the propriety of working fund transactions
and records were either not established or were ineffective.
Analysis
The Region lacked adequate procedures for ensuring that all working fund
transactions were valid and properly authorized, and that the related records were
prepared and maintained in an appropriate, accurate manner. Our examination
disclosed, for example, inadequate separation of certain critical employee
functions, a lack of effective supervisory oversight for transactions, and poor or
non-existent records. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Blank checks and the signature plate used for disbursements from the GWF
were not adequately controlled since access was not restricted to designated,
authorized employees who required such access for their job duties.
Furthermore, employees who had access to blank checks also had access to
the signature plate. In addition, during the period May 2007 to October 2007,
67 checks totaling $44,230 were signed using a signature plate that contained
the signature of an individual who had resigned from the Region in May 2007
(dual signatures were not required). These checks were used for various
purposes, such as employee advances.
 Two employees, who could record transactions in MOBS which was used to
process and print IWF checks, also had access to the blank check stock. In
addition, one of these employees was responsible for using the signature plate
to affix the authorized signature to checks processed.
 One employee exercised complete control over cash that was withdrawn from
the IWF for inmates upon their release. This employee requested and
received the cash and subsequently placed it in individual envelopes for pick-
12

--- Page 15 ---
up by correctional officers for distribution to the inmates, and could perform
these functions without independent supervisory approval.
 Disbursement transactions related to the IWF frequently lacked adequate
supervisory review as evidenced, for example, by the lack of sufficient
documentation for certain transactions, including documentation specifically
required by DPSCS policy, such as inmate signatures.
 Supervisory review of transmittals submitted to the Comptroller to replenish
the IWF was, in some cases, inadequate as evidenced by the submission of
duplicate transmittals and a lack of supporting documentation. Our testing
disclosed that 12 duplicate transmittals totaling $28,235 were submitted by the
Region during the period January to September 2009, and that a transmittal
for $70,454 was processed in October 2008 without supporting
documentation, In 1992, DPSCS received a waiver from the Comptroller
from the requirement to submit supporting documents, such as receipts, with
requests for reimbursement of the IWF. However, documentation must be
kept on file at the applicable unit.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Region establish appropriate controls and adequate
segregation of duties. Specifically, the Region should ensure that
a. employees who have access to blank checks not have access to signature
plates, or be assigned the capability to record transactions in MOBS, and
that access to both the blank checks and signature plates be limited to
only those employees who require such access for their job duties;
b. employees who request cash for inmates’ release are not also allowed to
receive and prepare the cash for distribution;
c. independent supervisory personnel adequately verify the propriety and
accuracy of all critical transactions and records, disbursement
transactions and reimbursement requests, and document this
verification; and
d. return the aforementioned $28,235 to Comptroller, make any necessary
adjustments to inmate fund records, and investigate and determine the
appropriate disposition of the $70,454.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 4
The Region periodically transferred funds between the GWF and IWF,
which impaired accountability for the funds and circumvented the
Comptroller’s approval process for establishing the amount authorized for
each working fund.
Analysis
The Region periodically transferred funds between the GWF and the IWF without
proper authority. In addition, the Region received a $40,000 loan from the inmate
working fund of another Division of Corrections (DOC) region. These actions
impaired accountability for the funds, and circumvented the Comptroller’s
approval process for establishing the amount authorized for each fund.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 The Region made four transfers totaling $48,829 between the GWF and the
IWF during the period April 2008 to April 2009 without the approval of the
Comptroller. In one case, an emergency advance of $31,500 received from
the Comptroller in March 2009 for the IWF was subsequently transferred by
the Region to the GWF. Furthermore, although the Comptroller required
repayment by May 2009, as of January 2010 this advance had not been repaid.
 Our review of 15 GWF checks issued during the period September 2007 to
November 2008 disclosed 3 checks totaling $10,365 that were issued to the
IWF. The Region had no documentation on file substantiating the reason for
these payments.
Beside the lack of accountability and approval for these transfers, we question the
practice of comingling State funds and funds belonging to inmates. We were
advised that these steps were necessary, in part, to help ensure that sufficient cash
balances existed to cover disbursements and avoid bank service charges for
overdrafts and insufficient funds (see Finding 1 for comment on bank fees).
According to the State’s records, as of March 2010, $8,300 had been advanced to
the Region for its GWF and $57,300 had been advanced for the IWF.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Region
a. not transfer funds between the GWF and the IWF without authorization,
and use the Comptroller’s established procedures for requesting
additional working funds when necessary;
b. investigate the aforementioned transactions to determine the proper
disposition of these funds (including a determination as to why such
transfers were necessary); and
14

--- Page 17 ---
c. repay the aforementioned $31,500 emergency advance to the
Comptroller, as well as the $40,000 loan to the other region.
Finding 5
The Region made certain unsupported and questionable check
disbursements and cash withdrawals from the working funds.
Analysis
Adequate documentation was not available to substantiate the propriety of several
check disbursements and cash withdrawals made from the working funds, and the
propriety of certain transactions was questionable. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
General Working Fund
 Our review of 37 GWF checks totaling $23,780, written during the period
December 2006 through July 2009, disclosed 25 checks totaling $19,536 for
which the Region was unable to provide documentation substantiating the
propriety of the disbursement. One check for $2,000 indicated that it was for
the IWF. However, there was no evidence that the funds were deposited into
the IWF bank account. Furthermore, in February 2008, a check for $541was
issued to a former employee who had resigned in June 2005. The Region
could not provide an adequate explanation or authorizing documentation for
this payment.
 Our review of approximately 60 cash withdrawals from the GWF totaling
$33,000 made between November 2008 and October 2009 disclosed 3
withdrawals totaling $7,600 for which documentation was not on file
substantiating why the cash was needed. Another withdrawal of $6,200 was
never recorded or included in the daily counts of cash on hand by the cashier
as was the Region’s regular procedure. Two months after this cash was
withdrawn, $6,200 in cash was deposited back into the GWF account. Due to
the lack of accounting for the withdrawal, the Region was unable to
authenticate the whereabouts of the cash during the interim.
 Authorizing documentation was not on file to substantiate the propriety of
salary advances made from the GWF prior to fiscal year 2008, and
documentation for advances processed since that time often lacked certain
required signatures. For example, supporting documentation could not be
located for any of the 72 advances ($53,000) issued in fiscal year 2007.
Furthermore, an employee with an unpaid advance of $1,052 from October
15

--- Page 18 ---
2007 was issued a second advance of $1,117 just prior to the employee’s
retirement in July 2009. Both advances remained unpaid as of January 2010.
Inmate Working Fund
 Cash withdrawals from the IWF for the purpose of paying inmates upon their
release were frequently not supported by a receipt form signed by the inmate
as required by DPSCS policy. Our review of documents supporting
approximately 270 such withdrawals totaling $10,500 made during August
and September 2009, disclosed that the vast majority did not include the
inmate’s signature. Although the documentation was always signed, the
signature was often that of someone other than the inmate who should have
received the funds, such as a correctional officer.
 Supporting documentation was not on file for three IWF checks (totaling
$7,474) we examined for the period March to May 2009.
 The Region improperly used inmate funds from the IWF to pay seven salary
advances totaling $4,199, rather than using general funds from the GWF. As
previously noted, inmate funds are the property of inmates and should not be
used to advance funds to Region employees.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Region
a. maintain adequate documentation, including documentation required by
DPSCS policy, supporting the propriety of all disbursements and
withdrawals from the working funds;
b. ensure that all cash withdrawals are properly documented, recorded, and
accounted for when received;
c. verify the propriety of the aforementioned checks and cash withdrawals
lacking adequate supporting documentation (including the disbursement
to the former employee); and
d. recover salary advances on a timely basis, including those noted as
outstanding and, in the future, ensure salary advances are not paid from
the IWF.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 6
Procedures and controls relating to the accountability and verification of the
Region’s cash receipts were not sufficient.
Analysis
Procedures and controls relating to the accountability and verification of the
Region’s cash receipts were not sufficient. During fiscal year 2009, cash receipts
deposited by the Region totaled approximately $4.1 million. These receipts
included, for example, funds received for inmates, and were received either
directly by the Region’s finance office, or at one of the Region’s five institutions
and forwarded to the office. We noted the following conditions:
 Although the Region performed certain procedures to account for pre-
numbered receipt forms used to record collections, there was no
documentation that missing forms identified through this process were
subsequently investigated for propriety. We examined the Region’s
accounting for a block of 13,000 receipts issued between June 2008 and May
2009. According to the Region’s records, approximately 3,700 missing multi-
part receipt forms were identified within the 13,000. However, the Region
was unable to provide any documentation that an investigation or other review
was performed to determine the disposition of the missing forms. As a result,
receipt forms could have been provided for payments without the funds being
deposited and this would not be detected.
 Our test of 20 cash receipts, collected during fiscal years 2008 and 2009 and
totaling approximately $1.3 million, disclosed 10 deposits that were made
totaling $390,000 for which there was no documentation supporting a
verification of recorded collections to bank deposit records. Additionally, for
five other deposits totaling $77,000, the deposit verification was not
performed timely. Specifically, the verification was performed using bank
statements that were received at the end of the month, rather than the daily
bank record of deposits.
 Chargeback transactions totaling approximately $174,000 as of June 30, 2009
had not been resolved as of October 2009. Approximately $165,000 of this
total related to transactions that had occurred prior to fiscal year 2008.
Chargeback transactions occur when the State Treasurer is unable to obtain
credit from the bank for certain items, such as non-sufficient fund checks.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The lack of an adequate accounting for receipt forms was commented upon in our
preceding audit report, while deficiencies in the deposit verification function have
been commented upon in our three preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the Region
a. adequately account for pre-numbered receipt forms and investigate the
disposition of missing forms (repeat);
b. verify in a timely manner (as deposits are made) that all receipts are
subsequently deposited by comparing recorded collections to bank
deposit documentation and ensure the verification is documented
(repeat); and
c. promptly investigate and resolve chargeback transactions.
Payroll
Finding 7
Certain controls had not been established over the Region’s payroll.
Analysis
Procedures and controls over the Region's payroll were not sufficient.
Specifically, procedures had not been established during our audit period to
ensure that payroll adjustments recorded on automated timekeeping reports were
subject to independent supervisory review. Our review of four pay periods
disclosed that supervisory verification of payroll adjustments had not been
conducted for two of the Region's five institutions. Furthermore, we noted that
the Region, in December 2007, processed a duplicate payroll payment totaling
$12,017, to a retired employee for unused leave. The Region made the same
payment twice in consecutive pay periods and was unaware of the duplication
until our inquiries. We were advised by DPSCS management that, subsequent to
our inquiries, the overpayment was recovered.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
According to the State’s accounting records, the Region’s regular payroll totaled
$89.1 million during fiscal year 2009.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the Region ensure that all payroll adjustments recorded
on payroll time reports are subject to supervisory review, at least on a test
basis (repeat).
18

--- Page 21 ---
Purchasing Transactions
Finding 8
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of certain
purchasing transactions.
Analysis
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of certain
purchasing transactions on the State’s Financial Management Information System
(FMIS). Specifically, the Region’s online approval rules allowed eight employees
(one of which was employed by the Region while the remaining seven were
employed by other DPSCS facilities) with the capability to initiate purchase
orders to also make changes to those transactions after independent approvals
were obtained. Consequently, the aforementioned employees had the capability
to make unauthorized changes to critical purchase information (such as vendor
names and amounts) without those changes being subject to independent
approval. According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2009,
the Region used FMIS to process payments against purchase orders totaling
approximately $2.1 million.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that the Region establish approval requirements that
prevent individuals with the capability to initiate purchasing transactions
from modifying the transactions after related approvals have been obtained.
Equipment
Finding 9
Equipment records were not adequately maintained and physical inventories
were not completed as required.
Analysis
The Region’s equipment records were not adequately maintained and physical
inventories were not conducted in compliance with the Department of General
Services’ Inventory Control Manual. According to the Region’s records, the
book value of the Region’s equipment totaled approximately $5.9 million as of
June 30, 2009. Specifically, we noted the following deficiencies:
 Significant adjustments to the Region’s equipment control accounts were not
adequately supported, and the account balances were not periodically
reconciled with the related detail records. For example, according to the
19

--- Page 22 ---
Region’s records, during the third quarter of fiscal year 2008, adjustments
totaling approximately $4 million were made to reduce the control account
totals maintained for three locations (Maryland Reception, Diagnostic, and
Classification Center; Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center; and
Metropolitan Transition Center). However, the Region could not explain or
document the reason for these adjustments, nor had the adjustments been
approved as required. In addition, periodic reconciliations of the control
accounts with the corresponding detail records were not performed. As of
June 30, 2009, the aggregate total of the Region’s control accounts
($5,948,548) exceeded the total of the corresponding detail records
($5,821,386) by $127,162.
 Acquired equipment was not always recorded in the detail records.
Specifically, our test of 5 equipment purchases totaling $69,294 that were
made between October 2006 and December 2008, disclosed that 4 of the
purchases comprising 152 items and totaling $59,294 were not posted to the
detail inventory records as of October 2009. These items included bullet
proof vests and handheld radios.
 Equipment items recorded in the detail records could not always be located.
Our test of 15 equipment items totaling $15,673 and recorded in the detail
records, disclosed that 5 of the items (such as photography equipment)
totaling $8,091 could not be located by us or Region personnel. Furthermore,
equipment items on hand were not always recorded in the detail records. Our
test of 15 items sighted at the Region, disclosed 5 items that could not be
located in the detail records.
 Physical inventories of sensitive items had not been completed annually as
required. As of October 2009, physical inventory counts of sensitive items at
each of the Region’s five units had not been conducted for periods ranging
from 22 to 30 months.
The Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual requires
that a control account and detail records be properly maintained for equipment
and that the control account be reconciled at least quarterly with the aggregate
balance of the detail records. In addition, the Manual requires that all adjustments
to equipment control accounts be approved by someone in authority not below the
level of Chief Administrative Officer (or designee). Furthermore, the Manual
requires that all capital equipment items be recorded in the detail records and that
a complete inventory of sensitive items be performed annually.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Similar conditions have been commented upon in our preceding audit reports,
including conditions relating to the proper maintenance of a control account,
which has been commented upon in our five preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that the Region
a. comply with the aforementioned requirements of the Inventory Control
Manual (repeat), and
b. investigate the propriety of the noted $4 million in adjustments to the
control accounts.
Materials and Supplies
Finding 10
Procedures and controls over the Region’s materials and supplies inventory
were not adequate.
Analysis
Procedures and controls over the Region’s materials and supplies inventory were
not adequate. For example, we noted that requisition forms used for withdrawals
from the Region’s storerooms could be altered after the issuance of goods, and
additional items could be removed from stock without detection. Specifically, the
custodian officers had access to all three copies of the completed requisition form
used to withdraw items from inventory. The custodians forwarded two copies of
the completed requisitions to the inventory record keeper to update the perpetual
inventory records. Consequently, the record keeper was unable to determine
whether improper alterations to the quantities issued on the requisition forms were
made. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Furthermore, differences between the perpetual inventory records and physical
inventory counts were not always investigated and resolved. Our review of the
results of two monthly physical inventories conducted during fiscal year 2009 for
the commissary at the Metropolitan Transition Center, disclosed a lack of
documentation to support an investigation of differences noted (primarily
shortages) totaling approximately $49,000. The lack of a proper investigation of
such differences was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual establishes requirements regarding internal
controls and related recordkeeping to be followed by State agencies. According
to the State’s records, the Region’s materials and supplies expenditures totaled
approximately $2.5 million in fiscal year 2009. As of June 30, 2009, the Region’s
21

--- Page 24 ---
reported materials and supplies inventories on hand totaled approximately
$988,000.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that the Region comply with the requirements of the
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that the Region
a. provide copies of completed inventory requisition forms to the
requisitioning unit, and that the inventory record keeper periodically
compare the requisition copies used for inventory posting to the copies
provided to the employees receiving the goods, at least on a test basis
(repeat);
b. ensure that differences between physical quantities on hand (noted as a
result of physical inventories) and the related perpetual records are
investigated and resolved by an employee who does not have access to the
materials and supplies stock (repeat); and
c. ensure that documentation be maintained to support such investigations.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Baltimore Region of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS) for the period beginning February 1, 2006 and
ending June 30, 2009. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included primarily the general and inmate working funds,
inmate funds, cash receipts, payroll, the purchasing function, equipment, and
materials and supplies. Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate
personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of the
Region’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided
in this report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable,
but were not independently verified.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Region’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Region that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
DPSCS’ response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of the Region,
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
24

--- Page 29 ---
Baltimore Region October 28, 2010
Page 2 of 8
b. ensure that independent supervisory personnel review and approve all
reconciliations and compositions including verifying that all
adjustments and reconciling items are adequately supported; and
c. investigate the disposition of any unaccounted for funds, and refer any
questionable activities to the Office of the Attorney General.
We agree. On July 1, 2009, the General Working Fund (GWF) transactions were
transferred to the CRFO account. No activity has occurred related to the Baltimore
Region GWF account since May 2010. Also, on July 1, 2009, the Inmate Working
Fund (IWF) transactions were transferred to the CRFO account. No checks have
been written on the Baltimore Region IWF account since that date. Presently, the
CRFO is maintaining critical accounting records on a current and complete basis and
using these records in the preparation of bank reconciliations and fund compositions
on a monthly basis. The CRFO ensures that independent supervisory personnel
review and approve all reconciliations and compositions including verifying that all
adjustments and reconciling items are adequately supported. The Division plans to
close the Baltimore Region Working Fund accounts by December 31, 2010. By June
30, 2011, the Division will investigate and resolve all unaccounted for funds and refer
any instance of possible criminal or unethical conduct to the Office of the Attorney
General. The Department is reviewing the feasibility of contracting with an outside
accounting firm to investigate the GWF and IWF transactions identified in the audit
findings to assure that these funds have been reviewed and accounted for by an
independent examination.
Finding 2 - The Region had not reconciled its records of inmate funds with the
Comptroller of Maryland’s records.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that the Region
a. periodically reconcile the aggregate balance of the individual inmate
accounts with the corresponding records of the Comptroller of
Maryland (repeat); and
b. investigate and resolve all differences and that these actions be
documented and retained for future reference (repeat).
We agree. Periodic reconciliations of the aggregate balance of the individual inmate
accounts with the corresponding records of the Comptroller are complete for July,
August, and September 2010. The Division will investigate and resolve all
differences and these actions will be documented and retained for future reference by
June 30, 2011.

--- Page 30 ---
Baltimore Region October 28, 2010
Page 3 of 8
Finding 3 - Controls necessary for ensuring the propriety of working fund
transactions and records were either not established or were
ineffective.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that the Region establish appropriate controls and
adequate segregation of duties. Specifically, the Region should ensure that
a. employees who have access to blank checks not have access to signature
plates, or be assigned the capability to record transactions in MOBS,
and that access to both the blank checks and signature plates be limited
to only those employees who required such access for their job duties;
b. employees who request cash for inmates’ release are not also allowed to
receive and prepare the cash for distribution;
c. independent supervisory personnel adequately verify the propriety and
accuracy of all critical transactions and records, disbursement
transactions and reimbursement requests, and document this
verification; and
d. return the aforementioned $28,235 to Comptroller, make any necessary
adjustments to inmate fund records, and investigate and determine the
appropriate disposition of the $70,454.
We agree: Effective July 2009, the CRFO has established appropriate controls and
adequate segregation of duties. Specifically, the Region will ensure that employees
who have access to blank checks do not have access to signature plates, nor will they
be assigned the capability to record transactions in MOBS. The Region will also
ensure that access to both the blank checks and signature plates be limited to only
those employees who require such access for their job duties. Employees who
request cash for inmates’ release are also not allowed to receive and prepare the cash
for distribution effective March 2010. In addition, as of July 2009, independent
supervisory personnel adequately verify the propriety and accuracy of all critical
transactions and records, disbursement transactions and reimbursement requests, and
document this verification. The CRFO will return the aforementioned $28,235 to the
Comptroller and make any necessary adjustments to inmate fund records by
December 31, 2010. By June 30, 2011, the Division will investigate the appropriate
disposition of the $70,454.
Finding 4 - The Region periodically transferred funds between the GWF and
IWF, which impaired accountability for the funds and circumvented
the Comptroller’s approval process for establishing the amount
authorized for each working fund.

--- Page 31 ---
Baltimore Region October 28, 2010
Page 4 of 8
Recommendation 4:
We recommend that the Region
a. not transfer funds between the GWF and IWF without authorization
and use of the Comptroller’s established procedures for requesting
additional working funds when necessary;
b. investigate the aforementioned transactions to determine the proper
disposition of these funds (including a determination as to why such
transfers were necessary); and
c. repay the aforementioned $31,500 emergency advance to the
Comptroller, as well as the $40,000 loan to the other region.
We Agree: The CRFO will not transfer funds between the GWF and the IWF. The
two funds are now controlled by two separate Fiscal Services Chiefs. The Division
plans to close the Baltimore Region GWF and IWF by December 31, 2010, and
return the related advances to the Comptroller. By June 30, 2011, the Division will
investigate the aforementioned transactions to determine the proper disposition of
these funds (including a determination as to why such transfers were necessary). The
Division will repay the aforementioned $31,500 emergency advance to the
Comptroller. In addition, the CRFO has requested the Comptroller’s Office to
complete a journal entry to transfer the $40,000 as required to close the account. The
$71,500 will be returned to the Comptroller by December 31, 2010.
Finding 5 - The Region made certain unsupported and questionable check
disbursements and cash withdrawals from the working funds.
Recommendation 5:
We recommend that the Region
a. maintain adequate documentation, including documentation required
by DPSCS policy, supporting the propriety of all disbursements and
withdrawals from the working funds;
b. ensure that all cash withdrawals are properly documented, recorded,
and accounted for when received;
c. verify the propriety of the aforementioned checks and cash withdrawals
lacking adequate supporting documentation (including the
disbursement to the former employee); and
d. recover salary advances on a timely basis, including those noted as
outstanding and, in the future, ensure salary advances are not paid
from the IWF.

--- Page 32 ---
Baltimore Region October 28, 2010
Page 5 of 8
We agree. The Division plans to close the Baltimore Region GWF and IWF
accounts by December 31, 2010, and return the related advances to the Comptroller.
The CRFO currently maintains adequate documentation, including documentation
required by DPSCS policy, supporting the propriety of all disbursements and
withdrawals from the working funds. In addition, the CRFO currently ensures that all
cash withdrawals are properly documented, recorded, and accounted for when
received. By June 30, 2011, the Division will investigate the propriety of the
aforementioned checks and cash withdrawals lacking adequate supporting
documentation (including the disbursement to the former employee). By June 30,
2011, the CRFO will also recover salary advances on a timely basis, including those
noted as outstanding, and will ensure salary advances are not paid from the IWF.
Finding 6 - Procedures and controls relating to the accountability and
verification of the Region’s cash receipts were not sufficient.
Recommendation 6:
We recommend that the Region
a. adequately account for pre-numbered receipt forms and investigate the
disposition of missing forms (repeat);
b. verify in a timely manner (as deposits are made) that all receipts are
subsequently deposited by comparing recorded collections to bank
deposit documentation and ensure the verification is documented
(repeat); and
c. promptly investigate and resolve chargeback transactions.
We agree. The CRFO will adequately account for pre-numbered receipt forms by
investigating missing receipt forms and reviewing voided receipts for propriety. To
assist with compliance, the Division of Correction contracted with SunTrust Bank to
provide a lock box service to process the receipts of inmate funds. This new process
began in May 2010 and eliminates the need for most pre-numbered receipt forms.
The remaining receipts are being adequately accounted for as required.
As of July 2009, the CRFO verifies in a timely manner (as deposits are made) that all
receipts are subsequently deposited by comparing recorded collections to the bank
deposit documentation and ensuring that the verification is documented. The
verifications are documented and retained for reference. Also, as of July 2009, the
CRFO investigates and resolves chargeback transactions in a timely manner.

--- Page 33 ---
Baltimore Region October 28, 2010
Page 6 of 8
Finding 7 - Certain controls had not been established over the Region’s payroll.
Recommendation 7:
We recommend that the Region ensure that all payroll adjustments
recorded on payroll time reports are subject to supervisory review, at least
on a test basis (repeat).
We agree: As of July 2009, the CRFO ensures that all payroll adjustments recorded
on payroll time reports are subject to supervisory review, at least on a test basis.
Finding 8 - Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of
certain purchasing transactions.
Recommendation 8:
We recommend that the Region establish approval requirements that
prevent individuals with the capability to initiate purchasing transactions
from modifying the transactions after related approvals have been
obtained.
We agree: The CRFO has established approval requirements that prevent individuals
with the capability to initiate purchasing transactions from modifying the transactions
after related approvals have been obtained. The DPSCS FMIS Security Officer has
updated the approval path for purchases to include removal of procurement
employees’ ability to make changes to critical purchase information after independent
approvals were obtained. The interface 02 in ADPICS was removed from the
Baltimore Region procurement employees’ FMIS security profile. The CRFO will
continue to monitor security reports to assure compliance bi-monthly as new reports
are issued.
Finding 9 - Equipment records were not adequately maintained and physical
inventories were not completed as required.
Recommendation 9:
We recommend that the Region
a. comply with the aforementioned requirements of the Inventory Control
Manual (repeat); and
b. investigate the propriety of the noted $4 million in adjustments to the
control accounts.

--- Page 34 ---
Baltimore Region October 28, 2010
Page 7 of 8
We agree: The CRFO will comply with the aforementioned requirements of the
Inventory Control Manual. It should be noted that the responsibility for maintenance
of equipment records and physical inventories of equipment is a shared responsibility.
The CRFO is responsible for maintenance of the control accounts and for assisting
with the reconciliation of control accounts to the detail records. However, the
Warden is responsible for the maintenance of the detail records and the physical
inventories of the equipment. In any case, the fixed assets control accounts have been
reconciled to the related detailed record for fiscal year 2010. Fixed assets control
accounts and detail records are being updated on a quarterly basis and reconciliations
of control accounts to the detailed records are also performed quarterly. Physical
inventories are currently being conducted in accordance to the DGS manual. In
addition, the CRFO will have the Fiscal Services Chief review and approve the
equipment control accounts effective October 31, 2010. The Division will investigate
the propriety of the noted $4 million in adjustments to the control accounts by
December 31, 2010.
Finding 10 - Procedures and controls over the Region’s materials and supplies
inventory were not adequate.
Recommendation 10:
We recommend that the Region comply with the requirements of the
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that the Region
a. provide copies of completed inventory requisition forms to the
requisitioning unit, and that the inventory record keeper periodically
compare the requisition copies used for inventory posting to the copies
provided to the employees receiving the goods, at least on a test basis
(repeat);
b. ensure that differences between physical quantities on hand (noted as a
result of physical inventories) and the related perpetual records are
investigated and resolved by an employee who does not have access to
the materials and supplies stock (repeat); and
c. ensure that documentation be maintained to support such
investigations.
We agree. The CRFO and the Baltimore Region Wardens will comply with the
requirements of the Inventory Control Manual. The Enterprise Inventory
Management System (eIMS) was implemented for the Baltimore Region institutions
in June 2010, creating a paperless on-line requisition process. The eIMS requires
independent responsibilities and access, and therefore, negates the need for
comparing requisition copies. In addition, investigating and resolving differences
between the physical quantities on hand and the related perpetual records will be

--- Page 36 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock
Senior Auditor
Andrew N. Dobin, CPA, CFE
Kevin J. Mercer
Staff Auditors