Title: Department of Agriculture
Date: 05/05/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674262
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:36:59.500426
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Agriculture
May 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) supervises, administers, and
promotes agricultural activities throughout the State of Maryland. Its mission is
to provide leadership and support to agriculture and the citizens of Maryland by
conducting regulatory, service, and educational activities that assure consumer
confidence, protect the environment, and promote agriculture. MDA’s
responsibilities include providing planning assistance to farmers, protecting the
health of domestic animals (such as livestock), controlling insect pests, regulating
the use of pesticides, and implementing sound soil conservation methods. MDA
also inspects and grades agricultural commodities, oversees the practice of
veterinary medicine, and inspects the weighing and packaging of various
products. According to the State’s records, MDA’s operating expenditures for
fiscal year 2015 totaled approximately $80.3 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 24, 2013. We determined that MDA
satisfactorily addressed two of the findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Adequate controls were not established over cash receipts and the related
registrations issued in one unit.
Analysis
The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) had not established adequate
controls over certain cash receipts and the related registrations issued in one MDA
unit. This unit collects various fees, including commercial feed and pesticide
registration fees. According to MDA’s records, the unit’s collections totaled
approximately $2.8 million during fiscal year 2015, including $2.5 million
collected through the MDA lockbox account and $300,000 collected by the MDA
unit.
3

--- Page 6 ---
The employee who initially received cash receipts in this unit also recorded
product registration application data in the automated records; the registrations
were subsequently issued without independent supervisory review and approval.
Furthermore, MDA did not perform an independent reconciliation of the value of
registrations issued with the corresponding revenue deposited to ensure that the
proper amounts were collected and deposited for all registrations issued by the
unit. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires
that the total value of registrations issued should be reconciled with the total cash
received for those registrations.
The lack of an independent reconciliation of the total value of registrations issued
and fees collected has been commented upon in our three preceding audit reports
dating back to 2007. The lack of a process for supervisory review and approval of
registrations issued was commented upon in our preceding report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDA
a. establish a process for supervisory review and approval of registrations
issued by an employee independent of the registration and cash receipts
processes (repeat), and
b. independently reconcile the total value of registrations issued and fees
collected according to its records with the related revenues deposited
(repeat).
Equipment
Finding 2
Control deficiencies exist over equipment records and physical inventories.
Analysis
MDA’s physical inventory and equipment recordkeeping procedures were
inadequate and were not in accordance with the Department of General Services
(DGS) Inventory Control Manual. According to MDA’s records, its equipment
inventory as of November 17, 2015 totaled approximately $8.3 million.
 The equipment control account was not properly maintained since it did not
provide a continuing summary of transactions and a total dollar value control
over amounts recorded in the related detail records.
 Physical inventories of certain sensitive equipment were not performed
annually as required. We noted 1,452 sensitive items with a recorded cost of
4

--- Page 7 ---
approximately $1.4 million which, as of November 2015, had not been
inventoried within one year. Of this total, $1.2 million had not been
inventoried within the last three years.
 Equipment items were not always properly recorded in the detail equipment
records. Our test of 12 equipment purchases totaling approximately $354,000
made prior to April 2015, disclosed 3 purchases totaling $179,000 which, as
of November 2015, had not been recorded in the detail records. We also
noted 1,035 items totaling $540,763 that had been incorrectly classified in the
detail records as non-sensitive even though they met the criteria for sensitive
items. These items included cameras, computer monitors, and printers.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires a control account to be maintained
and periodically reconciled to the related detail records, and sensitive equipment
to be inventoried annually. The Manual also requires detail records to be properly
maintained. Similar conditions regarding adequate accountability and control
over equipment have been commented on in our preceding audit reports dating
back to 1990.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDA comply with the Inventory Control Manual
requirements (repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Agriculture (MDA) for the period beginning July 16, 2012 and ending August 20,
2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
5

--- Page 8 ---
addressed by the audit included disbursements for MDA’s operating expenditures,
as well as payroll, cash receipts, and equipment inventories. We also determined
the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit included a review of certain support services (such as purchasing, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions)
provided by MDA to the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation
which administers the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund. Our audit
did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal
laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment
of MDA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDA.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MDA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MDA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MDA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDA regarding the results of
our review of its response.
7

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker
Lindsay M. Fertig, CPA
Staff Auditors