Title: Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority
Date: 11/19/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742ba
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:43:40.895113
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority
May 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 1, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Canal Place Preservation and
Development Authority for the period beginning December 1, 2020 and ending
November 18, 2024. The Authority’s primary purpose is to transform the
Chesapeake and Ohio Canal and adjacent areas in the city of Cumberland,
Maryland into a showpiece of historic preservation that will enhance recreation,
commercial, civic, transportation, educational, and ecological values.
Our audit disclosed the Authority did not obtain annual financial statement audits
as required by State law, a condition noted but not corrected from our prior audit
report. Specifically, as of January 2025, the Authority had not engaged an
accounting firm to conduct the audit of its financial statements for the fiscal year
ending June 30, 2024. In addition, although the Authority engaged an accounting
firm in February 2024 to conduct the audits for fiscal years ending June 30, 2022
and 2023, they have not been completed as of January 2025.
The Authority’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
We reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our finding and related
recommendation, and while there are other aspects of the response which will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by the
Office.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority, an instrumentality of
the State of Maryland, a public corporation, and an independent unit of state
government, is governed by its nine members. The Authority is responsible for
transforming the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal and adjacent areas in the city of
Cumberland, Maryland into a showpiece of historic preservation that will enhance
recreational, commercial, civic, transportation, educational, and ecological values.
The administrative affairs and activities of the Authority are directed and
supervised by an executive director who is appointed by the Authority, subject to
approval of the Governor.
According to State records, during fiscal year 2024, the Authority's expenditures
totaled approximately $1.1 million, the vast majority of which represented payroll
costs for its employees and contractual services to maintain its property (see
Figure 1). According to the State’s records, the main funding source covering the
Authority’s operating expenditures consisted of special funds (primarily from
tenant rents, fees, and lease revenue totaling $455,000).
3

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1
Authority Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2024
Positions
Filled 3
Vacant 0
Total 3
Fiscal Year 2024 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 312,026
Technical and Special Fees 34,468
Operating Expenses 720,404
Total $1,066,898
Fiscal Year 2024 Funding Sources
Funding
General Fund $ 236,570
Special Fund 580,328
Reimbursable Fund 250,000
Total $1,066,898
Source: State financial records and Authority personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated April 23, 2021. See Figure 2 for the results of our
review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Finding
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority
Repeated
Finding 1 did not ensure required annual audits of its financial
(Current Finding 1)
statements were conducted in a timely manner.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Financial Statement Audits
Finding 1
The Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority did not obtain
required annual audits of its financial statements as required by State law.
Analysis
The Authority did not obtain annual audits of its financial statements as required
by State law. Our review disclosed that as of January 2025 the Authority had not
obtained audits of its financial statements for the fiscal years ending June 30,
2022 and 2023. Although the Authority engaged an accounting firm in February
2024 to conduct these audits, they have not been completed as of January 2025.
In addition, the Authority had not engaged an accounting firm to conduct the audit
for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2024. The Authority’s management advised us
that it expected the 2022 and 2023 audits to be completed by April 2025 and that
the delay in engaging a firm for the 2024 audit was due to its personnel being
busy with other tasks.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report regarding
the audits for fiscal years 2018, 2019, and 2020. In response to that report, the
Authority obtained audits for those fiscal years and for fiscal year 2021.
However, as noted above the Authority did not ensure subsequent audits were
obtained as required. The audit reports for fiscal years 2018 through 2021 stated
that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of the governmental activities and each major fund of the Authority, and
the respective changes in financial position for the aforementioned years in
accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States
of America.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Authority ensure that annual audits of its financial
statements are conducted as required by State law and that these audits are
completed timely (repeat).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Canal Place Preservation and
Development Authority for the period beginning December 1, 2020 and ending
November 18, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Authority’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, cash receipts, and
tracking of annual financial disclosure forms with the State Ethics Commission.
We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit
report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on the Authority’s procedures and
controls in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other
auditing procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during
our audit period of December 1, 2020 to November 18, 2024, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions
and to the extent practicable, observations of the Authority’s operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
6

--- Page 9 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
The Authority’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the Authority, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding regarding a significant instance of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Our audit did not disclose any findings
relating to conditions that we considered significant deficiencies in the design or
operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Authority’s ability to
maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Authority that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The Authority’s response to our finding and recommendation is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Authority regarding
the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
Wes Moore
Governor
Aruna Miller
Lt. Governor
Authority Members April 30, 2025
Colleen Peterson
Board Chair Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Rebecca Ruppert
Allegany College Office of Legislative Audits
of Maryland (Retired),
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Vice-Chair
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
Tina Cappetta Baltimore, Maryland 21201
U.S. Department of the
Interior, NPS
Dear Mr. Tanen:
Stuart Czapski
Cumberland Economic
Development Corp. I am in receipt of the draft of the legislative audit performed for the Canal Place
Preservation and Development Authority (CPPDA) by your office for the time
Al Feldstein
Maryland period of December 1, 2020, through November 18, 2024. Attached to this letter
Historical Trust
you will find the Agency Response to the draft documents.
Michael Mudge
Allegany County Public In regards to the audit finding about the annual audits being late, the CPPDA will
Schools
continue to improve on having audits done in a timely manner.
Ray Morriss
Mayor, City of
If you have any questions, or need additional information, please do not hesitate to
Cumberland
contact me.
Bradford Nixon
Frostburg State
University Sincerely,
Ashli Workman
Allegany County
Tourism Director Deidra L Ritchie
Executive Director
CPPDA
Deidra Ritchie
Executive Director
Western Maryland Railway Station, 13 Canal Street, Suite 301, Cumberland, Maryland 21502
Phone: 301-724-3655 Fax: 301-724-3659 Toll Free: 800-989-9394 TTY/TDD: 800-735-2258
Email: canalplace.mail@maryland.gov Website: www.passagesofthepotomac.org

--- Page 12 ---
Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority
Agency Response Form
Financial Statement Audits
Finding 1
The Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority did not obtain
required annual audits of its financial statements as required by State law.
We recommend that the Authority ensure that annual audits of its financial
statements are conducted as required by State law and that these audits are
completed timely (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2025
Please provide details of The FY22-23 Audits are nearing completion and the FY24 and FY25
corrective action or Audits will be put out to bid as soon as possible and completed
explain disagreement. before the end of FY26.
Page 1 of 1

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Thomas J. Kraemer
Senior Auditor