Title: Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund - Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2008
Date: 06/15/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674276
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:38:28.314464
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
June 15, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund (Fund) for
the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. The Fund was established to preserve
productive agricultural land and is primarily funded by State and agricultural
transfer taxes and local subdivision matching funds. The Fund is administered by
the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF).
Our audit disclosed that MALPF lacked a comprehensive listing of all easement
acquisitions and needed to improve existing processes to ensure the accuracy of
easement purchase prices and related payments. We also noted that MALPF did
not effectively monitor the certification status of local land preservation programs
and did not ensure that all appropriate taxes were remitted to the Fund. In
addition, MALPF did not properly monitor easement inspections performed by
local jurisdictions.
An Executive Summary of our findings can be found on page 5. The Department
of Agriculture’s response to this audit, on behalf of MALPF, is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
by MALPF during the course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Financial Information 7
Fund Status 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Easement Acquisitions
* Finding 1 – A Comprehensive Listing of All Easement Acquisitions 9
Was Not Maintained
∗ Finding 2 – Controls Over Easement Acquisitions Were Inadequate 10
County Agricultural Land Transfer Taxes
* Finding 3 – County Programs Were Not Properly Certified, Resulting in 11
Certain Counties Improperly Retaining Transfer Taxes
* Finding 4 – MALPF Did Not Ensure That Counties Properly Used 12
Their Share of Transfer Taxes
Inspections
* Finding 5 – Easement Inspections Were Not Properly Monitored 13
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Exhibit A – Schedule of Financial Activity 17
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
June 2009
• Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) did not
maintain sufficient records of all easement acquisitions to ensure all
easements were properly accounted for, and significant discrepancies
existed between the cost of easement acquisitions reported by the MALPF
to the General Assembly and the related amount reported on the State’s
accounting records.
MALPF should maintain a comprehensive listing of all easement acquisitions
and ensure consistent reporting of such activity.
• MALPF lacked adequate procedures for ensuring easement acquisition
prices were properly calculated.
MALPF should ensure that critical calculations of easement acquisition prices
are reviewed by an independent employee and that such reviews are
documented.
• County agricultural land preservation programs were not properly
certified, resulting in certain counties retaining a higher share of transfer
taxes.
MALPF should properly certify county agricultural land preservation
programs and determine the legality of recovering any amounts deemed to be
inappropriately retained by the non-certified counties.
• MALPF did not ensure that counties properly used agricultural land
transfer taxes that had been retained by the counties in accordance with
State laws and regulations, and did not ensure that counties remitted the
required amount of unused transfer taxes to the State.
MALPF should obtain and review annual reports and related audited financial
statements to ensure that counties are using the transfer taxes in accordance
with State law and are remitting all required amounts to the State.
5

--- Page 8 ---
• Easement inspections were not performed in accordance with MALPF’s
policy to ensure that landowners were in compliance with the provisions
stipulated in the easement agreements.
MALPF should establish procedures to ensure that all easement properties are
periodically subject to inspection, and establish procedures to take
documented follow-up action when counties fail to conduct required
inspections.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) was
established to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland in Maryland.
MALPF, which is governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of 12 members,
purchases land easements with Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
(Fund) revenue and places certain restrictions on the use of the land (for example,
the land cannot be subdivided for residential or commercial purposes). The Fund,
which is administered by MALPF, generally derives revenues from State transfer
taxes, agricultural transfer taxes, local subdivision matching funds and federal
grants. According to MALPF’s records, as of June 30, 2008, it had purchased
2,018 easements on 275,000 acres of land for a total cost of approximately $556
million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 4, 2008. We determined that
MALPF had not satisfactorily addressed these findings; therefore, these findings
are repeated in this report.
Financial Information
Attached, as Exhibit A, is a schedule of the financial activity of the Fund for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. This schedule is not intended to, and does not,
provide the financial position and results of operations in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. Specifically, certain financial
statements (for example, a balance sheet) and disclosures have not been provided
as would be required by generally accepted accounting principles. The schedule
was prepared on a modified accrual basis of accounting which provides that
revenues are recognized when they become available and measurable, and
expenditures are recognized when the related liability is incurred.
The fund balance as of June 30, 2008 in the Special Revenue Fund ($7,193,870)
represents funds available to finance future expenditures, including easement
acquisitions. The fund balance as of June 30, 2008 in the Trust Fund
($9,591,171) represents funds committed for the payment of easements purchased
by MALPF on an installment basis.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Fund Status
MALPF recorded approximately $78 million in encumbrances at the end of fiscal
year 2008, which generally served to reserve funds for outstanding easement
offers and was consistent with the remaining budgetary appropriations from 2008
and prior fiscal years. As of June 30, 2008, the amount of such offers totaled
approximately $73 million. However, the Fund only had a balance of
approximately $7 million to be used for these obligations. The $66 million dollar
shortage was caused, in part, by the attainment of less than budgeted revenue. For
example, during fiscal year 2008, the actual revenues realized by MALPF was
approximately $12 million less than the estimated revenue of $68 million
appropriated to MALPF and used to make offers to purchase easements for that
year.
The revenue shortfall was also affected by certain limitations on federal funding
that MALPF has experienced since late 2005, which were addressed in the
Department of Legislative Services’ Analyses of Maryland Executive Budget for
fiscal years 2008, 2009, and 2010. In this regard, certain changes made to federal
government easement requirements in 2005 have inhibited the use of federal
funding. We were advised by MALPF management that it had contacted the
federal government to request that the federal restrictions be relaxed.
State law governing the Fund recognizes that estimated revenues may not be
realized. Consequently, the law provides for adjustments in future years or de-
authorization of projects previously authorized.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Easement Acquisitions
Finding 1
A comprehensive listing of all easement acquisitions was not maintained to
ensure that easements were properly accounted for and reported.
Analysis
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) did not
maintain a comprehensive listing or operational database of all easements
purchased, including the number of acres purchased and the related purchase
price, to ensure all easements were properly accounted for and reported. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report, wherein we
commented that, consequently, MALPF was unable to support the dollar value of
easements previously reported to the General Assembly for fiscal year 2007
(which still is the most recent year reported) or recorded in the State’s accounting
records. Currently, MALPF management advised us that it is developing a new
database which will provide detailed easement information for all easements
acquired by MALPF since its inception. MALPF management anticipates that the
new database will be completed by December 31, 2009.
In addition to a lack of underlying data to support the total cumulative cost of
easement acquisitions reported in the MALPF Annual Report to the General
Assembly ($490 million), we also noted that the reported amount exceeded the
comparable amount recorded on the State’s accounting records ($419 million) by
$71 million. MALPF management could not readily explain this difference.
Recommendation 1
We recommend
a. that MALPF maintain a comprehensive database of all easement
acquisitions and that this information be accurately reported in its
annual reports and reconciled to the State’s accounting records (repeat),
and
b. that MALPF investigate the aforementioned discrepancy and take
appropriate corrective action (repeat).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
Procedures and controls over easement acquisitions were inadequate.
Analysis
MALPF lacked adequate procedures and controls over easement acquisitions.
Specifically, independent reviews of calculations performed to determine
easement acquisition prices were not documented. One MALPF employee was
responsible for determining the Agricultural Land Value of properties considered
for easement purchases, which totaled approximately $79 million during fiscal
year 2008. Since this value is subtracted from the appraised value of the land to
determine the acquisition cost, undetected errors could result in erroneous
easement acquisitions payments. MALPF management advised us that the
calculations were reviewed by an independent employee; however, the reviews
were not documented.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In
response to our preceding report finding, MALPF agreed to implement a
documented review procedure to address this issue. However, since MALPF has
not gone through another offer cycle since our preceding report was issued, the
new procedure has not yet been used.
In addition, payments to landowners for easement acquisitions purchased on an
installment basis were not always subject to independent review or approval.
Although lump sum acquisition payments and initial installment payments were
subject to review by the Department of General Services, no such review was
required or performed for subsequent installment payments. A landowner has the
option of receiving either a lump sum payment for easements acquired by
MALPF, or may request that the purchase price, along with related accumulated
interest, be paid in installments over a ten-year period. According to MALPF
records, during fiscal year 2008, MALPF issued installment payments totaling
approximately $2.3 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend
a. that MALPF ensure that critical calculations be reviewed by an
independent employee and that such reviews be documented (repeat), and
b. that MALPF ensure that installment payments be reviewed by an
independent employee and that such reviews be documented.
10

--- Page 13 ---
County Agricultural Land Transfer Taxes
Finding 3
County agricultural land preservation programs were not properly certified
resulting in certain counties improperly retaining a higher share of transfer
taxes collected.
Analysis
The certification process for county agricultural land preservation programs was
inadequate. Our test of 16 county programs that were deemed certified by
MALPF through June 30, 2008 disclosed that MALPF retroactively recertified 11
of the programs for periods ranging from 2 to 13 months even though such
retroactive approval was not provided for in State regulations. For example,
MALPF approved in July 2008 requests for program certification received from
three counties whose prior certifications had expired as of June 30, 2007.
Furthermore, MALPF recertified the programs for three other counties tested even
though the counties had not requested that their programs be recertified.
This is significant because, under State regulations, a county that lacks a properly
certified program may only retain 33 percent of its agricultural land transfer tax
revenues rather than the 75 percent retained by a certified county (except
Montgomery County, which is allowed to retain 67 percent even if it is not
certified). According to MALPF’s records, transfer tax revenues remitted to the
State by the aforementioned eleven counties, during that portion of fiscal year
2008 for which each county lacked proper certification, totaled approximately
$900,000. However, if the counties had been treated by MALPF as non-certified
and remitted transfer taxes at the higher percentage, these eleven counties would
have been required to remit an additional $1.2 million to the State during fiscal
year 2008.
A similar condition was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports. At
the conclusion of our preceding audit, we discussed this matter with MALPF
management and the Department of Agriculture’s legal counsel. We were
advised that, the aforementioned regulations notwithstanding, it was not necessary
to require non-certified counties to remit additional transfer taxes since the
counties would ultimately use such funds for the same purpose as MALPF
(namely to acquire additional property easements). However, as commented upon
in Finding 4, MALPF does not currently ensure that counties use all agricultural
land transfer taxes as required.
11

--- Page 14 ---
State regulations specify that MALPF and the Maryland Department of Planning
are jointly responsible for certifying and recertifying county agricultural land
preservation programs. Counties are certified for a two-year period and must
submit a request for recertification in October of the year preceding their
certification expiration (for example, in October 2007 for certifications expiring
in June 2008) in order to maintain continuous certification status.
Recommendation 3
We recommend
a. that MALPF establish a process to timely monitor the certification status
of the county agricultural land preservation programs and to ensure that
agricultural land transfer taxes remitted are consistent with the
certification status (repeat), and
b. that MALPF obtain a formal legal advice to determine the legality of
recovering the excessive amounts retained by the counties, including the
aforementioned $1.2 million, and take appropriate action (repeat).
Finding 4
MALPF did not ensure that counties properly used their share of
agricultural land transfer taxes or remitted the unused funds to the State as
required.
Analysis
MALPF did not have an effective process to annually monitor the use of
agricultural land transfer taxes to ensure that counties properly used their share of
transfer taxes or remitted the unused funds to the State as required. All counties
are required by State regulations to submit annual reports that are to include
information regarding the transfer taxes collected by the counties, the nature of
the counties’ use of the taxes, and whether any unexpended taxes were due to the
State.
However, as of January 30, 2009, MALPF had not received from the counties any
of the annual reports applicable to fiscal year 2007 (generally due in October
2007) and, as a result, did not ensure the proper disposition of the transfer taxes.
Although we were advised by MALPF management that this information may be
included in a county’s audited financial statements, MALPF did not obtain these
statements to determine whether counties remitted all amounts due to the State.
State law provides that each county shall remit the transfer taxes attributable to
instruments of writing that transfer title to certain parcels of wooded land and a
percentage of any remaining agricultural land transfer taxes to the State, most of
12

--- Page 15 ---
which is subsequently credited to the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation
Fund (Fund). The remaining transfer tax revenue can be used by the counties for
land preservation (for example, to purchase development rights) and any taxes not
expended or committed on or before three years from the original date of receipt,
shall be remitted to the State for deposit into the Fund. According to the State’s
accounting records, agricultural land transfer taxes remitted to the State during
fiscal year 2008 totaled approximately $2.8 million.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend
a. that MALPF establish procedures to obtain and review the required
annual reports and the related audited financial statements in order to
monitor the use of transfer taxes in accordance with State law and the
remission of amounts due to the State (repeat), and
b. that MALPF review the counties’ usage of agricultural transfer taxes
during prior years, determine if the taxes were used for purposes
provided for by law, and recoup any taxes due to the State or improperly
used (repeat).
Easement Inspections
Finding 5
MALPF did not adequately monitor to ensure that counties annually
inspected property easements as required.
Analysis
MALPF did not adequately monitor to ensure that counties annually inspected
property easements as required. Specifically, for easements acquisitions paid for
with State and local funds, MALPF did not receive inspection reports for 31 of
176 land parcels that should have been inspected by the applicable counties
during fiscal year 2008 to ensure compliance with the related easement purchase
agreements. Moreover, although MALPF advised us that it performed follow-up
procedures with those counties that did not submit the required inspection reports,
MALPF was unable to provide documentation to support its claim that efforts had
been made to obtain the aforementioned 31 reports. As a result, MALPF lacked
assurance that property owners were in compliance with provisions contained in
the applicable easement purchase agreements governing the use of the related
property. For example, such agreements may prohibit a property owner from
subdividing a parcel of land for which MALPF acquired an easement. MALPF’s
13

--- Page 16 ---
related written policy requires that counties perform annual inspections of 10
percent of easement properties purchased with State and local funds.
A similar condition related to the failure to obtain the required inspections has
been commented upon in our six preceding audit reports dating back to June 3,
2003.
Recommendation 5
We again recommend that MALPF take appropriate action to ensure that
easement inspections are performed as required, including establishing a
process to account for all required annual inspections and to take
documented follow-up action when counties fail to provide the inspections as
required.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund (Fund) for
the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s
financial transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We audit the Fund
annually as required by the Agriculture Article, Section 2-505 of the Code. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Fund’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Maryland
Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) by the Department of
Agriculture. These support services (such as purchasing, data processing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of the Department.
MALPF management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect the Fund’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our
report also includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Fund that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Department of Agriculture’s response, on behalf of the Foundation, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our
review of its response.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit A
MARYLAND AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION FUND
SCHEDULE OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2008
Governmental Fiduciary
Fund Type Fund Types Total
Special (Memorandum
Revenue Trust Only)
REVENUES:
State property transfer taxes $ 35,538,975 $ 35,538,975
Local subdivision matching funds for easement purchases 17,574,518 17,574,518
Agricultural transfer taxes 2,751,773 2,751,773
Interest earnings on funds reserved for installment purchases $ 238,362 238,362
Sale of land included in prior easement acquisitions 33,083 33,083
Other non-recurring receipts 67,527 67,527
Total Revenues 55,965,876 238,362 56,204,238
EXPENDITURES:
Easement acquisitions 78,628,807 78,628,807
Federal fund easement acquisitions 290,500 290,500
Administration 1,119,189 1,119,189
Land appraisal, legal, and settlement fees 913,051 913,051
Total Expenditures 80,951,547 80,951,547
EXCESS (DEFICIENCY) OF REVENUES OVER
EXPENDITURES (24,985,671) 238,362 (24,747,309)
OTHER SOURCES (USES) OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES:
Federal reimbursement of Special Revenue Fund
expenditures for easement acquisitions 290,500 290,500
Transfers in from Special Revenue Fund for easement
acquisitions purchased on installment basis 6,118,652 6,118,652
Payments made on easement acquisitions purchased
on an installment basis (2,523,964) (2,523,964)
Net Other Sources (Uses) of Financial Resources 290,500 3,594,688 3,885,188
EXCESS (DEFICIENCY) OF REVENUES OVER
EXPENDITURES AND NET OTHER SOURCES
(USES) OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES (24,695,171) 3,833,050 (20,862,121)
FUND BALANCES, July 1, 2007 31,889,041 5,758,121 37,647,162
(1)
FUND BALANCES, June 30, 2008 $ 7,193,870 $ 9,591,171 $ 16,785,041
(1) The Special Revenue Fund Balance is reserved for easement acquisition offers that were approved by the MALPF Board of
Trustees, but were not presented to the landowners as well as offers accepted by the landowners that were awaiting Board of
Public Works approval or settlement at year end.
17

--- Page 21 ---
RESPONSE TO THE LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
MARYLAND AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION FOUNDATION
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE JULY 1, 2007 TO JUNE 30, 2008
Easement Acquisitions
Finding 1
A comprehensive listing of all easement acquisitions was not maintained to ensure that
easements were properly accounted for and reported.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MALPF maintain a comprehensive database of all easement
acquisitions and that this information be accurately reported in its annual reports and
reconciled to the related State’s accounting records (repeat), and
that MALPF immediately investigate, and take appropriate corrective action (repeat).
Response 1
MDA and MALPF concurs. MALPF is in the process of creating a new, comprehensive
database of all easement acquisitions that will allow timely and accurate reporting and a
verifiable baseline for reconciling the State's accounting records. Once completed, MALPF will
then be able to investigate the discrepancy with the State's accounting records. MDA has just
rehired the intern / staff used last year to finish the data entry from actual easement files.
MALPF expects the initial data entry (approx 15% remaining), data verification checks and
report testing to be completed by September 15, 2009. MDA is concurrently drafting specific
reports as we also validate data entered into the system. At that point, MALPF would run the
first report and start the process of investigating any discrepancies in the various state and
program records. MALPF expects to be able to reconcile the records of all easement purchases
by December 31, 2009.
Explanation: MALPF has traditionally relied primarily on its written records and, secondarily,
on an outdated, inaccurate, and incomplete database with limited number of data fields. MALPF
has undertaken a fundamental revision of its database so it can be the preeminent source of
accurate up-to-date information for reporting and policy-making. Given the scope of this task
and the discontinuation of support for the old database (creating a lacuna for quick data
accessibility, though all of the data remains accessible in written form in the files), providing
accurate and verifiable historical data from the beginning of the Program is not yet possible.
Data records back to FY 1996 have been completed, including entry of new data and verification
of existing data for completeness and accuracy from the files. Once all of the records in new
database are complete and verified, accurate reporting will be available based on relevant criteria
for any historical point or time period. The historical data will be recalculated and published in
the Annual Report and at the website once complete and accurate data are available. Whether or
not that data will be reconcilable to the figures recorded on the State's accounting records can
only be analyzed after the database has been completely populated and the records verified.
Corrective action appropriate to resolve any reporting discrepancies will be taken at that time.

--- Page 22 ---
Easement Acquisitions (continued)
Finding 2
Procedures and controls over easement acquisitions were inadequate.
Recommendation 2
a) We recommend that MALPF ensure that critical calculations be reviewed (repeat)
and,
b) That MALPF ensure that installment payments be reviewed by an independent
employee and that such reviews be documented.
Response 2
MDA and MALPF concurs: As recommended last year, MALPF has developed a new review
methodology for easement payments and county billing. In this review, after MALPF has
received notice that DGS is ready for settlement, the administrators responsible for that client
review the check request and the request for any required county billings.
As to the reviews for calculating agricultural value and certain other values, a methodology for
independent review and verification of work, the Executive Director will develop a procedure for
a “random review” of such calculations by the three administrators and/or the Executive
Director. There would be a formal "sign-off" by the person performing the independent
verification of the sample cases.
Installment payment reviews can be performed by an “independent employee”. For FY09 and
FY10, MDA plans to have Douglas H. Wilson, Director of Administration perform these
reviews.
Explanation: MALPF notes that the legislative auditors did not identify any errors in the
calculation of agricultural land values, but were concerned with a formal "sign-off" procedure
that established a paper trail of responsibility. Calculations have always been reviewed by an
independent employee, but an official "sign-off" procedure was never part of the process. We
would offer that the Executive Director always verifies the numbers making up an offer before
offer letters and option contracts are sent to landowners. His signature on the letter was
considered our documentation that that verification has taken place.

--- Page 23 ---
County Agricultural Land Transfer Taxes
Finding 3
County agricultural land preservation programs were not properly certified resulting in
certain counties improperly retaining a higher share of transfer taxes collected.
Recommendation 3
a) We recommend that MALPF establish a process to timely monitor the certification
status of the county agricultural land preservation programs and to ensure that
agricultural land transfer taxes remitted are consistent with the applicable county
certification status (repeat), and
b) That MALPF obtain a formal legal advice to determine the legality of recovering
the excessive amounts retained by counties, including the aforementioned $1.2
million, and take appropriate action.
Response 3
MDA and MALPF concurs. This finding and recommendation are based on the gap between
the way the certification program is administered today and existing regulations which were
developed many years ago. The certification program has been operated in a manner that is
more flexible than regulations in effect during this audit period would allow. In response to this
finding and recommendation, the Maryland Department of Planning has updated the applicable
regulations both to take into account changes in the statute applying to certification – HB 2
(Agricultural Stewardship Act of 2006) and HB 1354 (2007) – and to bring the regulations in
line with how the certification program actually operates. These regulations were approved by
the AELR committee and then adopted after approval by the Secretary of Agriculture in
February, 2009.
The Department of Planning sent a notice to the counties that had not yet been recertified
notifying them that their status was maintained as long as they provided notice of their intent to
file under the new regulations. Many counties were in the process of modifications due to the
new requirements for PPA areas. These regulations also provide discretion for MALPF and the
Department of Planning to not “decertify” a county while they are under review.
MDA will also request a written advice of counsel determination as to previous administration
procedures for the certification program and related revenues.

--- Page 24 ---
County Agricultural Land Transfer Taxes (continued)
Finding 4
MALPF did not ensure that counties properly used their share of agricultural land transfer
taxes or remitted the unused funds to the State as required.
Recommendation 4
a) We recommend that MALPF establish procedures to obtain and review the
required annual reports and the related audited financial statements in order to
monitor the use of transfer taxes in accordance with State law and the remission of
amounts due to the State (repeat), and
b) That MALPF review the counties’ usage of agricultural transfer taxes during prior
years, determine if the taxes were used for purposes provided for by law, and
recoup any taxes due to the State or improperly used (repeat).
Response 4
MDA and MALPF concurs. MALPF will continue to explore procedures to obtain and review
the required annual reports. MALPF will also explore with the Maryland Department of
Planning (MDP) incorporating the delivery and review of the annual reports and audited
statements as part of the recertification review. A supplemental procedure will need to be
developed cooperatively with MDP to address the timely review of annual reports and audit
statements of certified counties under the new statutory and regulatory requirements. Further, as
MALPF staff does not have the necessary expertise to review audits and financial statements of
certified counties, the issue will be further reviewed within MDA to establish responsibilities and
the availability of staff resources to ensure that the reviews of certified counties' audited financial
statements are completed in a timely manner. Finally, MALPF notes that the auditors did not
identify any improper expenditure of agricultural land transfer taxes by certified counties, but
were simply concerned that a clear procedure is in place to monitor compliance.

--- Page 25 ---
Easement Inspections
Finding 5
MALPF did not adequately monitor to ensure that counties annually inspected property
easements as required.
Recommendation 5
We again recommend that MALPF take appropriate action to ensure that easement
inspections are performed as required, including establishing a process to account for all
required annual inspections and to take documented follow-up actions when counties fail to
provide the inspections as required.
Response 5
MDA concurs. MALPF has just produced a new ‘inspection report” for FY08 prepared by our
new inspection staff member. For FY08, significant improvement was made as MALPF
completed 98% of the required 130 inspections of all easements that utilized federal funds and
176 inspections were made of the state easements (10%). While MALPF and MDA may
disagree on the concept of each county being required to have a 10% inspection rate, we concur
in the general audit finding.
The report details follow up actions related to major and minor violations. MALPF’s Board of
trustees will continually monitor the inspection status and is reviewing inspection priorities,
inspection criteria, new inspection targets, etc. Clearly, significant improvement has been made
over prior year activity.

--- Page 26 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Peter J. Klemans, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Catherine M. Clarke
Staff Auditor