Title: Maryland Tax Court
Date: 12/01/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746d6
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:47:42.951586
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Tax Court
December 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
‘Msrren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ. BarnickelIII,CPA
ExecutiveDirector LegislativeAuditor
December 1, 2016
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Maryland Tax Court (MTC)
for the period beginning february 20, 2013 and ending October 2, 2016. MTC’s
primary purpose is to provide the final administrative hearings for appeals of
taxing authority decisions within the State, including the Comptroller of
Maryland, Property Tax Assessments Appeals Boards, and local collectors.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis
audit by MTC.
Respectfully submitted,
72y4L&
Thomas J. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland21201
410-94659O0/301-970-5900 fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Tax Court (MTC) provides the final administrative hearings for
appeals of taxing authority decisions within the State. Decisions of the
Comptroller of Maryland, Property Tax Assessment Appeals Boards, local
collectors, and other taxing authorities may be appealed to MTC. Decisions of
MTC may be appealed to the Circuit Court. MTC consists of five judges
appointed by the Governor for six-year terms. According to the State's records,
during fiscal year 2016, MTC had eight authorized positions and expenditures
totaling approximately $594,000.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated May 9, 2013. We determined that MTC
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MTC’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Less
significant findings were communicated to MTC that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MTC. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Tax Court (MTC)
for the period beginning February 20, 2013 and ending October 2, 2016. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
3

--- Page 6 ---
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MTC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included contract procurements and disbursements,
residential property appeals, and payroll. We also determined the status of the
finding contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MTC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from MTC’s database for the purpose of testing residential property appeals.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MTC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor