Title: Department of Human Resources - Family Investment Administration
Date: 02/09/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d7245606743fe
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:43:15.919109
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Resources
Family Investment Administration
April 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401· 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud,
waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government resources.
Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
through the Office’s website, by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, or by
mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department's
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Computer Matches
* Finding 1 – FIA Lacked Documentation of Required Computer Matches and 10
System Alerts Were Not Always Adequately Resolved
Quality Assurance Programs
Finding 2 – Certain Quality Assurance Reviews Were Not Always Conducted 11
as Required
Energy Assistance Programs
* Finding 3 – Documentation Required to Support Recipient Eligibility and the 13
Validity of Payments Was Not Always Maintained
Contract Monitoring
* Finding 4 – Certain Contract Costs and Deliverables Were Not Adequately 14
Monitored
Temporary Disability Assistance Program
* Finding 5 – FIA Lacked Procedures and Documentation to Support Recipient 15
Eligibility for Certain Cases Examined and Federal Funds Were Not
Always Recovered
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Human Resources
Family Investment Administration (FIA)
April 2015
 FIA lacked documentation to evidence that it had performed certain
required computer matches designed to help ensure recipients are eligible
for assistance benefits and to help detect potential fraud. In addition, the
results of computer matches and related alerts were not always
investigated and resolved in a timely and adequate manner. For example,
as of January 2014, FIA had identified approximately 10,500 instances of
unverified or missing social security numbers relating to public assistance
cases which had been outstanding for more than a year without being
adequately addressed (Finding 1).
FIA should ensure that documentation is maintained showing all computer
matches are performed at required intervals, and that the results of computer
matches are fully addressed in a timely manner.
 FIA did not ensure that local departments of social services conducted all
required quality assurance reviews of public assistance cases. These
reviews help FIA monitor local department compliance with legal and
regulatory requirements, including recipient eligibility for various
assistance programs including the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) and Temporary Cash Assistance. Our examination of
reviews of SNAP cases required for one month disclosed that most local
departments did not conduct the number of reviews required, and one
did not conduct any reviews (Finding 2).
FIA should use available reports to ensure that local departments complete the
required number of quality assurance reviews and should take corrective
action to address non-compliance.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Documentation to support critical data required from applicants for
energy assistance program benefits, such as proof of residency and
current utility bills, was not always maintained by Local Administering
Agencies which processed program applications. Energy assistance
program benefits totaled $125 million during fiscal year 2013 (Finding 3).
FIA should ensure that Local Administering Agencies obtain and maintain
adequate supporting documentation for critical application data.
 Procedures for monitoring contract costs and deliverables for certain
contracts totaling $22.6 million were not sufficient. For example,
documentation was not obtained to support the propriety of the contract
costs and certain required status reports were not received (Finding 4).
FIA should obtain appropriate documentation to support all contract costs and
deliverables.
 Critical application documentation was not always on file and
overpayments occurred for certain Temporary Disability Assistance
Program (TDAP) cases we examined. Furthermore, FIA did not always
receive federal reimbursement for TDAP payments for which it was
eligible. TDAP benefits, which are entirely State funded, totaled
approximately $43 million during fiscal year 2013 (Finding 5).
FIA should take the recommendation actions to improve its procedures and
documentation for TDAP applications, payments, and reimbursements.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Family Investment Administration (FIA) is a unit of the Department of
Human Resources (DHR) and oversees a number of public assistance programs
that are administered statewide by the 24 local departments of social services.1
FIA administers three major programs: the Temporary Cash Assistance Program
(TCA) and home energy assistance programs, which are funded by both State and
federal funds, and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP),
formerly the food stamp program, which is entirely federally funded.
Local departments of social services are responsible for recording recipient and
benefit data in DHR’s automated benefits system, the Clients’ Automated
Resource and Eligibility System (CARES). In addition to TCA and SNAP data,
CARES includes data for several smaller assistance programs, as well as a
database of Medicaid recipients. The Medicaid recipient database serves as the
basis for Medicaid benefits processed on a separate automated benefits system
(MMIS II) maintained by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
CARES includes Medicaid recipient data because most Medicaid recipients
originally apply for those benefits at a local department of social services where
the eligibility determination is made. Home energy assistance program automated
records are separately maintained.
According to DHR’s records, during fiscal year 2013, CARES included, on
average, approximately 1.3 million monthly recipient records, including 755,000
for SNAP, 456,000 for Medicaid, 67,000 for TCA, and 24,000 in other assistance
programs.2 Payments made during fiscal year 2013 for programs under FIA
jurisdiction totaled approximately $1.4 billion, consisting primarily of $1.2 billion
for SNAP, $142 million for TCA, and $125 million for home energy assistance
programs. In addition, Medicaid payments made by the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene during fiscal year 2013 totaled approximately $6.9 billion.
1Local departments of social services administer a number of programs for FIA and other units of
DHR. The local departments are audited separately during our audits of DHR – Local
Department Operations.
2Many recipients receive assistance from more than one program.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report on FIA dated February 9, 2011. We determined that
FIA satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The remaining four findings
are repeated in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Computer Matches
Background
The Family Investment Administration (FIA), with the assistance of the
Department of Human Resources’ (DHR) Office of the Inspector General and the
Office of Technology for Human Services, periodically performs certain
computer matches and related data verification procedures to help ensure
recipients are eligible for public assistance and medical assistance benefits and to
help detect potential fraud.
Computer matches are performed by comparing assistance recipient data in the
Client’s Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES) with outside data
sources, such as Social Security Administration (SSA) records, prisoner records
from the State’s Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services, and new
hire registry data from the National Directory of New Hires. Computer matches
are also performed by comparing CARES benefits or income data with similar
data from other state or federal government agencies via the Public Assistance
Reporting Information System (PARIS).
The results (hits) of these computer matches, which represent potential
discrepancies or errors, are generally referred to the applicable local department
of social services for investigation and resolution via “system alerts” within
CARES. System alerts are also generated when a recipient’s social security
number (SSN) has not been obtained from the recipient or has not been verified
through the matching process with SSA records.
The public assistance programs associated with these matching and verification
procedures include Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) and the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) for which payments totaled approximately
$1.3 billion in fiscal year 2013. The matches also cover recipient eligibility for
the medical assistance program (Medicaid) administered by the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) – Medical Care Programs Administration,
which had expenditures totaling approximately $6.9 billion for the same period.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
FIA lacked documentation that required computer matches were performed
and alerts were adequately resolved.
Analysis
FIA lacked documentation that all computer matches were performed as required,
and did not adequately resolve system alerts, including some that were not
recorded in CARES. Specifically, our review of documentation on file for three
types of computer matches required by FIA (SSN, PARIS, and New Hire
matches) identified the following conditions:
 FIA could not provide documentation that it conducted all required computer
matches of CARES recipient and/or benefit data since July 2010.
Specifically, FIA could not provide documentation of SSN matches prior to
September 2013, PARIS matches prior to December 2012, and certain New
Hire matches prior to October 2012. FIA policy requires that PARIS matches
be conducted quarterly and New Hire and SSN matches be conducted
monthly. FIA advised that the matches were conducted but related
documentation was not maintained.
 System alerts resulting from the matches were not always recorded in
CARES, and FIA did not always investigate why the alerts were not recorded.
For example, our review of the results of two New Hire matches conducted
for the months of May and November 2013 disclosed that, although the
matches identified 254,650 and 265,443 hits, only 4,779 and 7,071
corresponding alerts, respectively, were recorded in CARES. In certain cases,
alerts are appropriately not recorded in CARES because system filter criteria
automatically identify cases for which an alert is not required, such as an
inactive case. However, FIA did not document that it verified this had
occurred for the results we examined, a procedure which we believe to be
warranted based on the volume of unrecorded alerts.
 Although FIA had implemented certain steps to ensure timely resolution of
missing or invalid SSNs, many cases remained unresolved for extended
periods. For example, as of January 2014, there were approximately 18,000
unresolved system alerts identifying an active or pending case with an
unverified or missing SSN.3 These alerts had remained unresolved for more
than six months, of which more than 10,500 had been outstanding longer than
a year.
3Multiple system alerts may be generated for one recipient if the recipient is eligible for more than
one public assistance program. The number of alerts reported in this finding excludes cases for
which DHMH was solely responsible; that is, the applications were processed by local health
departments exclusively for medical-related benefit programs.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Federal and State regulations require the disclosure of SSNs by recipients
during the benefits eligibility determination process. If a recipient does not
have a SSN, State regulations allow the recipient to provide evidence that one
has been applied for in order to begin receiving benefits. However, FIA was
not ensuring that a valid number was subsequently obtained. Furthermore,
there was a lack of documentation that FIA had determined that any of these
outstanding alerts related to individuals for which a SSN was not required,
such as for a child in foster care or a newborn. A similar condition was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FIA
a. ensure documentation is maintained showing that all computer matches
are performed at the required intervals and that the results are
investigated;
b. determine the specific reasons and the appropriateness of certain match
results not being recorded in CARES as system alerts; and
c. ensure that local departments investigate and resolve unverified or
missing recipient social security numbers, including those noted above, on
a timely basis (repeat).
Quality Assurance Programs
Finding 2
Certain quality assurance reviews were not always conducted as required.
Analysis
Quality assurance reviews of public assistance cases were not always conducted
as required by the local departments of social services, and FIA lacked
documentation that this noncompliance was adequately addressed. Under its Pre-
Review Program (PRP), FIA requires independent personnel at local departments,
prior to the payment of benefits, to review 10 percent of newly approved SNAP
applications and 15 percent of completed SNAP redeterminations each month for
propriety. The PRP for SNAP also includes reviews of eligibility criteria for
other assistance programs including TCA and Medicaid. The PRP helps FIA
ensure local department compliance with the program’s legal and regulatory
requirements, including eligibility criteria.
FIA has access to monthly reports showing the percentage of SNAP cases that
have received a PRP review by the local departments; however, there was no
evidence that FIA used these reports to ensure that the local departments were
meeting the PRP requirements established by FIA. Our review of 39 reports
generated for the month of September 2013, one for each local department district
11

--- Page 14 ---
office, disclosed that 17 offices did not meet the review requirement for newly
approved applications, including 10 offices that conducted reviews of less than 5
percent of the cases. Additionally, 28 offices did not meet the requirement for
completed redeterminations for the month, including 17 offices that conducted
reviews of fewer than 7 percent of the cases. One office did not perform any PRP
reviews for either newly approved applications or redeterminations in September
2013. Although FIA advised that it follows up with the local departments
regarding these missing reviews, there was no documentation specifying what
action was taken to address noncompliance by those local departments.
FIA’s records indicated that, for the reviews that were performed during that
month, the SNAP applications and redeterminations disclosed a pre-review error
rate of 14 percent and a related TCA pre-review error rate of 23 percent. An error
disclosed during the PRP review does not necessarily mean that the application or
redetermination should not have been approved. Nevertheless, the failure to
conduct PRP reviews could, for example, allow approved applications for
ineligible recipients to go undetected.
Conducting PRP reviews is an important part of FIA’s quality assurance program
since processing errors can result in payments to ineligible recipients and, in the
case of SNAP, federal sanctions. In the past, Maryland’s SNAP payment error
rate has exceeded the national performance measure established by the United
States Department of Agriculture and, accordingly, certain federal financial
sanctions have been imposed. Maryland’s SNAP payment error rate has
improved. The fiscal year 2013 rate of 2.12 percent is below the national
performance measure of 3.20 percent.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FIA
a. use the aforementioned monthly reports to ensure that PRP reviews are
performed as required by the local departments, and
b. maintain documentation specifying the steps taken to address
noncompliance on the part of local departments.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Energy Assistance Programs
Finding 3
FIA did not ensure that adequate documentation was maintained to support
applicant eligibility and the validity of payments made for energy assistance
programs.
Analysis
FIA did not ensure that documentation to support certain critical data required
from applicants for energy assistance program benefits was always maintained by
designated Local Administering Agencies (LAA), which were responsible for
processing program applications. Energy assistance benefit payments totaling
$125 million were made to utility companies during fiscal year 2013 for
approximately 220,000 households.
Our test of 10 applications processed by two LAAs for energy assistance benefits
totaling approximately $24,000 disclosed a number of deficiencies. Specifically,
5 of the applications did not include required documentation, such as a valid
driver’s license or current lease agreement, to support the applicant’s identity or
proof of residency. Additionally, required documentation supporting utility
services, such as a current billing statement, was not on file for 2 applicants.
Without this documentation, the LAA could not support the applicant’s current
energy usage or amounts past due, which are necessary to properly calculate
amounts for bill payment assistance. Furthermore, 4 of the applications, including
2 without required documentation, did not include a certifier’s signature to
indicate a supervisor’s review of the application for program eligibility. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. Finally, 2 of the 10
applications examined were approved 55 and 59 days past the 45-day requirement
established in State regulations for processing program applications.
FIA’s Office of Home Energy Programs (OHEP) is responsible for administering,
through LAAs, the State’s Electric Universal Service Program and the Maryland
Energy Assistance Program, both of which provide eligible recipients with
assistance to help pay current and past due home energy bills. LAAs may be
community action agencies contracted by OHEP or local departments of social
services. Program benefits for eligible individuals are based primarily on income
level and energy usage, and are disbursed directly to utility companies for
approved applicants.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FIA ensure that LAAs
a. obtain and maintain all required documentation to support critical
energy assistance application data (repeat), and
b. approve or deny completed applications within the required time frame.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 4
FIA’s monitoring of contract costs and deliverables for certain contracts was
not sufficient.
Analysis
FIA did not adequately monitor contract costs and deliverables for certain
contracts we reviewed. These contracts, some of which were with State or local
government entities, were designed to assist FIA and local departments of social
services by providing, for example, training to recipients. Our review of six
contracts disclosed four contracts, totaling $22.6 million, for which monitoring
procedures needed to be improved.
For three contracts, FIA did not sufficiently verify billed costs. For example,
payments were made on one contract without receiving adequate documentation
to support the accuracy and propriety of salary and fringe benefit costs incurred.
Specifically, FIA paid invoices totaling $2.7 million during the period from
January through November 2013 for one $13.3 million contract which provided
nutrition education and training relating to SNAP. Salary and fringe benefit costs
ranged from 68 percent to 75 percent of the amounts invoiced by the contractor.
Although reports were received from the contractor showing total salary costs by
employee classification, these reports lacked details such as the number of hours
incurred, and the dates the work was conducted. A similar condition regarding a
lack of documentation supporting billed costs was commented upon in our two
preceding audit reports.
For the other contract reviewed, with a base term from September 2011 to August
2012, valued at $302,000, and a one year renewal option valued at $332,000, FIA
did not receive contractor-required quarterly reports of specific economic benefits
resulting from the contract (detailing job creation and state taxes generated from
the program). The purpose of this contract was to obtain and repair used vehicles
for distribution to benefit recipients to help them obtain or maintain employment.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, such as time and payroll records, to
verify the accuracy and propriety of contract billings (repeat); and
b. ensure that required contract deliverables, such as economic benefit
reports, are received.
Temporary Disability Assistance Program
Finding 5
FIA lacked procedures and documentation to ensure that Temporary
Disability Assistance Program payments were made only to eligible
recipients, and that federal funds were recovered.
Analysis
FIA lacked procedures and documentation to ensure that Temporary Disability
Assistance Program (TDAP) payments were made only to eligible recipients and
that federal reimbursements due were received. TDAP is a State-funded program
which provides assistance to low-income disabled adults who are ineligible for
other categories of assistance and who are applying for federal Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) or Social Security Disability Income (SSDI). According to
DHR records, TDAP payments totaled approximately $43 million during fiscal
year 2013, and the average monthly number of recipients totaled approximately
19,600. Our review of 22 TDAP recipients who received payments during our
audit period disclosed the following conditions:
 FIA was unable to provide certain critical documentation for 12 recipients,
such as the application itself, medical forms, and properly completed Interim
Assistance Reimbursement (IAR) forms. IAR forms are required to be filed
with SSA so that FIA may receive federal reimbursement, when applicable,
for TDAP benefits paid. As of the time of our review, a total of $76,025 had
been paid to these 12 recipients from November 2008 to June 2014. It is
FIA’s policy to retain documentation for a period of three years after a case is
closed and, as a result, since these 12 recipients were active during the period
we reviewed, documentation should have been maintained.
 FIA did not always immediately close cases for which a final decision was
rendered by SSA, either approved or denied, regarding the individual’s
application for federal benefits. We noted that, for 8 of these 22 cases, a final
decision had been rendered by SSA, but the case was not closed for 3 to 19
months thereafter. During that time, TDAP benefits totaling $14,400 were
paid to these individuals. TDAP benefits should cease when SSA renders a
final decision regarding a recipient’s application for federal benefits. Any
15

--- Page 18 ---
TDAP payments made after the decision would not be federally reimbursable.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Of the 22 TDAP cases tested, in 11 instances, the individual was subsequently
approved for SSI benefits and, therefore, FIA was eligible for federal
reimbursement of TDAP payments made. Our test revealed, however, that
FIA did not receive reimbursements totaling $6,465 for 3 individuals because
of delays in submitting the required IAR forms. Specifically, FIA paid
$29,960 but only received federal reimbursements of $23,495.
TDAP benefits are paid to eligible individuals on a temporary basis pending
approval or denial by the Social Security Administration (SSA) for federal
benefits. For those individuals who are later approved for SSI benefits, FIA is
entitled to be reimbursed for the TDAP payments made during the period between
SSI application and approval. (This reimbursement is not available for
individuals subsequently approved for SSDI.) FIA has responsibility for
administering this program in which eligible individuals receive up to $185 per
month, although eligibility is initially determined at the local departments of
social services.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that FIA establish procedures to ensure that
a. all documentation required to establish recipient eligibility is received
and maintained prior to making TDAP payments,
b. TDAP cases are closed in a timely manner once SSA renders its final
decision regarding a recipient’s application for federal benefits (repeat),
and
c. IAR forms are appropriately filed and all reimbursable TDAP payments
are received.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Family Investment
Administration (FIA) of the Department of Human Resources (DHR) for the
period beginning July 1, 2010 and ending November 24, 2013. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine FIA’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the quality assurance processes used by FIA to
monitor the local departments of social services’ administration of the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Temporary Cash Assistance, and
FIA’s administration of the home energy assistance programs, the Temporary
Disability Assistance Programs, and contracts. We also determined the status of
the findings included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
FIA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also obtained data extracted from
the Clients’ Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES) and automated
records relating to energy assistance programs for purposes of testing selected
attributes relating to recipient eligibility, program payments, and FIA’s
monitoring efforts. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to FIA by DHR’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as cash receipts and payroll
processing, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audit of the DHR Office of the
Secretary. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls
17

--- Page 20 ---
over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs (such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) and an
assessment of FIA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State
of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including FIA.
FIA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect FIA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to FIA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DHR, on behalf of FIA, to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHR
regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Human Resources
Family Investment Administration Audit
Response to Draft Audit Report
July 1, 2010 - November 24, 2013
Finding 1
FIA lacked documentation that required computer matches were performed and alerts
were adequately resolved.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that FIA
a. ensure documentation is maintained showing that all computer matches are performed at the
required intervals and that the results are investigated;
b. determine the specific reasons and the appropriateness of certain match results not being
recorded in CARES as system alerts; and
c. ensure that local departments investigate and resolve unverified or missing recipient social
security numbers, including those noted above, on a timely basis (repeat).
Department’s Response
Recommendation a.
We agree with this recommendation.
DHR's practice had been to retain three quarters of match data. However, in response to OLA’s
audit request, the CARES was modified in December 2014 to retain four years of raw PARIS
data files.
Recommendation b.
We agree with reservations.
FIA is confident in the parameters set for determining the New Hires matches that generate
systems alerts. We base the parameters on filter criteria that automatically triage matches and
determine those that generate or do not generate alerts.
We agree that it is prudent practice to ensure that documentation exists to support alerts that are
not recorded in CARES. Consequently, we have requested the CARES system vendor to
generate a report, for future matches, that will outline specific reasons and appropriateness why
certain match results were not recorded in CARES as system alerts. We will review the
aforementioned report for propriety.

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation c.
We agree with this recommendation.
The FIA Bureau of Information Analysis will expand the existing strategies it uses for certain
Medical Assistance cases that have missing SSNs. Specifically, each office will receive a weekly
MISSING SSNs GENERATOR V file that will identify the cases in all programs with missing
SSNs, including the cases identified by the auditors, and will allow the DHR/FIA Office of
Operations to monitor the entry of the SSNs for those cases.
Finding 2
Certain quality assurance reviews were not always conducted as required.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that FIA
a. use the aforementioned monthly reports to ensure that PRP reviews are performed as
required by the local departments, and
b. maintain documentation specifying the steps taken to address noncompliance on the part of
local departments.
Department’s Response
Recommendations a. and b.
Although we agree with the auditors recommendation that some local departments did not meet
their pre-review targets, the finding represents a low level of risk. Our federal Food Supplement
Program payment error rate remains below the national average, we received a bonus for the
most improved payment error rate during the audit period, and posted the lowest error rate in the
Department’s history in 2012.
In addition, FIA’s Bureau of Program Evaluation has begun monitoring the monthly Pre-review
compliance for all local offices. We compare the number of reviews completed in each office to
the number of approved applications and completed redeterminations to calculate the compliance
rate for the prior month.
Improvements in the automated Pre-review process will enable local offices to monitor their own
daily compliance with the requirements. In Fall 2015, FIA's Office of Operations will launch
PIRAMID Pre-review Direct, an online, web-based enhancement, so that local offices can select
samples of cases to pre-review and directly calculate the number of reviews needed on a daily,
weekly and monthly basis.

--- Page 24 ---
Whereas the Bureau of Program Evaluation used the email system in the past to communicate
with the local offices regarding compliance, beginning in January 2015, BPE started generating
an official memo and emailing that to the local leadership. These memos are saved to the shared
directory for BPE in the Central office reviewing the completion rates for each office. BPE sends
a memo to the Family Investment Assistant Directors for offices that have not met the 10% of
Applications and 15% of Redeterminations review requirement. Should an LDSS not meet
compliance for two months in a row, then the Deputy Executive Director for Operations contacts
the LDSS Director.
Finding 3
FIA did not ensure that adequate documentation was maintained to support applicant
eligibility and the validity of payments made for energy assistance programs.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FIA ensure that LAAs
a. obtain and maintain all required documentation to support critical energy assistance
application data (repeat), and
b. approve or deny completed applications within the required time frame.
Department’s Response
Recommendation a.
We agree with the recommendation.
DHR has taken the following steps to ensure that all of our case records include all of the
required verification documents. In 2014, we expanded access to our document imaging system
to include the LAAs. The imaging system creates searchable, electronic case files, improving
efficiency and helps us avoid redundant requests for identity and other verification and loss of
paper documentation. As verification documents are entered into the document imaging system
the issue of case records without documents should be completely resolved because permanent
documents such as social security cards will be part of the permanent record and documents
required annually, such as utility bills, will be scanned into the record at application.
Additionally, the local offices identified in the audit have direct, online access to the utility
company billing records as well as communication through dedicated phone numbers supplied
by the utility companies. We also note that some of the supporting documentation for records
sampled by OLA was lost due to flooding of the storage area where the applications were filed.

--- Page 25 ---
Recommendation b.
We agree with the recommendation.
We have developed the Local Processing Time Report in response to a Joint Chairmen's Report
request. The report helps the Local Administering Agencies (LAAs) to manage application
timeliness. The OHEP Central office also uses this report to monitor the progress of each LAA
and to identify when and where we need to provide technical assistance and additional oversight.
Furthermore, in FY 2015, the Department increased staffing for those LAAs receiving the
highest volume of applications to provide support during the first six months of the fiscal year
when the largest number of applications are received. All of these efforts led to an average
improvement of 13% in timeliness compliance rates when compared to FY 2014.
Finding 4
FIA’s monitoring of contract costs and deliverables for certain contracts was not sufficient.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that FIA
a. obtain adequate documentation, such as time and payroll records, to verify the accuracy and
propriety of contract billings (repeat); and
b. ensure that required contract deliverables, such as economic benefit reports, are received.
Department Response
Recommendation a.
We agree with reservations.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) provides grant funding
to Maryland for nutrition education activities. The federal grant pays for the services provided
by the University of Maryland. FIA adheres to FNS Program Guidance on salary and benefits
documentation, which permits states to use their university partners' hourly documentation
procedures for program activity reporting.
Nonetheless, FIA is committed to implementing controls that will further improve our
operations. Therefore, FIA will conduct periodic onsite reviews of documentation, such as time
and payroll records, to further verify the accuracy and propriety of contract billing as
recommended.

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation b.
We agree that we did not receive quarterly reports during the audit period for our Transportation
Assistance Program. We now collect the reports and will document the employment statistics
and economic benefit data from them into our quarterly contract monitoring reports.
Finding 5
FIA lacked procedures and documentation to ensure that Temporary Disability Assistance
Program payments were made only to eligible recipients, and that federal funds were
recovered.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that FIA establish procedures to ensure that
a. all documentation required to establish recipient eligibility is received and maintained prior
to making TDAP payments,
b. TDAP cases are closed in a timely manner once SSA renders its final decision regarding a
recipient’s application for federal benefits (repeat), and
c. IAR forms are appropriately filed and all reimbursable TDAP payments are received.
Department Response
Recommendations a and b.
We agree with the recommendations.
FIA has guidance and training in place, instructing case managers to use several different
electronic tools (CARES, SOLQ, SDX, Document Imaging/Scanning) to capture and maintain
eligibility verification documents for TDAP Cases. We reinforce these policy requirements in
basic case manager training as well as "refreshers." We seek to improve access to this training
via the Cornerstone training portal (known as "The Hub") maintained by the Maryland
Department of Budget and Management, and establishing regular refresher training available to
staff in an "on-demand," self-directed model.
Beginning in February 2015, FIA's Bureau of Disability Services Operations (BDSO) reviews a
sample of TDAP cases every month to identify cases that were improperly approved, recipients
who are no longer eligible and recipients who have not followed the eligibility requirement to
seek Federal disability benefits. The Office of Policy Research and Training provided training to
the BDSO staff on the requirements that all recipients must meet in order to receive TDAP
benefits. The training included technical tools such as CARES, SOLQ and SDX that can be used
to conduct the reviews. FIA's Bureau of Information Analysis constructed a database to allow
BDSO to complete the reviews and analyze the results. BDSO conducts an average of 200

--- Page 27 ---
reviews per week, and reports the findings to each local office electronically. BDSO also
follows up on the corrective action needed to ensure it is completed.
Recommendation c.
We acknowledge these findings and are making changes to ensure fiscal documentation such as
the interim assistance reimbursement (IAR) forms remain in the electronic case files, and to
improve coordination between the FIA eligibility case managers and local fiscal staff to
maximize IAR revenue.

--- Page 28 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Peter C. Flack, CPA
Calvin Matthews, Jr.
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors