Title: Department of State Police
Date: 03/20/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067454e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:33:52.572966
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of State Police
November 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Special Funds
Finding 1 – DSP Did Not Properly Account for Certain Special Fund 10
Activity
Finding 2 – DSP Lacked Adequate Controls Over Special Fund 12
Collections and Accounts Receivable
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 3 – Certain Year-end Closing Transactions Were Not 13
Adequately Supported and Reporting Discrepancies Were
Noted
Procurements
Finding 4 – DSP Did Not Include or Could Not Support Approximate 15
Quantities of Services in Certain Solicitations
Finding 5 – Procedural and Documentation Deficiencies Were Noted 16
Regarding the Evaluation of Vendor Bids for Certain Service
Contracts
Handgun Registration
Finding 6 – DSP’s Procedures for Processing Handgun Qualification 20
Licenses and Handgun Registration Applications Lacked Certain
Controls
Finding 7 – Quality Control Procedures Were Not Comprehensive 21
Finding 8 – Controls Over Handgun Registration Application Fees 23
and Related Accounts Receivable Records Were Not Sufficient
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Controls
Finding 9 – DSP’s Network Was Not Properly Secured 24
Finding 10 – Procedures for Maintaining and Securing DSP’s 25
Workstations Were Not Sufficient
Finding 11 – DSP Lacked Assurance That Adequate Security and 26
Operational Controls Existed Over Its Records Management
System
Equipment
* Finding 12 – DSP Did Not Establish Adequate Controls Over Its 28
Equipment
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of State Police (DSP)
November 2015
 DSP did not properly account for certain special fund activities. DSP did
not establish separate accounts in the State’s accounting records to
readily identify individual fund balances for certain activities, and certain
expenditure activity was not properly recorded. As a result, one special
fund had a deficit balance of $44.2 million while another had a positive
balance of $34.4 million at the end of fiscal year 2014, neither of which
appeared reasonable given the nature of the activity pertaining to these
funds. DSP had not investigated these balances (Finding 1).
DSP should ensure that all special fund activity is properly accounted for by
establishing separate accounts to individually track financial transactions and
properly record all applicable revenue and expenditures. DSP should
investigate and make the necessary corrections to the aforementioned special
fund balances.
 Certain budgetary year-end closing transactions for fiscal year 2014 were
not adequately supported and reporting discrepancies were noted. For
example, DSP did not maintain adequate documentation to support that
revenue totaling $28.2 million recorded as of June 30, 2014 was available
to cover incurred expenditures. DSP also retained certain special funds
at year-end without proper legal justification (Finding 3).
DSP should ensure that all revenue transactions recorded to cover
expenditures are accurate and adequately supported and should work with the
Department of Budget and Management to resolve any resulting deficits. DSP
also should ensure that proper legal justification exists for all funds retained at
year-end.
 DSP did not include critical information in its solicitations for certain
contracts tested to ensure DSP received bids that satisfactorily addressed
its needs, made the appropriate award decisions, and had established
reasonable contract values. For example, our test of five contracts
disclosed that, for four of the contracts totaling $9.0 million, approximate
quantities for the various services needed either were not provided in the
solicitations or could not be supported. A number of deficiencies were
also noted in the process used to evaluate and award some of these
5

--- Page 8 ---
contracts which, in some cases, raise questions as to the propriety of the
award decisions and related contract values (Findings 4 - 5).
DSP should ensure that procurement solicitations contain the approximate
quantity of services needed and ensure that such quantities are adequately
supported. DSP should also ensure that evaluation documents are complete
and the methodologies used to evaluate vendors’ financial proposals ensure
that the winning vendor provides the best value to the State. Finally, DSP
should maintain adequate support for contract values.
 DSP procedures over handgun qualification licenses (HQL) and handgun
registration applications were not sufficiently comprehensive. For
example, DSP did not require handgun dealers to submit certain required
HQL documentation with the handgun registration applications and did
not have procedures to ensure that dealers submitted completed
applications in a timely manner. DSP also did not adequately ensure that
handgun information recorded in its automated systems was accurate.
We noted that the handgun serial numbers for approximately 4,000
registered handguns differed in two automated systems (Findings 6 - 7).
DSP should take the recommended actions to improve controls over HQL and
handgun registration applications. Specifically, DSP should ensure dealers
submit all required information in a timely manner, investigate any
discrepancies noted in our findings, and ensure that all critical information is
recorded accurately in its automated systems.
 Numerous security and control issues were noted regarding DSP’s
information systems and critical data. Specifically, DSP’s network and
numerous workstations were not properly maintained and secured, and
assurance was lacking that critical data hosted by a third-party service
provider were adequately safeguarded (Findings 9 - 11).
DSP should take the recommended actions to improve security and controls
over its information systems and critical data.
 Controls over certain cash receipts, related accounts receivable, and
equipment were not sufficient (Findings 2, 8, and 12).
DSP should take the recommended actions to improve controls in these areas.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
The Department of State Police (DSP) operates under the provisions of Title 2 of
the Public Safety Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The Code provides
that DSP shall safeguard the lives and the safety of all persons within the State,
protect property, and assist in securing to all persons the equal protection of the
laws. DSP provides these services through a headquarters unit located in
Pikesville, Maryland and 22 barracks and detachments located throughout the
State. In addition, DSP includes the State Fire Marshal and the State Fire
Prevention Commission. According to the State’s accounting records, during
fiscal year 2014, DSP’s operating expenditures totaled approximately $319.3
million.
Chapter 372, Laws of Maryland 2013, effective July 1, 2013, created the
Maryland Center for School Safety (Center) as an independent unit of State
government with a governing board. This law provides that the Center shall
collaborate with public and private entities (such as, local school systems, law
enforcement agencies, state and local governments, community organizations) to
provide a comprehensive, coordinated approach to school safety. DSP’s budget
includes funding for the Center and it provides administrative support to the
Center including payment processing and accounting functions. The scope of our
audit of DSP included the Center.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report on DSP dated March 20, 2013. We determined that
DSP satisfactorily addressed four of the findings. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Special Funds
Background
The Department of State Police (DSP) received revenue from various sources that
was used to support certain field operations. For example, according to the
State’s accounting records, DSP received funds totaling approximately $6.1
million during fiscal year 2014 from the speed camera monitoring program fund.
DSP also received reimbursements from other governmental units and private
entities for costs incurred by DSP in providing certain external services to those
entities. During fiscal year 2014, DSP billed approximately $50.5 million for
these external services, of which approximately $36.7 million related to the
following activities:
 Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Division (CVED): DSP costs are billed
to the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) for operating
inspection stations for commercial vehicles traveling in the State.
Fiscal Year 2014
 Reimbursable Overtime:
External Services Billings
DSP costs are billed to both
Commercial Vehicle Enforcement $ 17,478,859
public and private entities that
Reimbursable Overtime 7,044,435
contract with DSP for
JFK Memorial Highway 5,718,660
services such as police patrols
Automotive Safety Enforcement 5,194,172
stationed at construction
Resident Trooper 1,224,354
zones.
Total $ 36,660,480
Source: State's accounting records
 John F. Kennedy (JFK) Memorial Highway: DSP costs are billed to
MDOT for providing patrol and criminal enforcement on the JFK Memorial
Highway.
 Automotive Safety Enforcement Division (ASED): DSP costs are billed to
MDOT primarily for operating the automotive safety inspection program.
 Resident Trooper: DSP costs are billed to local jurisdictions for which DSP
provides police enforcement.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
DSP did not properly account for financial activity pertaining to certain
special funds for which the related year-end balances appeared questionable.
Analysis
DSP did not properly account for certain special fund activity, especially as it
related to the external services provided to other entities. Specifically, the
accounting records were not set up to enable DSP to readily determine whether
the costs of providing these services had been recovered. Furthermore, DSP did
not ensure all such costs and related recoveries were properly recorded.
DSP did not establish separate accounts in the State’s accounting records to
readily identify individual fund balances for four of the aforementioned five
external services activities. Although revenues and expenditures for each of these
activities were being separately tracked, the individual fund balances for these
activities were not available due to the manner in which the accounting records
were set up. Consequently, several different activities were combined and
reflected in two special fund balances. One special fund balance reflected the
financial activity related to the CVED, reimbursable overtime, and ASED
programs. The other special fund balance was used for the financial activity of
the JFK Memorial Highway patrol services and the speed camera monitoring
program. Without individual fund balances, DSP was unable to readily determine
whether it recovered all costs charged for each of the four external services.
Furthermore, both special fund balances as reflected on the State’s accounting
records at June 30, 2014 appeared questionable. The fund used to account for
CVED, reimbursable overtime, and ASED activities had a deficit balance of $44.2
million. Because the costs for these activities are generally recovered on a
reimbursable basis (DSP incurs costs and then is reimbursed) a small deficit
balance would be typical. However, the amount of this deficit balance exceeded
the expenditures for these activities for the entire year. The fund used to account
for the JFK Memorial Highway patrol services and speed camera monitoring
programs had a positive balance of $34.4 million. The costs for JFK Memorial
Highway patrol services are also generally recovered on a reimbursable basis
while the speed camera monitoring program funds are received in advance.
However, the positive fund balance significantly exceeded the approximately $6.1
million in speed camera monitoring program funds received in fiscal year 2014.
We also noted certain expenditure activity for fiscal year 2014 was not properly
recorded. In this regard, we noted instances in which expenditures incurred were
not matched to the related revenue received. For example, although revenue
received for indirect costs totaling $2.5 million was properly reflected in the fund
10

--- Page 13 ---
used to account for CVED, reimbursable overtime, and ASED activity, the related
expenditures had not been charged (or matched) to the same fund. In addition,
this same fund was improperly charged for indirect costs totaling $885,000
pertaining to JFK Memorial Highway patrol services. Such costs should have
been charged to the fund used to account for the JFK Memorial Highway patrol
services and speed camera monitoring programs, where the related revenue was
recorded.
DSP had not identified and investigated the aforementioned inconsistent activity
and the related balances in these funds, and could not determine if the positive
and negative balances in these funds were related. As a result, DSP did not know
if any of the aforementioned $44.2 million deficit balance was recoverable, nor
the proper disposition of the aforementioned $34.4 million positive balance.
Furthermore, given the nature of the activity, it may be more appropriate for the
financial activity associated with obtaining reimbursement for services from other
State agencies to be budgeted and recorded in the State’s accounting records as
reimbursable funds. Reimbursable fund appropriations can only be expended to
the extent that an agency has billed and subsequently received reimbursement
from other State agencies.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DSP
a. establish separate accounts to individually track financial transactions,
including fund balances, for reimbursable services provided to external
entities;
b. ensure that all applicable financial transactions are properly recorded;
c. investigate the aforementioned fund balances to determine the portion
applicable to each special fund activity and make the necessary
adjustments in the accounting records; and
d. in conjunction with the Department of Budget and Management,
determine whether certain activity should be budgeted and accounted for
as reimbursable funds.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
DSP lacked adequate controls over special fund collections and related
accounts receivable.
Analysis
DSP lacked adequate controls over special fund collections and the related
accounts receivable due from other governmental units and private entities.
According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2014, collections
received and deposited into special funds totaled approximately $10.5 million
(excluding payments received electronically).
 Checks were not recorded and restrictively endorsed immediately upon
receipt. Rather, checks were recorded and endorsed the following day, but not
before being processed by several employees.
 The employees responsible for verifying that all recorded collections were
deposited were not independent because they also processed or had access to
the related collections prior to deposit.
 DSP did not verify the completeness of billings for overtime hours worked by
troopers for services provided to public and private entities. According to the
State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2014, these billings totaled $7.0
million. Although DSP had procedures to verify that the amounts included on
billings were supported, procedures were not sufficient to ensure that all hours
worked were billed.
Troopers worked additional hours (reimbursable overtime) beyond their
normal workday providing security services such as at construction zones on
public thoroughfares. Reimbursable overtime hours recorded by troopers on
their timesheets were subsequently entered into an automated system by their
supervisors. DSP Finance Office personnel used reports generated from the
automated system to manually enter information into the State’s accounting
records. The State’s accounting records were then used to maintain accounts
receivable records and to generate the related invoices. However, Finance
Office personnel did not verify that all reimbursable overtime hours worked
were subsequently entered in the State’s accounting records. The reports from
the automated system generally contained more than 100 pages each pay
period of overtime, including reimbursable overtime; this volume of activity
increases the risk of errors when manually entering this information in the
State’s accounting records.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 DSP did not adequately control adjustments to accounts receivable records,
which totaled $12.0 million during fiscal year 2014, according to the State’s
accounting records. Specifically, two employees responsible for approving
adjustments also had access capabilities that allowed them to process these
transactions without independent approval. Furthermore, these employees had
access to the related collections.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
immediate recordation and endorsement of checks upon receipt, the reconciliation
of the initial record of collections with the amounts deposited by an employee
independent of the cash receipts function, the segregation of critical duties, and
the supervisory review and approval of adjustments.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that collections are recorded and restrictively endorsed
immediately upon receipt,
b. require an employee independent of the collections function to verify that
all recorded collections were subsequently deposited,
c. ensure that all reimbursable overtime was properly billed by reconciling
timesheet data recorded on its automated records with amounts invoiced,
and
d. ensure that all adjustments to accounts receivable records are subject to
independent review and approval by an employee who does not have
access to the related collections.
We advised DSP on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Budgetary and Year-End Closing
Finding 3
Certain year-end closing transactions were not always adequately supported
and reporting discrepancies were noted.
Analysis
DSP’s budgetary year-end closing transactions for fiscal year 2014 were not
always adequately supported or accurately reported.
 DSP did not maintain adequate documentation to support that revenues
recorded during the fiscal year 2014 budgetary closeout totaling $28.2 million
were available to cover incurred expenditures. To the extent that revenues are
13

--- Page 16 ---
not available, general fund appropriations (or deficiency appropriations) may
be needed to eliminate any resulting deficits. Specifically, DSP could not
substantiate the propriety of four federal and reimbursable fund revenue
transactions tested totaling approximately $13.4 million that were processed
during the fiscal year 2014 budgetary closeout. As of May 11, 2015, DSP
could not clearly document that it received any of this revenue. In addition,
revenue for invoices related to CVED and ASED expenditures totaling $14.8
million was recorded at year-end to cover special fund expenditures even
though the related funds had already been received and recorded in fiscal year
2014; this error improperly reduced the deficit balance of $44.2 million
(mentioned in Finding 1) on the State’s accounting records.
 DSP did not accurately report and did not have valid legal justification for
retaining certain special funds at year-end. DSP reported to the Comptroller
of Maryland that it retained special fund balances as of June 30, 2014 in four
budgetary programs totaling $22.9 million and included legal references for
each balance. However, the legal references reported by DSP provided
justification for retaining only $7.2 million of these funds, and legal
justification for retaining the remainder of these funds ($15.7 million, which
related to external services mentioned in Finding 1) did not substantiate that
these funds could be retained. Furthermore, the reimbursable nature of certain
of these funds would preclude the retention of any fund balances. Finally, as
mentioned in Finding 1, DSP accounted for revenue and expenditure activity
for unrelated activities in two separate special funds, and was unable to
explain or provide detailed documentation of the balances of those funds as of
June 30, 2014. Therefore, the actual portion of those balances that could be
legally retained is unknown.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s (GAD) year-end
budget closeout instructions require that proper detailed documentation of
revenue transactions recorded to cover expenditures be maintained by State
agencies to support their accounting transactions and for audit. In addition, State
law requires any unspent balance of each appropriation made for the fiscal year to
revert to the State’s General Fund unless otherwise provided for by State law.
GAD’s closing instructions provide that all special fund balances to be retained
are to be reported along with the legal justification for retaining the funds.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that all revenue transactions recorded to cover expenditures are
accurate and adequately supported, and work with the Department of
Budget and Management to resolve any deficit balances; and
14

--- Page 17 ---
b. ensure that special fund balances are accurately reported in the
budgetary close-out process and that there is valid legal justification for
special funds to be retained, and revert any improperly retained special
funds to the State’s General Fund.
Procurements
Background
We judgmentally selected and reviewed the procurements for the five contracts
listed in the table below, which were collectively valued at $16.1 million.
Schedule of Tested Contracts
Contract DNA Transmission Latent Print Psychological E911
Service Testing Repair Services Testing System
Contract 10/1/13 to 10/1/14 to 6/13/13 to 3/1/14 to 7/25/12 to
Period 9/30/18 9/30/19 6/12/18 2/28/19 7/24/19
Contract Not
to Exceed $5.0 million $1.6 million $2.0 million $400,000 $7.1 million
Amount
Contract
Expenditures
$426,200 $153,400 $381,800 $54,600 $0
as of October
19, 2015
Source: State’s accounting records and DSP records
Finding 4
DSP did not include or could not support the approximate quantities of
services needed in its solicitations for certain contracts tested.
Analysis
DSP did not include or could not support the approximate quantities of services
needed in its solicitations for four of the five contracts tested totaling $9.0 million.
Information about the expected levels of services could impact vendors’ bidding
decisions, as well as the outcome of the bid evaluation processes (see Finding 5).
Therefore, the failure to provide such information based on a documented
rationale impedes DSP’s ability to determine whether it received the most
favorable bids, made the appropriate award decisions, and established reasonable
contract values. Furthermore, State procurement regulations require that
solicitations provide an approximate quantity of goods or labor for an indefinite
quantity contract.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 For two contracts tested (transmission repair and DNA testing), totaling $6.6
million, an approximate quantity was not provided for each of the service
types included in the procurement solicitation. For example, for the
transmission repair contract, DSP solicited unit prices for the repair of 39
different types of DSP vehicles without providing any estimate of the
expected transmission repair activity for each vehicle type (see Finding 5).
The award was made based on the sum of these unit prices without regard to
the expected activity. For the DNA testing contract, DSP only provided an
overall estimated number of crime scene cases requiring analysis, but did not
provide an estimated quantity for each of the 46 categories for which a price
was solicited. As a result, the ultimate value of these contracts had no
documented correlation to expected contract needs. Also, as noted in Finding
5, this condition adversely impacted the bid evaluation processes.
 For two other contracts tested (latent print services and psychological testing),
totaling $2.4 million, the approximate quantities provided in the solicitations
could not be supported. For example, for the latent print services contract,
DSP solicited an hourly rate for approximately 100 hours of work annually
onsite at DSP and an hourly rate for another 100 hours of work at the
contractor’s location. DSP advised us that the approximate quantities was
based on an estimation of the services to be expected and the amount of the
previous contract for related services; however, no documentation could be
provided to support this explanation.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that procurement solicitations contain the approximate quantities
of the specific items or services needed, and
b. document the basis of approximate quantities to be used in the
solicitations.
Finding 5
Procedural and documentation deficiencies were noted regarding the
evaluation of vendor bids for certain service contracts.
Analysis
A number of deficiencies were noted in the processes used to evaluate and award
three of the five service contracts tested which, in some cases, raise questions as
to the propriety of the award decisions and the related contract values. In
addition, none of the awards was published on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) as
required.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 Technical evaluations were not completed and adequately documented for two
of the contracts tested (psychological and DNA testing), totaling $5.4 million.
Specifically, we noted instances in both of these contract evaluations in which
certain team and individual technical evaluations were not signed by the
evaluators and, for the psychological testing contract, some of the evaluation
forms were incomplete in that all of the evaluation attributes were not
addressed by the applicable evaluators.
 For two of the contracts tested (transmission repair and DNA testing), totaling
$6.6 million, the basis for evaluating the financial proposals, which was
integral to the award decisions, did not seem reasonable. Specifically, DSP
evaluated the proposals and selected the best proposal based on the sum of the
price quotes for each type of service without the ability to consider the total
estimated quantities needed (as noted in Finding 4). This methodology would
be reasonable if the expected levels of services for each of the service types
were the same, which is not the case for these two contracts. As a result, the
evaluation methodology did not provide assurance the two contracts had been
awarded to the vendors providing the best value to the State. In this regard,
for the transmission repair contract (which was split into five State regions), a
vendor was awarded the contract for one of the larger regions even though its
unit price ($1,300) for one of the 39 vehicle types, which accounted for
approximately half of DSP’s fleet, was on average $115 more than the losing
bidder’s price.
 DSP awarded a portion of the contract for transmission repair to a vendor that
did not meet all required specifications. The solicitation for this contract
required vendors to have a location in each region for which they were
submitting a response to the solicitation. However, DSP awarded the contract
for four regions to one vendor even though that vendor did not have a location
in any of the four regions. Furthermore, we were unable to determine how
DSP evaluated the qualifications of another vendor awarded the contract for
the fifth region, because DSP did not retain all of the related solicitation
documents, such as the vendor’s technical response.
 The award for the psychological testing contract was not consistent with the
winning vendor’s bid. Specifically, the psychological testing contract was
awarded for $400,000 even though the winning vendor’s bid, based on DSP’s
estimate of service units required (which could not be substantiated as noted
in Finding 4) and the vendor’s unit price, totaled approximately $201,000.
DSP advised us that it awarded the contract for the higher amount to reflect
actual estimated usage and to avoid having to process change orders in case it
underestimated the quantity.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 DSP did not publish any of the five awards on eMM as required by State
procurement regulations for contracts valued at more than $25,000.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure evaluations are completed and adequately documented,
b. ensure the methodology used to evaluate financial proposals helps ensure
the winning vendor’s bid provides the best value to the State based on
anticipated service needs,
c. award contracts only to vendors that meet the contract requirements
established in the procurement solicitations and retain all critical bid
documentation,
d. maintain documentation supporting the basis for award amounts
including how those amounts relate to the winning vendor’s bids, and
e. publish contract awards on eMM as required.
Handgun Registration
Maryland’s Handgun Registration Process
Background
1. Handgun Qualification License (HQL)
Obtaining and registering a
•Individual is fingerprinted and has the results submitted to
handgun in Maryland is a multi- DSP.
step process with specific •Individual completes a DSP approved handgun safety
course (unless exempt).
procedural and documentation
•Individual completes the online HQL application and pays
requirements for handgun dealers, the $50 license fee.
DSP, and handgun applicants as •A DSP civilian clerk conducts a full criminal background
check and, if not disapproved, issues an HQL within 30
noted in the accompanying chart.
days of receiving an application.
The Firearms Safety Act of 2013,
2. Handgun Registration
effective October 1, 2013,
•Individual completes a paper handgun registration
provides that a handgun dealer or
application and dealer (or individual if private sale) submits
any other person may not sell, rent, application to DSP.
or transfer a handgun unless the •A DSP civilian clerk enters information into automated
records and conducts a full criminal background check.
individual receiving the handgun
•DSP notifies dealer/individual of disposition within 7 days.
first obtains and presents to the
•Preliminary handgun information is entered into automated
dealer or other person a valid records.
Handgun Qualification License •Monthly, DSP bills each dealer $10 for each application.
(HQL) issued by DSP. State law 3. Completed Sale
requires HQL applicants to be •Dealer submits completed application to DSP within 7 days
of handgun transfer.
fingerprinted, to submit to an
•DSP records final handgun sale information in automated
initial criminal background check
records.
by DSP, and to complete an
18

--- Page 21 ---
approved handgun safety course. Certain individuals, such as former police
officers, are exempt from the HQL requirement.
Once an HQL is obtained (or is exempt as noted above) the individual may submit
a handgun registration application to the dealer (or individual if a private sale),
which is then forwarded to DSP for evaluation, including another criminal
background check. If the application is not disapproved1 by DSP, the handgun
can be transferred. The dealer is then required to submit final transfer
documentation to DSP.
DSP uses certain automated systems and databases to track HQL and handgun
registration activity.
 MyLicense is a web-based system that is used by applicants to complete and
submit their HQL applications. DSP uses MyLicense to process and track
HQL applications and the status of the initial criminal background checks, and
also to print the HQL.
 Information Sharing for Applicant Background and Licensing (ISAB&L)
was implemented in January 2014 to receive and monitor handgun registration
application activity, including timely processing, and serves as the accounts
receivable record for application fees due from dealers.
 Maryland Automated Firearms Services System (MAFSS) is the official
record of regulated firearms, including handguns, in the State, and records
firearms information and data from the registration applications. MAFSS is
also used for a variety of law enforcement purposes, such as to assist in
investigating crimes. The Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services is responsible for the maintenance and security of MAFSS.
According to MAFSS, as of May 12, 2015, there were approximately 1.1 million
regulated firearms registered to approximately 700,000 individuals in Maryland.
According to DSP records, DSP received approximately 16,300 HQL applications
and 31,000 finalized handgun registration applications during calendar year 2014.
Firearm (including handgun) and HQL application fee collections during fiscal
year 2014 totaled $976,000 and $573,000 respectively, according to the State’s
accounting records.
1Not disapproved is the terminology used by DSP for approved.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 6
DSP’s procedures for processing HQL and handgun registration applications
lacked certain controls.
Analysis
DSP’s procedures for processing HQL and handgun registration applications
lacked certain necessary controls.
 DSP did not require dealers to submit a copy of an applicant’s HQL with the
handgun registration application as required by State law. DSP management
informed us that clerks processing applications are required to review
MyLicense to determine the validity of the HQL; however, this review is not
always documented. DSP also did not take appropriate measures to verify
that applicants who were exempt from the HQL requirements possessed a
valid exemption. Although we were advised that dealers were required to
inspect evidence of a valid exemption, DSP did not instruct dealers how to
document the verification. Rather, DSP relied on information provided on the
handgun application by the applicant without any specific indication that the
dealer had inspected exemption evidence. While not required by State law,
DSP could require dealers to record on the application the evidence (such as
employment credentials) sighted during the application process to provide
additional assurance regarding the validity of the exemption claimed.
DSP performs dealer audits, which include a review of the dealer’s records;
however, these audits would not verify an applicant’s HQL or related
exemption since the dealer may not retain the HQL or evidence of the
exemption sighted during the application process.
 DSP did not have a procedure in place to readily identify and follow-up on
dealers who did not submit to DSP each finalized handgun registration
application within seven days of delivery of the handgun to the applicant, as
required by State law. Specifically, DSP did not determine the disposition of
all applications submitted that were initially recorded in ISAB&L for which a
final application was not received.
Our test of 40 handgun registration applications that were not disapproved
and, according to various DSP records, were transferred during the period
from April 2013 through January 2015 disclosed that the finalized
applications for 21 handguns were received late, including 10 that were
received from 20 to 201 days after the handguns were transferred. Our test
also disclosed one finalized application for a handgun transferred on February
14, 2014 that had not been received. In response to our inquiries, DSP
20

--- Page 23 ---
obtained a copy of the finalized application from the dealer on April 12, 2015,
which was 422 days after the handgun was transferred.
 Numerous individuals were assigned capabilities on ISAB&L that allowed
them to approve handgun applications even though they did not require it. For
example, 13 individuals had such access capabilities even though they were
no longer employed by DSP, and 6 DSP employees did not need the assigned
access capabilities to perform their regular job duties. In addition, 14
employees were assigned administrator access capabilities that allowed them
to change the status of an application without independent approval (such as
from disapproved to not disapproved). Because DSP did not produce an
output report of these status changes, improper changes would not be readily
detected.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DSP
a. require dealers to submit a copy of the HQL with the handgun
application as required by law and explore options to provide additional
assurance that license exemptions were appropriate,
b. establish procedures to ensure that all finalized handgun applications are
received on a timely basis as required by State law,
c. restrict user access capabilities to ISAB&L to employees who require it
for their regular job duties, and
d. produce system output reports of handgun application status changes and
ensure such changes are independently reviewed for propriety.
Finding 7
Quality control procedures conducted to ensure the propriety of the HQL
and handgun registration process and related records were not
comprehensive.
Analysis
DSP had several processes to help ensure the propriety of the HQL and handgun
registration processes and the related records, including quality control reviews of
selected registrations and audits of dealer records. Our review disclosed that the
quality control procedures conducted by DSP were not comprehensive.
 DSP did not adequately ensure that handgun registration data recorded in
ISAB&L and MAFSS were accurate. Handgun registration information (such
as name of registrant, gun make, and serial number) is manually entered into
both ISAB&L and MAFSS. We were advised that the MAFSS information is
21

--- Page 24 ---
verified during independent quality control reviews of selected registrations
(generally 10 percent of registrations processed) and during dealer audits.
However, based on our analysis, these verification procedures do not appear
to be sufficient given certain discrepancies we identified. Our automated
comparison of approximately 27,500 applications that were recorded in
ISAB&L from May 16, 2014 through March 31, 2015 with the related
applications recorded in MAFSS disclosed approximately 4,000 instances in
which the handgun serial numbers in ISAB&L and MAFSS were different.
These discrepancies could be caused by clerical errors when the application
information is recorded into those systems as well as illegible information on
the handwritten registration applications. While dealer audits performed by
DSP help identify such discrepancies, we noted instances in which errors in
the MAFSS data during those audits were not always corrected. Accurate
handgun information in MAFSS is critical because MAFSS is the official
record of handguns in the State and is one of the sources used by law
enforcement when investigating crimes involving a handgun.
 Certain applications were excluded from DSP’s independent quality control
reviews that are performed to ensure the proper evaluation and disposition of
HQL and handgun applications. Specifically, HQL and handgun applications
that required a secondary evaluation because of possible criminal activity
were excluded from the aforementioned reviews. We notified DSP of this
issue during the audit and, effective March 2015, DSP updated its policies and
procedures to include these applications in the independent quality control
review process.
HQL and handgun registration applications were processed by civilian clerks
based on a review of submitted documentation. Applications were forwarded
for a secondary review to another clerk or a sworn officer if the review of the
criminal background check disclosed any criminal activity. The independent
quality control reviews are necessary since the secondary reviews only
determine whether the criminal activity disclosed on the criminal background
check disapproves an applicant but does not determine the accuracy of the
work performed by the civilian clerks over the applications.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DSP
a. enhance existing procedures and controls to ensure accurate data are
recorded in ISAB&L and MAFSS and investigate and correct
questionable data deemed to be critical to the integrity of those systems,
22

--- Page 25 ---
b. ensure that all errors or other discrepancies noted during dealer audits
are corrected, and
c. include all HQL and handgun applications in the independent quality
control review process in accordance with its new procedure.
Finding 8
Controls over handgun registration application fees and related accounts
receivable records were not sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over handgun registration application fees and the related accounts
receivable records were not sufficient. On a monthly basis, DSP invoiced
handgun dealers $10 for each application submitted by the dealer during the
month. The related accounts receivable records were maintained on ISAB&L.
During fiscal year 2014, firearm (including handgun) application fee collections
totaled $976,000, according to the State’s accounting records.
 Handgun application fees were not adequately controlled when first received.
Specifically, checks received through the mail were not initially recorded and
restrictively endorsed until being processed by a second employee.
 DSP did not periodically reconcile fee collections recorded in the State’s
accounting records with the payments recorded in the accounts receivable
records on ISAB&L.
 Three employees who processed collections were assigned capabilities on
ISAB&L that allowed them to update the related accounts receivable records.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
immediate recordation and endorsement of checks upon receipt, segregate cash
handling duties from accounts receivable record keeping functions, and
periodically compare cash receipts with the corresponding credits to accounts
receivable records.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that collections are recorded and restrictively endorsed
immediately upon receipt,
b. implement an independent reconciliation of collections recorded in the
State’s accounting records with payments recorded in the accounts
receivable records on ISAB&L, and
23

--- Page 26 ---
c. ensure that employees who have access to cash receipts do not also have
access to the related accounts receivable records.
We advised DSP on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Information Systems Security and Controls
Background
DSP’s Information Technology Division is responsible for information
technology and communications management in support of field troopers,
investigators, support personnel, allied law enforcement agencies, state and local
government agencies, and the citizenry. DSP’s information technology
environment includes an integrated computer network that provides connections
to a number of servers and workstations. Key network resources include the
citation system, which is used for citations, warnings, field observation reports,
and vehicle safety equipment repair orders, and the Records Management System
(RMS). RMS is used by State troopers to record incidents (such as vehicle
infractions and robberies), retain this information, and make it available when
needed (for example, for court appearances). In addition, DSP had Internet
connectivity and used firewalls and an intrusion prevention system to protect its
network.
Finding 9
Firewalls, the intrusion prevention system, and three virtual private
networks were not configured to ensure DSP’s network was properly
secured.
Analysis
Firewalls, the intrusion prevention system (IPS), and three virtual private
networks (VPNs) were not configured to ensure DSP’s network was properly
secured.
 Firewall rules allowed numerous unnecessary connections to portions of
DSP’s network, placing various devices at risk. For example, numerous rules
allowed many devices within untrusted network segments to have network
level access to all DSP internal devices over various ports. In addition, we
identified 10 firewall rules that were outdated and should be removed to better
protect the network.
24

--- Page 27 ---
 Traffic between untrusted third parties and the devices in DSP’s neutral
network zone was not subject to IPS coverage. We determined that DSP’s
IPS appliances were not positioned to review traffic between these untrusted
third parties and the devices, including important web and application servers,
in DSP’s neutral network zone.
 Traffic from three third-party business partners (for example, other State
agencies) to DSP via VPNs was not adequately restricted. For example, we
noted that, through one of these three VPNs, numerous third-party devices
could access almost the entire DSP internal network via all ports.
The State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy states that information
systems shall be configured to monitor and control communications at the
external boundaries of the information systems and at key internal boundaries
within the systems. The Policy also specifies that intrusion detection/prevention
tools and techniques must be employed to monitor system events, detect attacks,
and identify unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential
information.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DSP
a. configure its firewalls and VPNs to adequately secure its network, and
b. properly position and configure its IPS appliances to review all traffic
between untrusted third parties and the devices in DSP’s neutral network
zone.
Finding 10
Procedures for maintaining and securing DSP’s numerous workstations were
not sufficient.
Analysis
Procedures for maintaining and securing approximately 2,400 DSP workstations
were not sufficient.
 DSP was running an outdated and unsupported workstation operating system
on its network for many months. Specifically, we identified 1,034 active
workstations which were running the outdated and unsupported operating
system. The operating system vendor no longer provides security updates for
this operating system, leaving workstations running this operating system
vulnerable to attack. The State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy
specifies that system hardening procedures shall be created and maintained to
25

--- Page 28 ---
ensure up-to-date security best practices are deployed for all systems
including operating systems.
 Certain workstations were configured with users having administrative rights.
Administrative rights are the highest permission level that can be granted to
users and allow users to install software and change configuration settings.
Our test of eight workstations disclosed that two employees’ user accounts
were inappropriately defined with administrative rights rather than with user
rights. As a result, if the workstations used by accounts with administrative
rights were infected with malware, the malware would run with administrative
rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if
the workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights.
 Workstations tested had not been updated with the latest releases for software
products that are known to have significant security-related vulnerabilities.
Although the vendors for these software products frequently provide software
patches to address these vulnerabilities, DSP had not updated all of its
computers for these patches. For example, of eight workstations tested for
one of these software products we noted that four workstations were running
older versions of this software.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DSP
a. update all workstations with outdated operating system software to a
manufacturer supported version,
b. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel
that require such rights, and
c. keep its workstations up-to-date for all critical security-related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software.
Finding 11
DSP lacked assurance that adequate security and operational controls
existed over its RMS.
Analysis
DSP lacked assurance that adequate security and operational controls existed over
its RMS that was hosted by a third-party service provider. The RMS contains
personally identifiable information of some (but not all) individuals involved in
recorded incidents (such as vehicle infractions and robberies). The primary third-
party service provider for the RMS provides hardware, software, support, and
training services. The primary provider hosts the RMS at a subcontractor’s data
26

--- Page 29 ---
center. This subcontractor is responsible for physical security controls,
environmental controls, Internet connectivity, and disaster recovery services.
As of April 2015, DSP had neither performed independent security reviews at the
primary service provider or the subcontractor for the RMS nor obtained reports of
independent, standards-based security reviews of these two providers that
included tests of controls to ensure that the controls identified were operational.
Although we were advised that other reviews were conducted, these reviews were
not comprehensive and were not performed annually. Furthermore, the agreement
between the State of Maryland’s Department of Information Technology (which
initiated this contract on behalf of DSP) and the primary service provider did not
require that comprehensive, independent standards-based reviews, that included
tests of controls to ensure that the controls identified were operational throughout
the period under review, be performed.
As a result of the aforementioned conditions, DSP lacked assurance that certain
controls were in effect for the RMS, including the following:
 data in transit, data at rest, and backed-up data are encrypted
 intrusion detection, anti-virus and malware prevention, vulnerability scanning,
and patch management have been implemented
 reports of privileged user access activities, authorized and unauthorized access
attempts, and information security events are reviewed on a regular basis
 policies and procedures for user account and password controls for
applications, databases, the server, and network infrastructure are in
accordance with the State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy
 network segments are separated by firewalls to ensure compliance with
legislative, regulatory, and contractual requirements and that production and
non-production environments are segmented
 documented policies and procedures exist and have been implemented for
business continuity and/or disaster recovery
 data is backed up, stored offsite in an appropriate facility, and that such
backup and storage procedures are tested regularly
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance for
auditing and reporting on reviews of service providers. This guidance
27

--- Page 30 ---
encompasses several types of reviews and related Service Organization Control
(SOC) reports including a SOC 2 Type 2 review and report. A SOC 2 Type 2
report, which includes a review of controls placed in operation and tests of
operating effectiveness for the period under review, would provide DSP with
assurance as to the propriety of the design and operation of critical controls. A
SOC 2 Type 2 report could include an evaluation of security, availability,
processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy over the RMS.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DSP
a. request the Department of Information Technology to initiate efforts to
amend the contract to require that the primary provider and any
subcontractors performing material services for the RMS periodically
obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews and reports for the provided services to
ensure that adequate controls exist over the RMS,
b. obtain and review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports from the primary
provider and its subcontractors and determine if the related independent
reviews adequately address the aforementioned security concerns over
the RMS, and
c. ensure that the primary provider and its subcontractors implement all
critical recommendations made in the reports.
Equipment
Finding 12
DSP did not establish adequate controls over its equipment.
Analysis
DSP did not establish adequate controls over its equipment. DSP’s equipment
balance reported to the Department of General Services (DGS) as of June 30,
2014 totaled approximately $276.9 million (including vehicles).
 DSP did not complete annual physical inventories of sensitive equipment as
required. According to DSP records as of April 2015, physical inventories of
sensitive equipment were not conducted for 95 of the 113 DSP locations
during calendar year 2014. In addition, the results of the inventories of
sensitive equipment conducted in the remaining 18 locations were not
reconciled with the related detail records.
 DSP did not always record equipment purchases. Specifically, our test of
eight equipment purchases made between August 2013 and June 2014,
28

--- Page 31 ---
totaling $2.5 million, disclosed that three equipment purchases totaling
approximately $140,000 had not been recorded in the detail records as of
March 2015. For example, one purchase made in May 2014 of video
streaming and management equipment totaling $85,000 was not recorded in
the detailed records.
Similar conditions regarding inadequate inventories and the failure to record
equipment purchases have been commented upon in our six preceding audit
reports dating back to January 1998. The DGS Inventory Control Manual
requires that annual physical inventories be conducted for sensitive equipment,
that variances be investigated and resolved, and that related documentation be
retained for audit and verification purposes. The Manual also requires the
recordation of all capital equipment items in the detail records for identification
and control purposes.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that DSP comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that DSP
a. conduct physical inventories at the required intervals, reconcile the
results of the inventories with the related detail records, and promptly
investigate and resolve all differences (repeat); and
b. record all equipment purchases in the related inventory records in a
timely manner (repeat).
29

--- Page 32 ---
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of State Police
(DSP) for the period beginning December 20, 2011 and ending December 31,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DSP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included handgun registrations, payroll, cash receipts
(including handgun registration application fees and reimbursement from other
governmental units and private entities for external services provided), accounts
receivable, procurements and disbursements, information systems, and equipment
inventories. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs (such as the
Homeland Security Grant Program) and an assessment of DSP’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including DSP and the Maryland Center for School Safety.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DSP’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
31

--- Page 34 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from DSP’s Maryland Automated
Firearms Services System and the Information Sharing for Applicant Background
and Licensing system for the purpose of testing various handgun registration
requirements. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined
that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during
the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DSP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DSP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DSP that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
32

--- Page 35 ---
The response from DSP to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DSP regarding the
results of our review of its response.
33

--- Page 37 ---
Audit Report
Department of State Police Response to
Office of Legislative Fiscal Compliance Audit
DECEMBER 20, 2011 TO DECEMBER 31, 2014
November 2015

--- Page 38 ---
Finding 1
DSP did not properly account for financial activity pertaining to certain special funds for
which the related year-end balances appeared questionable.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DSP
a. establish separate accounts to individually track financial transactions, including
fund balances, for reimbursable services provided to external entities;
b. ensure that all applicable financial transactions are properly recorded;
c. investigate the aforementioned fund balances to determine the portion applicable to
each special fund activity and make the necessary adjustments in the accounting
records; and
d. in conjunction with the Department of Budget and Management, determine whether
certain activity should be budgeted and accounted for as reimbursable funds.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: DSP will establish separate accounts to individually track financial
transactions, including fund balances, for reimbursable services provided to external
entities. DSP has already conferred with the General Accounting Division, who have
assisted DSP in setting up the separate accounts for each reimbursable service.
b. DSP Agrees: DSP is currently in the process of ensuring that all applicable financial
transactions are properly recorded by performing a quarterly reconciliation to match
revenues to expenses and investigate any differences. This is an ongoing process.
c. DSP Agrees: DSP is in the process of investigating the aforementioned fund balances to
determine the portion applicable to each special fund activity and make the necessary
adjustments in the accounting records by June 30, 2016.
d. DSP Agrees: DSP will, in conjunction with the Department of Budget and Management,
determine whether certain activity should be budgeted and accounted for as reimbursable
funds. The DSP met with DBM on November 8, 2015 and agreed to leave as Special
Funds since separate funds have been created.

--- Page 39 ---
Finding 2
DSP lacked adequate controls over special fund collections and related accounts receivable.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that collections are recorded and restrictively endorsed immediately upon
receipt,
b. require an employee independent of the collections function to verify that all
recorded collections were subsequently deposited,
c. ensure that all reimbursable overtime was properly billed by reconciling timesheet
data recorded on its automated records with amounts invoiced, and
d. ensure that all adjustments to accounts receivable records are subject to
independent review and approval by an employee who does not have access to the
related collections.
We advised DSP on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: Effective July 1, 2015, checks received in the Finance Division are
immediately recorded and/or restrictively endorsed upon receipt; and the recordation and
endorsement occurs the same day of the receipt of the check(s). In addition, check
handling will be limited to only the employees who have keys to the money bag for
deposit.
b. DSP Agrees: The deposit verification function is currently performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts process that does not have direct access to the related
collections. The employee verifies that all recorded cash collections were subsequently
deposited.
c. DSP Agrees: The Finance Division has taken steps to create and implement an Accounts
Receivable Excel worksheet to record each vendor’s name, Z- number, and the amount to
be billed and the corresponding invoiced amount billed at each payroll pay period ending
(PPE), to ensure the completeness of the amounts billed. Upon completion of each
billing/invoicing pay period ending, the amounts recorded will be reconciled to the
amounts invoiced, and any discrepancy will be determined and resolved.
d. DSP Agrees: Beginning this fiscal year, July 1, 2015, the Finance Division contacted the
DOIT FMIS Helpdesk to request and to create a special Focus Report (W00T200A) that
shows a User-ID of employees who entered a non-cash adjustment each month. This
report will indicate the initiator of the non-cash credits adjustment to the accounts
receivable records to ensure the segregation of duties between the employee who initiated
the transaction and the individual who independently reviews and approves the
transaction in FMIS. The reviewer will verify, initial, and date the report after the review
for audit purposes.

--- Page 40 ---
Finding 3
Certain year-end closing transactions were not always adequately supported and reporting
discrepancies were noted.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that all revenue transactions recorded to cover expenditures are accurate
and adequately supported, and should work with the Department of Budget and
Management to resolve any deficit balances; and
b. ensure that special fund balances are accurately reported in the budgetary close-out
process and that there is valid legal justification for special funds to be retained, and
revert any improperly retained special funds to the State’s General Fund.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: DSP is currently in the process of ensuring that all revenue transactions
recorded to cover expenditures are accurate and adequately supported, by implementing
quarterly reviews, and will continue to work with the Department of Budget and
Management should there be any deficient balances.
b. DSP Agrees: DSP is in the process of ensuring that special fund balances are accurately
reported in the budgetary close-out process and that there is valid legal justification for
special funds to be retained, and revert any improperly retained special funds to the
State’s General Fund by year-end close on June 30, 2016.
Finding 4
DSP did not include or could not support the approximate quantities of services needed in
its solicitations for certain contracts tested.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that procurement solicitations contain the approximate quantities of the
specific items or services needed, and
b. document the basis of approximate quantities to be used in the solicitations.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: The Quartermaster Division (QMD) has a Procurement Review Group
(PRG) that reviews all solicitations prior to submission to the Control Agencies. The
Director of QMD will ensure that the PRG verifies approximate quantities for the specific
services or commodities are appropriate for the solicitation(s).
b. DSP Agrees: The QMD holds weekly meetings that include training with all procurement
staff to ensure they are aware that proper research and documentation must be done to
confirm the approximate quantities, whether by historical research or by gathering correct
information from the DSP Installation/Unit/Division requesting the service or
commodity.

--- Page 41 ---
Finding 5
Procedural and documentation deficiencies were noted regarding the evaluation of vendor
bids for certain service contracts.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure evaluations are completed and adequately documented,
b. ensure the methodology used to evaluate financial proposals helps ensure the
winning vendor’s bid provides the best value to the State based on anticipated
service needs,
c. award contracts only to vendors that meet the contract requirements established in
the procurement solicitations and retain all critical bid documentation,
d. maintain documentation supporting the basis for award amounts including how
those amounts relate to the winning vendor’s bids, and
e. publish contract awards on eMM as required.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: The DSP QMD created a written standardized evaluation criteria within 2
weeks of the stated recommendation and submitted it to each member of the evaluation
team. QMD will review the submitted evaluations for accurate completion upon
submission.
b. DSP Agrees: The DSP QMD will ensure all bidders are properly prepared to bid for each
type of service or commodity based on estimated (historical) quantities or require the
most accurate estimate received on the pricing sheet from the DSP
Installation/Unit/Division requesting the service or commodity. In addition, this training
is a part of the weekly procurement meetings held with all procurement staff to ensure
their methodology used to evaluate financial proposals are logical and that the bidder’s
proposals provide the best value to the state.
c. DSP Agrees: The DSP QMD has a Procurement Review Group (PRG) that reviews all
solicitations prior to submission on eMaryland Marketplace or to the Control Agencies.
The PRG shall also review solicitations when returned from vendors that are over
$25,000 prior to submission to the Control Agencies and before entering into eMaryland
Marketplace for award. The DSP QMD has created a checklist that is a working
document for the contract requirements established in the solicitations and require the
procurement staff to complete and maintain the checklist as part of the procurement
package.
d. DSP Agrees: The DSP QMD will maintain all procurement documentation pertaining to
a solicitation in one contract file. The DSP QMD procurement manual references these
policies and procedures.
e. DSP Agrees: The DSP QMD immediately posted the eMaryland Marketplace (eMM)
training modules and instructions on the DSP QMD share drive for all its procurement
staff to reference when publishing contract awards. All personnel have been trained as of
November 10, 2015.

--- Page 42 ---
Finding 6
DSP’s procedures for processing HQL and handgun registration applications lacked
certain controls.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DSP
a. require dealers to submit a copy of the HQL with the handgun application as
required by law and explore options to provide additional assurance that license
exemptions were appropriate,
b. establish procedures to ensure that all finalized handgun applications are received
on a timely basis as required by State law,
c. restrict user access capabilities to ISAB&L to employees who require it for their
regular job duties, and
d. produce system output reports of handgun application status changes and ensure
such changes are independently reviewed for propriety.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Disagrees: During the 2013 Legislative Session the Maryland General Assembly
passed the Firearms Safety Act of 2013. This legislation, effective October 1, 2013,
changed many aspects of gun licensing and regulation in Maryland. One such aspect is
the required automation of Maryland’s regulated firearm purchase and transaction
process. To that end, the DSP does not require a dealer to make and submit a paper copy
of an HQL for applicable applications to purchase a regulated firearm. Instead the DSP
ensures the validity of HQL internally by crosschecking the HQL number against the
HQL issuing database, MyLicense. The Department has drafted corrective legislation that
seeks to repeal the requirement of paper submission within the current law that requires
automation. During the 2013 and 2014 annual Regulated Firearms Dealer training
seminars the DSP trained dealers on the exemption requirements of the HQL. This
training literature remains posted to the DSP website. Training includes information
regarding recognizing and validating law enforcement credentials as well as a direct link
to the United States Armed Forces website for credentialing verification. In an effort to
ensure dealers are complying with exemption requirements the DSP will increase the
sample size of HQL exemption transactions during its required dealer audits and
document the verification process.
Auditor’s Comment: DSP states in its response that it disagrees with the
recommendation to require dealers to submit a copy of the HQL with the
handgun application because it verifies the HQL in MyLicense. However, as
noted in the finding, these verifications were not always documented. DSP
also states that it will submit legislation to remove the requirement for the
submission of the HQL. Nevertheless, DSP should comply with current law
requiring the submission of the HQLs until the requirement is repealed.
b. DSP Agrees: Standard Operating Procedure No. 29-1506, dated 6/2/2015 has been
established in ISAB&L’s functionality to ensure that all finalized handgun applications
are received within seven days of delivery of the handgun to the applicant.

--- Page 43 ---
c. DSP Agrees: In order to access ISAB&L a user must be on DSP’s network and must
have the ISAB&L client installed on the computer being used to access the data. The
DSP has restricted user access capabilities to ISAB&L to employees who require it for
their regular job duties.
d. DSP Agrees: ISAB&L ensures that every field level data change is logged and every
application record has an Application History report that displays the original data of a
field, the new data for that field, the date and time the change took place, and the user
name of the person who made the change. This Application History is available on-
demand. Based on recommendations made by OLA in April 2015, Licensing Division
implemented additional quality control reporting processes in ISAB&L. Using the above
noted functionality, DSP will produce system output reports of handgun application
status that pulls 100% of applications processed to final disposition by ISAB&L Admins
who do not process applications as part of their regular duties. Changes made by these
employees will be independently reviewed for propriety.

--- Page 44 ---
Finding 7
Quality control procedures conducted to ensure the propriety of the HQL and handgun
registration process and related records were not comprehensive.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DSP
a. enhance existing procedures and controls to ensure accurate data are recorded in
ISAB&L and MAFSS and investigate and correct questionable data deemed to be
critical to the integrity of those systems,
b. ensure that all errors or other discrepancies noted during dealer audits are
corrected, and
c. include all HQL and handgun applications in the independent quality control
review process in accordance with its new procedure.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: A fundamental reason for the passage of the 2013 Firearms Safety Act and
the subsequent automation of Maryland’s regulated firearm purchase was to improve data
quality. DSP agrees that a paper based business process that relies on the handwritten
transmission of information such as names, firearm serial numbers, and dates of birth that
supports on average 50,000 regulated handgun transitions annually is subject to
illegibility and data entry errors on all sides; applicant, dealer and DSP processing
employees. Full automation is in progress and is estimated to be in full operation by the
end of FY 2016. It will significantly minimize the data discrepancies and the DSP will
enhance existing procedures and controls to continue to ensure accurate data are recorded
in ISAB&L and MAFSS and investigate and correct questionable data.
b. DSP Agrees: Standard Operating Procedure No. 29-1312 is in the process of being
updated to ensure a better check and balance process to support auditors in correcting the
MAFSS record when data discrepancies are noted.
c. DSP Agrees: From April 1, 2014 until July 27, 2015 the DSP verified 18,552
applications to ensure the applicant possessed a valid HQL. From September 23, 2013
through July 20, 2014 MSP conducted 16,689 quality reviews of 77R’s processed by
more than 30 sworn police officers. Based on recommendations made by OLA in April
2015, Licensing Division implemented the following Quality Control (QC) reporting
processes in ISAB&L:
 QC Report #2: Monthly QC of Secondary Review - This report includes a
random percentage (selectable between 1-5%) of all applications processed to
final disposition by Sworn Officers where the applications were escalated to
Secondary Review. The report also allows the user to select and view the marked
applications in order to perform QC checks and confirm the applications were
processed correctly.
 QC Report #3: Quarterly QC of Admins - This report pulls 100% of applications
processed to final disposition by ISAB&L Admins who do not process
applications as part of their regular duties.

--- Page 45 ---
Finding 8
Controls over handgun registration application fees and related accounts receivable
records were not sufficient.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that collections are recorded and restrictively endorsed immediately upon
receipt,
b. implement an independent reconciliation of collections recorded in the State’s
accounting records with payments recorded in the accounts receivable records on
ISAB&L, and
c. ensure that employees who have access to cash receipts do not also have access to
the related accounts receivable records.
We advised DSP on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: DSP requires that collections are recorded and restrictively endorsed upon
receipt. DSP incorrectly interpreted “immediately” and therefore failed to require the
employee who opened and sorted mail to restrictively endorse collections, instead
requiring the employee assigned to record the collection as that employee responsible for
the endorsement. The DSP has since updated its desk top procedures as referenced in
SOP 29-1506.
b. DSP Agrees: DSP has implemented an independent reconciliation of collections
recorded in the State’s accounting records with payments recorded in the accounts
receivable records on ISAB&L. This process will be in full operation no later than
January 31, 2016.
c. DSP Agrees: Based on recommendations made by OLA in April 2015, DSP corrected
the three accounts noted to ensure that employees who have access to cash receipts do not
also have access to the related accounts receivable record.

--- Page 46 ---
Finding 9
Firewalls, the intrusion prevention system, and three virtual private networks were not
configured to ensure DSP’s network was properly secured.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DSP
a. configure its firewalls and VPNs to adequately secure its network, and
b. properly position and configure its IPS appliances to review all traffic between
untrusted third parties and the devices in DSP’s neutral network zone.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: DSP has maintained substantial network and device security such as IDPS,
firewalls and network monitoring. The State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy
are guidelines and not mandates according to the Maryland Department of Information
Technology. In order to increase security beyond what currently exists, firewall rules
have been reviewed in general and those deemed to be unnecessary have been removed.
The scope of rules has been reviewed and the scope or range of access has been reduced
to minimum levels. Rules are now being reviewed periodically to ensure their
legitimacy. The new policies and procedures expect to be completed by January of 2016.
b. DSP Agrees: The former Intrusion Detection System appliances are no longer in service.
DSP has procured a new IPDS product and it is in operation on the firewall. This
provides protection to both the DSP internal network as well as the DMZ network and
corrects the noted issues.

--- Page 47 ---
Finding 10
Procedures for maintaining and securing DSP’s numerous workstations were not
sufficient.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DSP
a. update all workstations with outdated operating system software to a manufacturer
supported version,
b. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel that require
such rights, and
c. keep its workstations up-to-date for all critical security-related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: This is an issue that was discussed with OLA involving limited funding
and staff to implement all audit recommendations and OLA understood DSP’s limitations
at the time of this audit. At the time of the audit, 1034 workstations were identified to
have the outdated operating system product. As of November 4, 2015, that number is
down to approx. 346 desktops and less than 50 laptops (excluding MDTs). Another ~85
will be replaced by the end of the Fiscal Year, and further reductions are funding
dependent. DSP agrees as discussed with OLA to continue to replace outdated systems
as funding becomes available to do so.
b. DSP Agrees: Due to Information Technology staffing cuts and reductions, there are local
administrators (IT Techs and other authorized individuals who repair computers) who
have local administrative rights to the workstations to effect repairs all over the State,
without having to drive to each location to fix a helpdesk ticket. This is also to allow the
local admin access to install software updates, printers etc. without having to wait for an
ITD technician. This is the most effective and efficient use of these limited personnel
while balancing timely repairs and upgrades. This access has been reduced, but cannot be
eliminated because of limited staff. This will be addressed in Standard Operating
Procedures which will be developed and implemented by January of 2016.
c. DSP Agrees: DSP previously used an older vendor software product to push PC updates
once they were approved. The use was stopped when the pushes overwhelmed the old
hardware and caused network issues across the board. A current vendor product is now
in use and the licensing fee for a two year license is approximately $100,000. As
discussed with OLA, this is a funding issue as are almost all audit findings cited in this
report.

--- Page 48 ---
Finding 11
DSP lacked assurance that adequate security and operational controls existed over its
RMS.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DSP
a. request the Department of Information Technology(DoIT) to initiate efforts to
amend the contract to require that the primary provider and any subcontractors
performing material services for the RMS periodically obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews
and reports for the provided services to ensure that adequate controls exist over the
RMS,
b. obtain and review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports from the primary provider
and its subcontractors and determine if the related independent reviews adequately
address the aforementioned security concerns over the RMS, and
c. ensure that the primary provider and its subcontractors implement all critical
recommendations made in the reports.
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: DSP will contact Maryland Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
by January of 2016 for this finding and corrective action. DoIT is responsible for the
finding and corrective actions.
b. DSP Agrees: DoIT is the contract holder/manager for the statewide CAD/RMS and
would have to amend the contract to require the reports and get the concurrence of the
contractor. DSP agrees to make this request by January of 2016, however, it cannot
guarantee or be held responsible for compliance with this finding.
c. DSP Agrees: DSP will review the reports once received. This is dependent upon a change
to the requirements and concurrence from the vendor. DSP agrees to ensure the primary
provider and its subcontractors implement all recommendations providing reports are
done and received and requirements are changed and accepted by the vendor.

--- Page 49 ---
Finding 12
DSP did not establish adequate controls over its equipment.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that DSP comply with the requirements of the DGS Inventory Control
Manual. Specifically, we recommend that DSP
a. conduct physical inventories at the required intervals, reconcile the results of the
inventories with the related detail records, and promptly investigate and resolve all
differences (repeat); and
b. record all equipment purchases in the related inventory records in a timely manner
(repeat).
DSP Response:
a. DSP Agrees: Calendar Year 2015 Capital and Sensitive inventories according to the DGS
manual are currently being conducted at all units. Once inventories are complete, we will
send discrepancy reports to units to resolve any difference.
b. DSP Agrees: As of November 16, 2015 the Property Unit met with QMD receiving staff
to train on the revised procedures that are being implemented with receiving stations to
improve accountability and record acquisitions in a timely fashion. An estimated time for
the process to be institutionalized will be no later than December 31, 2015.

--- Page 50 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Brian S. Han, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Anthony V. Calcagno
Mindy R. Garrett
Sarah L. Weddermann-Witkowski
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
Marissa L. Eby, CPA
David R. Fahnestock
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA, CFE