Title: Maryland Legal Services Corporation
Date: 07/19/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744b3
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:13:27.688296
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Legal Services Corporation
May 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 22, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Legal Services
Corporation (MLSC) for the period beginning August 1, 2021 and ending March
31, 2025. In accordance with State law, MLSC receives funding primarily
through the Maryland Legal Services Corporation Fund and the Access to
Counsel in Evictions Fund. The funds received are distributed to grantees that
provide civil legal assistance to eligible clients.
Our audit did not disclose any findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MLSC.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Legal Services Corporation (MLSC) is a nonstock, nonprofit
corporation that distributes funds to grantees (nonprofit organizations) that
provide certain legal assistance to income eligible clients who are unable to pay
for private counsel. MLSC is governed by a nine-member Board of Directors
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Maryland Senate.
MLSC receives most of its funding from the Maryland Legal Services
Corporation Fund (MLSC Fund), which is administered by the Administrative
Office of the Courts (AOC). The MLSC Fund appropriation is set in the State’s
budget each year based on projected revenues. Throughout each fiscal year, the
AOC issues equal monthly disbursements from the MLSC Fund to MLSC up to
the appropriation limit.1 The MLSC Fund primarily includes interest on lawyer
trust accounts (referred to as IOLTA), abandoned property funds, and certain
surcharges assessed in civil court cases as provided for in State law.
According to its records, during fiscal year 2024, MLSC’s revenues totaled
approximately $71.6 million, including primarily $47.9 million of MLSC Fund
appropriations and $11.1 million of eviction prevention funding through the
Access to Counsel in Evictions Program. In addition, MLSC’s expenditures
totaled approximately $50.3 million in fiscal year 2024. Revenues have
significantly increased during the audit period (from $21.8 million in fiscal year
2022) primarily due to increases in IOLTA revenue and a new legal services
program, described below.
Access to Counsel in Evictions (ACE) Program and Fund
Effective October 1, 2021, the Real Property Article was amended to add Sections
8-903 and 8-909 of the Annotated Code of Maryland to create the ACE Program
and the ACE Fund, respectively. The purpose of the ACE Program is to organize
and direct services and resources in order to provide all covered individuals2 in
1 If actual revenues received in the Fund exceed the annual appropriation, the excess can either be
disbursed through a budget amendment to the Fund appropriation or it can be carried forward to
subsequent years.
2 As prescribed by the Real Property Article, Section 8-901(c)(1)-(2) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, a “covered individual” means an individual who occupies a residential property under
a claim of legal right other than owner, including a tenant in a building owned, operated, or
managed by a public housing authority; and is a member of a household with an income that is
not greater than 50 percent of the median income, adjusted for household size, in the State as
determined by the United States Department of Health and Human Services or its successor.
3

--- Page 6 ---
the State with access to legal representation in evictions. The ACE Fund, which
is administered by MLSC, includes funds received by the Division of Consumer
Protection in the Office of the Attorney General from sources including any final
settlement or agreement with or judgment against a party relating to an
investigation or enforcement of the Maryland Consumer Protection Act.
Financial Statement Audits
In accordance with the Human Services Article, Section 11-407 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, MLSC engaged an independent accounting firm to perform
audits of its financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, 2022,
2023, and 2024. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that MLSC’s financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
MLSC and the respective changes in its financial position for the years then ended
in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any deficiencies in the design or operation of MLSC’s
internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MLSC. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Legal Services
Corporation (MLSC) for the period beginning August 1, 2021 and ending March
31, 2025. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MLSC’s financial
4

--- Page 7 ---
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included grants, bank accounts, and disbursements.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on MLSC’s procedures and
controls in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other
auditing procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during
our audit period of August 1, 2021 to March 31, 2025, but may include
transactions before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions
and to the extent practicable, observations of MLSC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected. We performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary
to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MLSC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MLSC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
5

--- Page 8 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Thomas J. Kraemer
Senior Auditor