Title: State Retirement Agency
Date: 12/22/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d19cc9d724560674682
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:41:18.359708
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Retirement Agency
December 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Retirement Agency provides administrative support services and
investment functions for the State Retirement and Pension System (System) of
Maryland, a cost-sharing multiple-employer public employee retirement system
consisting of a State pool and a Municipal pool. The State pool includes State
agencies, boards of education, community colleges, and libraries, while the
Municipal pool includes participating local governmental units that elected to join
the System. The System was established by the State Personnel and Pensions
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland and comprises the following
individual systems: Teachers’ Retirement and Pension Systems, Employees’
Retirement and Pension Systems, State Police Retirement System, Judges’
Retirement System, and the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System.
Responsibility for the administration and operation of the System is vested in a
15-member Board of Trustees. According to the State’s records, the Agency’s
operating expenditures totaled approximately $26.2 million during fiscal year
2013.
Financial Statement Audits
For fiscal years 2013 and 2012, the Agency engaged an independent accounting
firm to perform the audit of the System’s financial statements. The firm
expressed an opinion that the System’s financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position of the System as of June 30,
2013 and 2012, and the changes in plan net position for the years then ended, in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Select System Financial Information
According to its records, as of June 30, 2013, the System had approximately
138,000 retirees and beneficiaries, and approximately 193,000 active participants.
The following table provides select System financial information.
Select System Financial Information
Unfunded
Net Total Net
Fiscal Total Benefit Actuarial
Investment Position at
Year Contributions Payments Accrued
Income June 30
Liability
2013 $2.4 billion $3.8 billion $3.0 billion $40.4 billion $20.7 billion
2012 $2.3 billion $0.1 billion $2.8 billion $37.2 billion $20.6 billion
Source: Audited System Financial Statements
Note: The Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liability is the amount by which the Actuarial Accrued Liability
exceeds the Actuarial Value of Assets as determined by the System’s actuary.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated March 2, 2012. We determined that the Agency
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The State Retirement Agency hosts the Maryland Pension Administration System
(MPAS). MPAS is a server-based application that calculates and processes
retirement and pension benefits for retirees and beneficiaries and contributions for
current members. The Agency’s wide area network provides employee access to
various information technology services including business productivity
applications, database management systems, network file and print services, email
services, Internet access, and connectivity to State of Maryland hosted mainframe
systems.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 1
The Agency’s procedures for reviewing certain critical security events were
not sufficient.
Analysis
The Agency’s procedures for reviewing certain critical security events were not
sufficient.
 Although the Agency reviewed certain MPAS database security-related
events, other critical security events (grant, revoke, and deny database access),
audit events (add audit, modify audit, and stop audit), and direct modifications
to critical tables (insert, update, and delete) were not reviewed for propriety.
Accordingly, significant database security events, audit events, and direct
modifications to critical tables could go undetected, thus permitting
unauthorized or inappropriate activities to adversely affect the integrity of the
MPAS production database.
 Although the Agency logged critical MPAS application server security events,
the Agency did not have documentation to support that reviews of these
logged events were performed. Accordingly, unauthorized or inappropriate
activities affecting the integrity of the MPAS application server could go
undetected by management.
The State of Maryland Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT)
Information Security Policy requires that information systems must generate audit
records for all security-relevant events, including all security and system
administrator accesses. The Policy also requires that procedures be developed to
routinely (for example daily or weekly) review audit records for indications of
unusual activities, suspicious activities or suspected violations, and report
findings to appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Agency
a. review critical MPAS database and server security events, audit events,
and direct modifications to critical tables;
b. document these reviews; and
c. retain the documentation for future reference.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 2
The Agency’s intrusion detection prevention system was not properly
protecting the network.
Analysis
The Agency’s intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) was not properly
protecting the network.
 The Agency did not use IDPS on 11 critical servers that processed encrypted
traffic. The Agency headquarters’ firewall and its integrated intrusion
prevention system (IPS) component included the capability to decrypt
inbound encrypted traffic and to subject such traffic to IPS processing.
However, the firewall was not configured to use this feature.
 Although the Agency used a network-based IDPS to monitor unencrypted
traffic, the IDPS was not properly configured and, as a result, traffic to two
critical servers was not subject to IDPS coverage.
Properly configured IDPS protection can aid significantly in the
detection/prevention of, and response to, potential network security breaches and
attacks. Furthermore, without proper IDPS monitoring, critical network security
breaches may occur that could otherwise possibly be detected and prevented.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Agency perform a documented review and
assessment of its network security risks and identify how IDPS coverage
should be best applied to its network and inbound encrypted traffic. Based
on this review and assessment, we recommend that the Agency implement
IDPS coverage as necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Retirement Agency for
the period beginning May 20, 2011 and ending April 1, 2014. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
6

--- Page 9 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Agency’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included benefits paid to retirees and beneficiaries,
contributions required from participating employers, critical information systems,
purchases and disbursements, and payroll. We also determined the status of the
finding included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Agency’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted data from the
Agency’s automated Maryland Pension Administration System for the purpose of
testing pension contributions and benefits. Finally, we performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
The Agency’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal controls that could adversely affect the
Agency’s ability to operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations. These conditions also represent
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Other less significant findings were communicated to the Agency that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
The Agency’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Agency regarding
the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland State Retirement Agency
Response to Legislative Fiscal Compliance Report
Referring to pages 5-6 of your draft “Findings and Recommendations”, the audit finding and
recommendations along with the Agency response are as follows:
Finding 1
The Agency’s procedures for reviewing certain critical security events were not sufficient.
Recommendation 1:
We recommend that the Agency:
a. review critical MPAS database and server security events, audit events, and direct
modifications to critical tables;
b. document these reviews; and
c. retain the documentation for future reference.
Agency Response
SRA agrees with this finding.
a. The Agency has already implemented a process to ensure more timely review of critical
MPAS database and server security events, audit events, and direct modifications to critical
tables. A software product had previously been in production to perform this function;
however, this product created technical conflicts with other installed products and had to be
partially disabled (including the time period when auditors were on-site). A replacement
software product was selected and implemented in November 2014. The replacement
software is functioning properly.
b. The Agency will properly document these reviews.
c. The Agency will retain the documentation for future reference.
Finding 2
The Agency’s intrusion detection prevention system was not properly protecting the
network.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that the Agency perform a documented review and assessment of its
network security risks and identify how IDPS coverage should be best applied to its
network and inbound encrypted traffic. Based on this review and assessment, we
recommend that the Agency implement IDPS coverage as necessary.

--- Page 13 ---
Agency Response
SRA agrees with this finding. The Agency will perform an assessment of its network security
risks by 6/30/2015, focusing on the security and operational impacts of extending IDPS
coverage, and document the results. Then, based on a risk analysis of the results, the Agency
will implement IDPS coverage as necessary by 12/31/2015.

--- Page 14 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Sytems Audit Managers
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Samuel Hur
Lauren E. McLain, CPA
Staff Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditor