Title: Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
Date: 10/02/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d724560674434
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:50:02.455352
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
October 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Creation and Responsibilities 7
Financial Activity 8
Office of Legislative Audits’ Performance Audit of MHBE 9
MHBE Potential Legal Action or Settlement 10
Other Significant Matters 11
Federal Audit on Establishment Grant Funds 11
Advanced Premium Tax Credit 12
Medicaid Eligibility Determinations 13
Findings and Recommendations 15
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1 – MHBE Procurement Policy Was Not Followed for 15
Certain Contracts and MHBE Did Not Always Retain Relevant
Procurement Documentation
Finding 2 – Certain Payments for Contractual Services Were Made 17
Without Sufficient Support or Documented Review
Connector Program Grants
Finding 3 – Grant Expenditures for the Connector Program Were 18
Not Verified for Propriety
Federal Funds
Finding 4 – Federal Fund Reimbursement Requests Were Not Timely 19
Equipment
Finding 5 – MHBE Did Not Accurately Maintain Control and Detail 20
Records, or Properly Account for All of Its Equipment
Board of Trustees of the Exchange Meetings
Finding 6 – The Board of Trustees of the Exchange Violated the 21
Open Meetings Act
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 – Personally Identifiable Information Was Not 23
Appropriately Safeguarded
Finding 8 – Administrative Access to the MHBE Network Was 24
Excessive and Not Properly Restricted
Finding 9 – MHBE Lacked Assurance That Critical Data on 26
Contractor Servers Were Properly Secured
Finding 10 – MHBE Network Was Not Properly Secured 28
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE)
October 2015
 MHBE did not comply with its procurement policy when purchasing
certain goods and services under the emergency and sole source
procurement methods. Our review of five such contract awards totaling
$96.5 million disclosed that certain aspects of the procurements were not
carried out in accordance with MHBE policies. Also, relevant
procurement and contract documentation, such as evidence of negotiating
for best price and terms, could not be provided. Consequently, there is a
lack of assurance that MHBE obtained these services at the best value
(Finding 1).
MHBE should ensure its procurement policies and requirements are followed
for sole source and emergency purchases and should retain relevant
procurement and contract documentation to substantiate compliance with the
policies.
 MHBE did not routinely obtain or evidence its review of certain
documentation to substantiate vendor billings. Our tests disclosed that
MHBE made payments totaling $8.2 million to vendors for hourly
services without first obtaining time and payroll records to verify the
propriety of the labor charges billed (Finding 2).
MHBE should obtain adequate documentation to support all labor charges
billed and review the documentation to ensure charges are proper prior to
payment.
 MHBE had not verified the propriety of fiscal year 2014 grant
expenditures incurred by six entities providing outreach and enrollment
services under the Connector Program. During that year, grant
expenditures totaled $23.4 million (Finding 3).
MHBE should establish procedures to verify that expenditures charged to
grants were appropriate and consistent with the purposes of the grants.
 MHBE did not submit federal fund reimbursement requests in a timely
manner, resulting in a loss of interest income of $199,000. For
expenditures incurred during the period of April 2011 through
5

--- Page 8 ---
September 2014, MHBE submitted six federal fund reimbursement
requests totaling $73.9 million from 1 to 32 months after the claims could
have been submitted (Finding 4).
MHBE should ensure that future requests for federal fund reimbursements are
made in a timely manner.
 MHBE had not implemented procedures to account for and control its
equipment inventory, including computer equipment purchased for the
original Exchange System (Finding 5).
MHBE should establish procedures and properly maintain its equipment
records, to account for and control its equipment inventory.
 The Board of Trustees of the Exchange was found to have violated the
Open Meetings Act by the State Open Meetings Law Compliance Board
(Finding 6).
The Board of Trustees of the Exchange should implement the
recommendations of the Compliance Board to ensure compliance with the
Open Meetings Act.
 Numerous security and control issues were noted regard MHBE’s
information systems. Specifically, personally identifiable information
was not appropriately safeguarded, the MHBE network was not properly
secured and administrative access was excessive and not controlled, and
assurance was lacking that critical data on contractor servers was
secured. (Findings 7 – 10).
MHBE should take the recommended actions to improve security and controls
over its information systems.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Creation and Responsibilities
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act1 (ACA) signed into law in
March 2010 was intended to reform aspects of the private health insurance
market, expand the availability and affordability of health care coverage, and
improve the health care delivery system with the overall purpose to reduce the
number of uninsured people nationally. The ACA mandated that most
individuals2 have coverage through a public program (such as Medicaid or
Medicare) or a private health insurance policy and required a health insurance
exchange be made available in all states to offer qualified individuals and small
business with coverage effective January 1, 2014. The initial open enrollment
period was October 1, 2013 through March 31, 2014.
The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange Act of 2011, Chapter 2, Laws of
Maryland 2011, effective June 1, 2011, established the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE) as a public corporation and independent unit of state
government to implement the ACA in Maryland. Consistent with the ACA, the
primary purpose of MHBE is to reduce the number of Maryland residents who
have no health insurance.
The Act mandated that a nine-member board, called the Board of Trustees of the
Exchange (MHBE Board), be responsible for governing and managing MHBE.
Board members include the Secretary of the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene, the Maryland Insurance Commissioner, the Executive Director of the
Maryland Health Care Commission, and six other persons appointed by the
Governor including three who represent employers and individual consumer
interests. Under its enabling legislation, MHBE is also exempt from a number of
State rules and regulations, including procurement and inventory control.
Consequently, the MHBE Board was responsible for establishing various policies
and procedures governing MHBE operations.
MHBE worked with the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, the
Department of Human Resources, and the Maryland Insurance Administration to
establish Maryland’s state-based health insurance exchange, which was to provide
a marketplace for individuals, families, and small businesses to purchase
1Pub. L. No. 111-148, 124 Stat. 119 (Mar. 23, 2010), as amended by the Health Care and
Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-152,124 Stat. 1029 (Mar. 30, 2010).
2 Beginning January 1, 2014, the ACA requires most U.S. residents to maintain a minimum level
of health insurance or pay a penalty. However, there are certain exemptions, which can be found
at: https://www.healthcare.gov.
7

--- Page 10 ---
affordable health coverage. The original Exchange System, which was to become
available on October 1, 2013, consisted of several computer processing platforms
that perform various functions and which, acting together, was created to enable
Maryland residents, via the internet, to explore qualified health insurance plans,
compare rates, and to determine their eligibility for tax credits, cost sharing
reductions, and public assistance programs such as Medicaid and the Maryland
Children’s Health Insurance Program. Once an individual or family selected a
qualified health plan or available program, they could use the Maryland Health
Connection internet portal of the Exchange System to enroll in that plan or
program.
As a result of issues pertaining to the troubled launch of the original Exchange
System, the MHBE Board accepted the recommendation of the Maryland
Department of Information Technology’s Secretary to leverage another state’s
system to upgrade the Maryland Health Connection for the next open enrollment.
On April 1, 2014, the MHBE Board voted to approve this approach resulting in an
emergency procurement with the vendor that developed the state of Connecticut’s
system to retrofit the Connecticut system to meet Maryland’s requirements. This
replacement Exchange System was implemented in November 2014.
Since April 1, 2014, small business owners have been able to enroll their
employees in health insurance plans certified under the ACA Small Business
Health Options Program. Employers with one to fifty employees may purchase
insurance plans directly from a carrier, a third-party administrator, or a broker,
and, for those who are eligible, receive federal small business tax credits.
MHBE also administers the Connector Program, which provides grants to entities
organized geographically in Maryland to provide outreach and enrollment
services in their respective regions with the purpose of educating and assisting
Maryland residents in obtaining health insurance.
Financial Activity
According to State accounting records, MHBE expenditures from July 1, 2011 to
June 30, 2014 totaled approximately $264.3 million. These expenditures were
funded by State funds totaling approximately $29.0 million, and federal funds
totaling approximately $235.3 million. MHBE’s expenditures during the period
related primarily to information technology (IT) development, outreach and
consumer assistance, and agency operations necessary to implement the state-
based health insurance exchange.
8

--- Page 11 ---
MHBE’s federal funding was primarily sourced through federal ACA grants
($167.9 million) and Medicaid ($67.4 million). The Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene – Office of the Secretary, on behalf of MHBE, received four
types of federal ACA grants: planning and early innovator grants provided
support for research and planning on how the exchange would be operated, and
for design and implementation of the Exchange System, and establishment level 1
and 2 grants provided support for costs associated with IT development,
operations, consumer assistance, outreach/education, and other administrative
costs related to implementing state-based exchange operations. Certain Medicaid
funding was available due to the Medicaid eligibility determination components
within the Exchange System.
Office of Legislative Audits’ Performance Audit of MHBE
This fiscal compliance audit was conducted concurrently with a performance
audit of the troubled launch of the original Exchange System. The fiscal
compliance and performance audit reports are being issued separately.
The performance audit was conducted at the direction of the Maryland General
Assembly’s Joint Audit Committee to address concerns of the Joint Oversight
Committee on the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange. Specifically, we
conducted a performance audit of processes employed and the decisions made by
MHBE in advance of the October 1, 2013 launch of the Maryland Health
Connection. The purpose of the performance audit was to identify and analyze
factors that caused and contributed to the troubled launch of the original
Exchange System and to make recommendations for future information
technology procurement and project development efforts. The audit addressed the
following two objectives:
1. Evaluate the adequacy and appropriateness of the procurement and
contracting policies and practices for significant contract awards; and
2. Evaluate the extent to which industry best practices for managing information
technology development projects were employed, as they relate to
governance, planning and design, resource management, coordination, system
testing and functionality, and oversight.
According to agency records, there were 68 contract awards totaling
approximately $427.8 million (includes renewals, modifications, and task orders)
made between June 11, 2011 and July 15, 2014. During our performance audit,
we tested 13 contract awards totaling $209.0 million which pertained exclusively
to the development of the original Exchange System. The remaining 55 contract
awards totaling $218.8 million were subject to review during this fiscal
9

--- Page 12 ---
compliance audit. In summary, the fiscal compliance audit scope included an
evaluation of other material procurement and contracting activity occurring prior
to and after the launch of the original Exchange System, but excluded any
procurements and contracting activities reviewed as part of the performance audit.
MHBE Potential Legal Action or Settlement
On February 24, 2014, MHBE entered into a separation agreement that terminated
the contract with the primary vendor that developed the original Exchange
System. Approximately $72.6 million in payments had been made to the primary
vendor pertaining to the aforementioned contract; the Maryland Attorney General
has announced that a preliminary settlement agreement has been reached with the
primary vendor who will pay the State and federal governments a total of $45
million to settle all claims against this vendor. This settlement is subject to
federal approval, which has not been received as of September 1, 2015. The State
is considering legal actions against other vendors involved with the development
of the original Exchange System.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Other Significant Matters
Federal Audit on Establishment Grant Funds
The United States Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Office of
the Inspector General (OIG), issued an audit report in March 2015 that concluded
that the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH), which processes
grant allocation and reimbursement requests on behalf of the Maryland Health
Benefit Exchange (MHBE), did not allocate $28.4 million in costs to its
establishment grants and Medicaid funds in accordance with federal requirements
and its cost allocation plan. According to the DHHS OIG audit report, all $28.4
million in costs was misallocated to establishment grants, whereas all of these
costs should have been allocated to the Medicaid program, which has a lesser
federal fund participation rate.
The audit concluded that MHBE’s cost allocation methodology did not
prospectively use updated or better data when available for certain costs totaling
approximately $15.9 million. Specifically, for the three-month period of April
2014 through June 2014, MHBE used outdated estimated data to calculate
allocated costs instead of updated, actual enrollment data that was available as of
March 31, 2014. Regarding the remaining $12.5 million, for the 21-month period
of July 2012 through March 2014, the audit report stated MHBE’s cost allocation
methodology used to estimate enrollment populations was flawed, and MHBE
never amended the cost allocation plan. Specifically, the cost allocation
methodology included an error related to the use of the calendar year for
enrollment estimates that affected qualified health plan and Medicaid enrollees.
The audit recommended that MHBE refund the $28.4 million to the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS); however, MHBE would be allowed,
with CMS approval, to claim a portion of these costs through the Medicaid
program at Federal financial participation rates ranging from 50 to 90 percent. In
addition, the audit recommended MHBE immediately revise its cost allocation
methodology and establish adequate controls to ensure proper allocation of costs.
MHBE disagreed with the finding of $28.4 million in costs being misallocated,
but agreed to establish adequate controls to ensure proper allocation of costs. We
were advised by MHBE management that it believes it followed CMS guidance.
To what extent MHBE will be required to reimburse the federal government or
resubmit the claims at a lower federal participation rate is unknown, as CMS has
not concluded on the matter. If CMS requires these funds to be returned or allows
the claims to be resubmitted through the Medicaid program at a lesser
11

--- Page 14 ---
reimbursement rate, additional State funds would be needed to cover these past
costs.
Advanced Premium Tax Credit
The Advanced Premium Tax Credit (APTC) is a federal tax credit that assists
eligible consumers in affording the premium payments for health insurance
coverage purchased through exchanges. For this credit, consumers have the
choice to apply the credit against (reducing) monthly premium payments to
consumer selected insurance companies up to the maximum APTC amount, or
claim the entire credit at the end of year as a refundable credit when income taxes
are filed with the Internal Revenue Service. According to MHBE records, there
were 46,324 Maryland households that purchased insurance policies and were
eligible to claim $100.1 million in APTCs for calendar year 2014.
The original Exchange System developed and managed by MHBE was
responsible for determining the eligibility and amount of the maximum APTC
that could be claimed for each consumer while shopping for and purchasing
insurance through the Exchange. MHBE identified that the original Exchange
System was providing a higher maximum APTC than was proper for certain
individuals under specific plans for one insurance provider. This was due to a
coding error in the system that was corrected in February 2014. Specifically,
improper effective dates were used to calculate the maximum APTC for affected
individuals that purchased insurance through the original Exchange System
between January 7, 2014 and February 2, 2014.
An analysis was performed by a vendor contracted by MHBE to determine the
fiscal impact of this error. The vendor reported that during the aforementioned
period, there were 3,484 households with policies that received APTCs greater
than they should have totaling approximately $1.7 million. Due to limited
functionality of the original Exchange System, and its inability to provide
requested reports and other technical issues with the troubled original Exchange
System, we did not perform testing to determine if other populations of
consumers received proper APTCs, and could not validate the accuracy or
completeness of the errors reported by MHBE or the contractor.
As of February 2015, we were advised by MHBE management that it will work
with the federal government to determine how the $1.7 million in excess APTCs
will be funded, but consumers will not be held responsible for this error since the
consumer had no control over the computational process nor any way of knowing
that the calculated results were incorrect. We were further advised that the
options for the source of the repayment are the State, the insurance provider, the
12

--- Page 15 ---
federal government (essentially forgiven), or some combination of all three. For
the individuals with improper calculations, MHBE sent a letter notifying them
that they may have received more financial assistance through the APTC in 2014
than they were eligible for, but are not responsible for repaying this excess
amount of the APTC as MHBE has addressed this issue on their behalf.
Medicaid Eligibility Determinations
The original Exchange System that launched on October 1, 2013 was not able to
make proper Medicaid eligibility determinations for numerous cases based on
consumer information provided. This resulted in populations of individuals being
improperly approved for Medicaid benefits; in some instances, the individuals had
enrolled in a qualified health plan and were also enrolled in Medicaid. The fiscal
impact of these improper eligibility determinations in terms of Medicaid benefits
being paid would not impact MHBE’s budget, but rather would increase DHMH’s
Medicaid costs. The total fiscal impact was unknown at the time of our audit.
MHBE and DHMH attempted to identify the underlining issues causing the
improper eligibility determinations and provide remediation activities. Although
MHBE and DHMH were able to identify certain eligibility requirements, such as
citizenship and income verifications, as major contributing factors to the improper
determinations, reliable data on the overall number of improper determinations
made, and the related fiscal impact, was not developed. For example, MHBE and
DHMH management advised us that an indeterminable number of individuals
received an improper eligibility determination for several reasons and may have
been counted more than once when trying to determine the overall effect of the
erroneous determinations.
MHBE and DHMH management also advised us that individuals enrolled during
the initial period were subjected to review efforts (for example performing data
analysis and researching information on individuals in other State or federal
databases) that allowed MHBE and DHMH to remediate some cases. When
eligibility could not otherwise be verified, individuals were required to re-enroll
through the replacement Exchange System which launched on November 18,
2014. This effectively resulted in a proper Medicaid eligibility redetermination at
that time. For individuals that did not re-enroll into the replacement Exchange
System, their assistance coverage terminated effective March 31, 2015. As a
result, individuals with improper eligibility determinations could have been
receiving Medicaid benefits they were not entitled to from January 1, 2014 to
March 31, 2015 with the costs paid by the federal government and the State. The
extent to which the federal government will take action, if any, on ineligible
benefits received by affected individuals is unknown.
13

--- Page 16 ---
14

--- Page 17 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Maryland Health Benefits Exchange (MHBE) procurement policy was
not followed for certain contracts awarded under the emergency and sole
source procurement methods. In addition, MHBE did not always retain
relevant procurement documentation.
Analysis
The MHBE procurement policy was not followed for certain contracts awarded
under the emergency and sole source procurement methods. In addition, MHBE
did not retain certain relevant procurement documentation to substantiate
compliance with policies and requirements. Consequently, there is a lack of
assurance that MHBE obtained certain services at the best value.
We reviewed five contracts totaling $96.5 million procured under the emergency
(three contracts totaling $90.6 million) and sole source (two contracts totaling
$5.9 million) methods between July 2013 and April 2014 that had been approved
by the Board of Trustees of the Exchange (MHBE Board), as required. We found
problems with certain aspects of these procurements as follows:
 For the two sole source contracts, relating to project manager support and IT
software maintenance services, the sole source justifications did not
substantiate that only one vendor was available to provide the services as
required by MHBE policy. In general, the primary justification for these
procurements being sole sourced was because the vendors being contracted
with were subcontractors under the terminated primary vendor who developed
the original Exchange System. However, this sole source justification also
acknowledged that other vendors were available to provide such services. On
June 24, 2014, the MHBE Board retroactively ratified these contracts as
emergency procurements, even though the contracts had already been awarded
under the sole source method in March and April 2014. Although the
circumstances pertaining to the need for the original awards suggest that the
procurements could have been justified as an emergency procurement, this
subsequent action did not provide an effective remedy. In this regard, the re-
designation created a different policy violation since MHBE did not seek
other bids, which is generally required for emergency procurements. The
Board action occurred after the federal Department of Health and Human
Services – Office of the Inspector General requested procurement information
for these contracts on May 28, 2014.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 Another contract totaling $1.6 million and a task order under a fourth contract
totaling $1.2 million included five and four-year terms, respectively, even
though they were made under the emergency procurement method. The
contract related to consumer relationship software solutions and the task order
related to a lease agreement for office space. According to the MHBE
procurement policy for emergency procurements, this method will be used to
meet the immediate emergency and shall not be used to meet long-term
requirements.
 Sufficient documentation relating to the MHBE Board’s approval process was
lacking for all five contracts. Although the MHBE Board officially
documented its approval of procurements through its meeting minutes, there
were no records indicating what procurement materials were provided to the
Board, any concerns raised, or matters discussed. In some instances, the
applicable meeting minutes did not include the vendor’s name or contract
award amount.
 MHBE could not provide certain relevant procurement documentation for all
five contracts tested such as documentation to support the negotiations of
pricing and contract terms, which is required by policy for all procurements.
Also, MHBE was missing certain contract exhibits, such as vendor financial
disclosures. It appears that the cause of these documentation retention
problems is attributable, in part, to the lack of permanent procurement files.
Under the provisions of the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange Act of 2011,
MHBE is not subject to the majority of procurement laws under the State Finance
and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland or related State
Procurement Regulations. Instead, the Act directs the MHBE Board to adopt
written policies and procedures governing all procurements of the Exchange.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHBE comply with its procurement policy when
awarding contracts. Specifically, we recommend that MHBE
a. solicit competitive bids when possible and practical for emergency
procurements, and ensure that emergency procurement contracts are not
issued on a long-term basis;
b. ensure that the proper method is used when making procurements;
c. retain relevant procurement and contract documentation, such as records
of negotiations and contract exhibits in a permanent procurement file;
and
d. maintain complete records of Board minutes pertaining to contract
approvals.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 2
MHBE made certain payments for contractual services without routinely
obtaining or evidencing its review of documentation supporting vendor
billings.
Analysis
MHBE did not routinely obtain certain documentation (such as contractor
employee’s time and payroll records and subcontractor invoices) to substantiate
vendors’ billed hours. Furthermore, for certain other payments, evidence was
lacking to substantiate that MHBE had reviewed the billing documentation
submitted by vendors prior to payment. MHBE contracted with certain vendors
to obtain various services to remediate and replace the original Exchange System,
and provide project management support. Each vendor billed MHBE based on
the number of hours worked by its employees and subcontractors to complete
specific tasks at hourly rates stipulated in each contract.
Our test of 15 payments totaling $18.1 million that MHBE made to five vendors
between November 2013 and August 2014 disclosed that MHBE did not receive
adequate documentation such as time records to support eight payments made to
three vendors totaling $8.2 million. Subsequent to our test, the vendors provided
documentation, which appeared to sufficiently support the amounts billed and
paid. For additional payments totaling $3.2 million, there was no evidence
MHBE had reviewed the vendor billing documentation prior to making the
payments. Expenditures for contractual services (which include hourly services)
totaled approximately $121.5 million in fiscal year 2014.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHBE obtain from contractors adequate
documentation, such as employee time and payroll records, to support all
billed charges, and perform a documented review of the documentation to
ensure that such charges are supported and in accordance with the related
contract terms prior to making payment.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Connector Program Grants
Finding 3
MHBE had not verified the propriety of grant expenditures for the
Connector Program paid with State general funds and federal funds.
Analysis
MHBE had not verified the propriety of grant expenditures for the Connector
Program, which totaled approximately $23.4 million in fiscal year 2014 ($9
million in general funds and $14.4 million in federal funds). Effective July 1,
2013, MHBE administered grants supporting the Connector Program, to provide
outreach and enrollment services to individuals who did not have insurance and to
work with vulnerable and hard-to-reach populations. The Connector Program is
administered by six connector entities, each receiving a separate annual grant
award, serving in six geographic regions throughout the State. Connector entities
submit expenditure reports quarterly to MHBE and are required to return unspent
grant funds within 60 days after the end of each State fiscal year.
Although we were advised that MHBE reviewed the fiscal year 2014 quarterly
expenditure reports, which were a high-level summary of expenditures, as of
January 2015, MHBE did not have a process in place to verify the propriety of
expenditures being reported. Specifically, detailed support for expenditures was
not obtained and reviewed. Consequently, MHBE lacked assurance that
expenditures incurred by the connector entities were appropriate and for purposes
specified by the grant agreements.
Grant agreements for these entities state that funds shall be expended in
accordance with the budget and that any expenditure not in accordance with the
budget or not consistent with the purposes of the grant must be approved by
MHBE or MHBE may require repayment of the funds. In addition, Section 7-402
of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that, for grants that are State funded, granting agencies shall determine
whether the grantee has spent and accounted for the State aid in accordance with
the grant agreement.
We were advised that MHBE was developing procedures for monitoring
connector entity activity that would include conducting site visits; however, at the
time of our review, MHBE had not planned to establish procedures to evaluate the
propriety of grant expenditures by reviewing supporting documentation.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MHBE establish procedures to verify the propriety of
expenditures charged to Connector Program grants, including fiscal year
2014 activity and subsequent grant years.
Federal Funds
Finding 4
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely, resulting in a
loss of interest income of $199,000.
Analysis
Federal fund reimbursement requests were submitted from 1 to 32 months after
the claims could have been submitted, resulting in lost interest income to the State
of approximately $199,000 for expenditures made during the period from April
2011 through September 2014. MHBE submits reimbursements requests to the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Office of the Secretary (DHMH
O/S), and DHMH O/S requests the funds from the federal government on behalf
of MHBE. MHBE submitted only six federal fund reimbursement requests that
totaled approximately $73.9 million during the aforementioned period.
According to MHBE management personnel, submissions were not timely
because the agency lacked both dedicated personnel (that is, a Chief Financial
Officer) and standard procedures to perform the federal fund reimbursement
process timely and properly. Procedures were adopted and implemented in
September 2014.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MHBE ensure that future requests for federal fund
reimbursements are made in a timely manner.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Equipment
Finding 5
MHBE did not maintain adequate equipment inventory records, nor
properly account for all of its equipment.
Analysis
MHBE did not maintain adequate equipment inventory records, nor properly
account for its entire equipment inventory at the time of our review in September
2014.
 An equipment inventory control account was not maintained as required by
MHBE policy. A control account is a continuous summary of transactions
and serves as a total dollar value control over amounts included in the detail
records and should be maintained separately from the detailed inventory
record and by different personnel.
 MHBE could not provide complete detailed equipment records for equipment
owned by MHBE residing at locations other than its headquarters. With
respect to equipment at other locations, MHBE provided two detailed
equipment records that did not include required information, such as
equipment acquisition dates, values, and a sufficient description of the
equipment. In addition, MHBE was not able to provide a total value of
equipment owned for the entire agency. Although the value of equipment at
MHBE is unknown, we reviewed four major contracts that included the
purchase of approximately $48.4 million in equipment by MHBE. This
equipment total includes the purchase of software and hardware items,
primarily for the Exchange System, for which the individual item costs could
not be readily determined.
 Our review of equipment purchased from April 2012 to December 2013
totaling $33 million under one of the four major contracts disclosed that
MHBE did not establish a process to ensure that hardware purchases on the
invoices were actually provided by the vendor prior to payment. In this
regard, MHBE was not aware of what equipment was actually received until
the first physical inventory was performed by federal auditors and MHBE
personnel in June 2014. The purpose of this physical inventory was to
determine whether the equipment included in the contract requirements and
paid for by MHBE was actually received and to establish a detailed equipment
record. We were advised by MHBE management that, while performing the
inventory, discrepancies resulting from improperly tagged equipment were
20

--- Page 23 ---
identified and resolved. In MHBE’s opinion, all items procured under this
contract were properly accounted for; however, the resulting records provided
to us were incomplete because they did not include certain information
required by MHBE policy, such as a sufficient description of the individual
equipment items, the cost of each item, and the acquisition dates.
MHBE formally established an internal Capital Inventory Control Policy in June
2014 to provide consistent guidance for the management and protection of
equipment purchased; however, this Policy was not being adhered to at the time
our review. Although MHBE is not subject to the Maryland Department of
General Services’ Inventory Control Manual, this Manual was used when
preparing the Policy. The Policy appears to provide for adequate controls over
equipment. According to the Policy, the equipment records should reflect
information such as, but not limited to, item description, property tag number,
serial/license number, purchase order, physical location, assignment, acquisition
cost and date, accountable officer, and the most recent physical inventory date.
Also, according to the Policy, an inventory control account summarizing the
history of acquisitions and disposals will be maintained, and the detailed
equipment records will be periodically reconciled to the inventory control account
and the discrepancies investigated.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MHBE comply with its Policy and
a. establish an independent control account and periodically reconcile the
control account to the detail records;
b. establish complete detail records reflecting all of MHBE’s equipment,
including individual item description, acquisition cost and date, and other
unique identifying information; and
c. ensure that all purchased equipment items are received prior to payment
and properly recorded in MHBE’s inventory records.
Board of Trustees of the Exchange Meetings
Finding 6
The MHBE Board was found to have violated the Open Meetings Act by the
State Open Meetings Law Compliance Board.
Analysis
The MHBE Board was found to have violated the Open Meetings Act by the State
Open Meetings Law Compliance Board. State law established the State Open
Meetings Law Compliance Board (Compliance Board) to receive, review and
21

--- Page 24 ---
resolve complaints from any person alleging a violation to the Open Meetings
Act. MHBE is subject to the Open Meetings Act, the purpose of which is to
increase the public’s faith in government, ensure the accountability of government
to the public, and enhance the public’s ability to participate effectively in the
democratic process.
The Compliance Board received six complaints alleging that the MHBE Board
violated the Open Meetings Act in numerous ways during MHBE Board meetings
held between June 2011 and March 2014. During that period, the MHBE Board
held 66 meetings of which 44 included closed sessions. As of November 2014,
the Compliance Board had issued three opinions (public record) in reference to
four of these six complaints. (The Board decided not to consider the other two
complaints.) The Compliance Board reported seven violations based on these
three opinions.
The MHBE Board was found to be in violation with the Open Meetings Act
relating to content, untimely notice and inadequate disclosures of meetings, and
failing to adopt post closed session summaries. For example, the MHBE Board
was found to be in violation of the Open Meetings Act because the content of
closed session discussions exceeded the scope of the topics allowed by State law
for calling the MHBE Board into the closed session. In addition, the MHBE
Board acknowledged that it did not regularly prepare a written closing statement
before voting to convene in closed sessions held in 2012 and 2013 (there were 32
closed sessions during those two years). The MHBE Board agreed with the
Compliance Board’s recommendations to address the violations.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the MHBE Board implement the recommendations of
the Compliance Board to ensure future compliance with the Opening
Meetings Act.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
On February 24, 2014, MHBE entered into a separation agreement that terminated
the contract with the primary contractor who developed the original Exchange
System. Nevertheless, MHBE decided to keep the MHBE-owned equipment
containing enrollment data from the original Exchange System launch at a
datacenter owned by the parent company of the primary contractor, pending the
resolution of litigation with contractors.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Subsequently, MHBE contracted with a vendor to host the replacement Exchange
System and related services that became operational in November 2014. To help
provide these services, this vendor subcontracted with other vendors for
datacenter services, disaster recovery services, system maintenance and operation
of servers and network equipment, and wide area network and
telecommunications management.
The replacement Exchange System consists of a public consumer internet portal
and an internal worker internet portal. The consumer portal allows for consumers
to shop for healthcare plans, determine eligibility for various subsidies/tax credits,
enroll (or renew enrollment) in qualified healthcare plans or Medicaid, and
manage related information (for example, demographics, income, health
information). Brokers and connector entities also have access to the consumer
portal to assist consumers in enrolling in healthcare plans.
The worker portal provides State employees and contractors the ability to support
the consumers’ enrollment in healthcare plans or Medicaid, manage related case
information, and manage the application process. Numerous State employees
from DHMH and the Department of Human Resources (DHR) also assist in
supporting MHBE by performing case worker services pertaining to clients.
Adjustments were made to preexisting State network connections to enable the
MHBE and the applicable DHMH and DHR case workers to connect to the
datacenter hosting the replacement Exchange System.
Finding 7
MHBE inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information
and federal tax information in clear text.
Analysis
MHBE inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII)
and federal tax information (FTI) in clear text.
 As of April 28, 2015, the replacement Exchange System database contained
sensitive PII and FTI for 591,858 unique individuals in clear text. This
included, but was not limited to, full name, date of birth, social security
number, and household income. In addition, we were advised that this
sensitive PII and FTI were not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls, such as the use of data loss prevention software designed to guard
against unauthorized transmission of sensitive data.
23

--- Page 26 ---
 An MHBE server was used as a repository for sensitive enrollment files and
for the transfer of these files to health insurance carriers and supporting
vendors. We identified two unencrypted files on this server that contained
significant amounts of PII, including full names, social security numbers, and
addresses. One of these unencrypted files contained records with 338,784
unique social security numbers while the other file contained records with
10,724 unique social security numbers. In addition, we were advised that this
sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating controls, such
as the use of data loss prevention software.
PII and FTI, which is commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft,
should be protected by appropriate information system security controls. The
State of Maryland Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Information
Security Policy states that agencies should protect confidential data using
encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MHBE
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII and FTI,
b. determine if this sensitive information is properly protected by
encryption or other substantial mitigating controls, and
c. use approved encryption methods to protect all sensitive PII and FTI that
are not otherwise properly protected.
Finding 8
Administrative access to the MHBE network was excessive and access to
critical replacement Exchange System files was not properly restricted.
Analysis
Administrative access to the MHBE network was excessive and access to critical
replacement Exchange System files was not properly restricted. Consequently,
many users could perform critical functions that were not needed to perform their
job duties.
 Administrative access to the MHBE network was excessive. Specifically, we
noted that 55 accounts, assigned to 50 unique users, were improperly
classified as domain administrators. Accounts that are domain administrators
are the most powerful and privileged accounts in the network. Similarly, 47
users of 59 accounts were improperly classified as local administrators on a
critical database server, application servers, and web server. These users had
excessive and unnecessary access and control over these servers. As a result
24

--- Page 27 ---
of these conditions, users of the aforementioned accounts could make
unauthorized modifications to critical data without detection.
 MHBE did not properly restrict modification access to critical replacement
Exchange System application and web server files. Specifically, we noted
that 52 accounts, assigned to 46 unique users, had improper modification
access to 898 web server files and directories, and 528 application server
program files and directories. As a result, of these conditions, erroneous or
unauthorized changes to replacement Exchange System application and web
server files and directories, and to replacement Exchange System data, could
occur.
 MHBE did not properly restrict access to enrollment and report files,
containing unencrypted sensitive PII, on a repository and transfer server. We
determined that 5 health insurance carriers, 2 supporting vendors, and 10
report users could access this server for purposes of transferring and receiving
files. We were advised that each of these 17 users only required access to the
files in their assigned directories; however, the file permissions on this server
allowed each of these 17 users improper access to all of the other users’ files.
As a result of this condition, these 17 users could download files containing
substantial amounts of PII from other users’ directories.
DoIT’s Information Security Policy states that each agency must establish an
authorization process which specifically grants access to information ensuring
that access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of “least
possible privilege” and “need to know.”
Recommendation 8
We recommend that
a. domain administrator and local server administrator privileges only be
assigned to users requiring such privileges,
b. modification access to critical application and web server files and
directories be limited to only those users who require such access, and
c. access to enrollment and report files be restricted to only those users who
require such access.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 9
MHBE lacked assurance as to the security over critical data on servers
hosted by contractors.
Analysis
MHBE lacked assurance as to the security over critical data on servers hosted by
contractors for both the original and replacement Exchange Systems.
Original Exchange System
MHBE lacked assurance that the original Exchange System servers still in the
custody of the parent company of the primary contractor were properly secured.
These servers hosted enrollment data containing sensitive PII and FTI. As of May
2015, MHBE had neither performed independent security reviews of the
aforementioned contractor’s data center for the original Exchange System nor
obtained reports of independent, standards-based security reviews of the parent
company of the primary contractor. Such reviews should include tests to ensure
that sufficient controls existed over the equipment, data, and programs residing on
the original Exchange System servers following the termination of the
contractor’s original contract in February 2014.
Based on our inquiries, it was subsequently determined that the aforementioned
parent company of the primary contractor did have an independent, standards-
based security review of its system (which hosted the original Exchange System)
performed for the period January 1, 2014 to September 30, 2014. We reviewed
the resulting Service Organization Controls (SOC) report dated January 21, 2015
to ensure that the security review assessed and tested the appropriate controls (for
example, security, confidentiality, and privacy) over the system hosting the
original Exchange System servers. Although our review did not disclose any
significant operational or security-related concerns in the SOC report, MHBE
should ensure that security reviews continue to be performed until such time that
the equipment, data, and programs residing on the original Exchange System are
transferred out of the custody of the parent company of the primary contractor.
Replacement Exchange System
The contract between MHBE and the contractor responsible for hosting the
network and servers for the replacement Exchange System did not provide
adequate assurances that the network and servers were properly secured.
26

--- Page 29 ---
 The contract did not require an annual independent security review be
performed of the replacement Exchange System. Instead, the contract
required that the contractor obtain an independent, standards-based security
review only once every two years. Based on our experiences at other
government agencies, and considering the critical nature and importance of
this network and servers, we believe that performing an independent security
review only once every two years is not sufficient to provide MHBE with
timely assurances that security controls over the hosted systems are adequate.
 The contract did not require that the independent, standards-based security
review be structured to provide the proper assurances with respect to controls
which address for example, security, availability, and confidentiality. In this
regard, our review of the MHBE network disclosed certain control
deficiencies such as the lack of a network-based intrusion detection prevention
system (See Finding 10).
 The contract did not contain any provisions that the primary contractor’s two
main subcontractors (which performed material programming and operational
services for the replacement Exchange System) were required to obtain
independent, standards-based security reviews.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organizations. Based on this guidance,
service organizations (like the aforementioned contractors and subcontractors)
may contract for an independent review of controls and the resultant independent
auditor’s report is referred to as a SOC report. There are several types of SOC
reports, with varying scopes and levels of review and auditor testing. One type of
report, referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, includes the results of the auditor’s
review of controls placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness for the
period under review and could include an evaluation of system security,
availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MHBE
a. obtain SOC reports for periods during which MHBE enrollment data are
hosted by the parent company of the primary contractor responsible for
the original Exchange System,
b. review all SOC reports and take appropriate action to ensure that any
critical operational and security-related concerns are properly addressed,
and
c. attempt to amend the existing contract between MHBE and the primary
hosting contractor for the replacement Exchange System to mandate that
27

--- Page 30 ---
comprehensive SOC 2 Type 2 reviews be performed at least annually for
MHBE’s hosted operations and when material services are provided by
subcontractors.
Finding 10
The MHBE network was not properly secured at the hosting datacenter.
Analysis
The MHBE network was not properly secured at the hosting datacenter for the
replacement Exchange System.
 Network-based intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage did not
exist for encrypted traffic entering the MHBE network at the aforementioned
datacenter. Although the devices used to filter traffic and apply IDPS
coverage to such traffic had the capability to decrypt and inspect such traffic
for IDPS purposes, these features were not enabled on these devices.
Additionally, host-based intrusion protection system software was not
installed directly on any of the servers which received encrypted traffic. In
this regard, we identified 16 separate destination servers that received
encrypted traffic. DoIT’s Information Security Policy requires that agencies
protect against malicious code and attacks by implementing protections
including the use of IDPS to monitor system events, detect attacks, and
identify unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential
information.
 Numerous DHR and DHMH employees (who were not case workers) had
unnecessary network-level access to the MHBE worker portal. As a result,
these employees had access, at a network level, to the MHBE network
devices, thereby putting these devices at risk if they were not properly
secured. DoIT’s Information Security Policy requires that agencies must
ensure that only authorized individuals have access to confidential
information and that such access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it
supports the concepts of “least possible privilege” and “need to know.”
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MHBE
a. identify how IDPS coverage should be best applied to encrypted network
traffic to these datacenter servers and subsequently implement such
coverage; and
28

--- Page 31 ---
b. restrict, to the extent possible, network-level access by DHR and DHMH
personnel to the worker portal to only those individuals requiring such
access.
29

--- Page 32 ---
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange (MHBE) for the period beginning June 1, 2011 and ending July 23,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MHBE’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included certain purchases, disbursements, and contract
monitoring activities; awarding and monitoring of State-awarded grants;
reimbursement requests for expenditures supported by federal funds; information
system security; certain human resource and payroll activities (such as setting
salaries for unique positions as allowed by State law); and equipment inventory.
As described on page 9, this audit excluded certain procurement activities that
were reviewed as part of a performance audit we conducted pertaining to the
troubled launch of MHBE’s original Exchange System.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MHBE by the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Office of the Secretary. These
support services related to financial services, human resources, information
technology, grant management, and payroll. These services included, but are not
limited to: recording payment transactions in the State’s accounting system;
providing guidance during fiscal year-end closeout; draw downs of federal funds
including indirect cost allocations; reconciling grant revenue and expenditures;
processing payroll, timekeeping records, and personnel transactions; and general
network management services. These support services are included within the
scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary. In addition, our audit did not
include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial assistance programs
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including MHBE.
31

--- Page 34 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MHBE’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MHBE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MHBE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
32

--- Page 35 ---
findings were communicated to MHBE that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MHBE’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MHBE regarding the
results of our review of its response.
33

--- Page 37 ---
approval for significant contracts with the Board of Trustees, which considered and
approved all of the procurements reviewed by OLA.
Vendor Payments and Connector Entity Expenditures
While vendors did not always submit employee timesheets or payroll records, MHBE
received summaries of vendor work and conducted weekly meetings to review the work
of vendors. MHBE also reviews and approves Connector entity performance and
expenditure reports. The State’s 2014 Single Audit also corroborated that MHBE had
complied with federal grant expenditure requirements.
Federal Fund Reimbursement Requests
While MHBE’s quarterly Medicaid claims for reimbursement have not always been
timely, MHBE must wait for information from a sister agency before submitting its
claims in a short window of time. MHBE has implemented processes to ensure that
claims are as timely as possible.
Equipment Inventory
MHBE did not initially implement adequate procedures to account for its original IT
system equipment purchased by its prime contractor. Since that time, however, MHBE
has taken numerous steps to improve oversight, record-keeping, and accounting of all its
equipment, including use of the Maryland Inventory Tracking System, in compliance
with the Department of General Services’ standards.
Compliance with the Open Meetings Act
MHBE agrees that its Board of Trustees had room to improve its Open Meetings Act
compliance, and the Board of Trustees has followed OLA and Compliance Board
recommendations in this regard, e.g. providing advanced notice and reporting of closed
session matters.
IT System Security
The security of MHBE’s systems is among the agency’s highest priorities, and it has
protected all confidential data in compliance with federal requirements. Following CMS’
Minimally Acceptable Risk Standards Exchange (MARS-E) guidelines, MHBE has
employed a layered approach to security. Multiple significant security controls - like
firewalls, management zones and access monitoring - assure the security of its systems
and confidential data. Because of these layers of redundancy, none of the areas identified
for improvement by OLA put system security or confidential data at substantial or
material risk. MHBE has also received all requisite federal IT security approvals,
including receiving authority to connect after onsite reviews by the Center for Consumer
Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO) and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
As with every complex IT system, maintaining the highest levels of security requires
constant vigilance and enhancement. Committed to that ongoing effort, MHBE is
constantly evaluating and implementing potential improvements. The agency was in the
course of implementing some of OLA’s recommendations at the time of the audit, and it
is in the process of addressing the remainder of the recommendations.

--- Page 39 ---
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange Response
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 1
The Maryland Health Benefits Exchange (MHBE) procurement policy was not followed for
certain contracts awarded under the emergency and sole source procurement methods. In
addition, MHBE did not always retain relevant procurement documentation.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHBE comply with its procurement policy when awarding contracts.
Specifically, we recommend that MHBE -
a. solicit competitive bids when possible and practical for emergency procurements, and
ensure that emergency procurement contracts are not issued on a long-term basis;
b. ensure that the proper method is used when making procurements;
c. retain relevant procurement and contract documentation, such as records of
negotiations and contract exhibits in a permanent procurement file; and
d. maintain complete records of Board minutes pertaining to contract approvals.
MHBE Response to Finding 1
MHBE does not concur with the finding. For noncompetitive procurements, MHBE's
Procurement Policies and Procedures require the agency to provide justification for the selection
method used in the procurement (e.g. emergency or sole source), and to submit those
justifications for approval to the MHBE Board of Trustees on contracts above a certain value
threshold. See Maryland Health Benefit Exchange Procurement Policies and Procedures,
available at http://www.marylandhbe.com/wp-
content/uploads/2012/10/Permanent_Procurement_Policies1.pdf. As explained below, MHBE
followed its Procurement Policies and Procedures, approved by the MHBE Board of Trustees, on
all of its procurements, including those sole source and emergency procurements reviewed by the
Office of Legislative Audits (OLA).
First, OLA recognizes that each of the procurements it evaluates in this finding was approved by
the Board of Trustees, and that approval was "officially documented . . . through its meeting
minutes."
Second, OLA’s finding that in some emergency contracts MHBE violated its procurement
policies by only soliciting a single vendor misinterprets the requirement for vendor solicitation in
emergency procurements. MHBE’s Procurement Policies and Procedures require the Executive
Director to "solicit responses from as many vendors as practicable" under the emergency

--- Page 40 ---
circumstances. This provision expressly recognizes that it may not always be practical to
conduct a competitive selection or even a quasi-competitive selection in emergent circumstances.
Particularly in the context of the failure of the agency’s original website and major IT vendor, as
well as immovable federal implementation deadlines and open enrollment mandates, MHBE’s
emergency procurements complied with this requirement; the agency solicited competitive bids
to the extent possible and practical. MHBE’s Board of Trustees, in turn, endorsed the emergency
justifications and approved the contracts.
MHBE complied with its Procurement Policies and Procedures in the case of the two
procurements that were originally characterized and approved as sole source, and were later re-
characterized by the Board of Trustees as emergency procurements. OLA acknowledges that the
procurements were justifiable as emergencies, but states again that MHBE should have solicited
more than one vendor. Yet, as reflected in MHBE’s and the Board of Trustees' understanding of
the original characterization as sole source, the emergency circumstances faced by the agency
meant that solicitation of one vendor was the only practicable approach to completing the
procurements. As explained above, MHBE’s procurement policies require solicitation of
multiple vendors only when practicable. Thus, these procurements did not violate MHBE policy.
OLA also finds that two emergency contracts violate MHBE policy because their terms extend
beyond one year. Again, OLA misinterprets MHBE’s procurement policy, which provides that
emergency procurements shall not be used to meet “long-term” requirements. “Long-term,”
however, does not necessarily include any contract extending beyond one year, but must instead
be considered and applied in the context of surrounding circumstances.
With respect to the Task Order cited by OLA related to leasing office space, the underlying
contract term between MHBE and its vendor is one year with several one-year renewal options.
The Task Order related to the real property lease does not alter this contract term. Rather, the
vendor entered into a lease which extends beyond the term of its underlying contract with
MHBE, but the contract provides expressly for options to terminate the lease or assign the lease
to MHBE, at MHBE's option, if the underlying contract is not renewed. MHBE was able to
obtain a significant discount on vendor costs by virtue of the vendor’s multi-year lease as
compared to what its costs would have been had the vendor been limited to a one-year lease.
In the case of the $1.6 million contract for Customer Relationship Management (CRM) software,
the design of MHBE’s call center, developed with the assistance of a separate vendor and put in
place for a term of five years, required this type of CRM software. Multiple other vendors,
systems, and operations staff utilize and depend upon the CRM. Forced to make this software
investment on an emergent basis because of impending federal deadlines, MHBE solicited
proposals from all three major providers of CRM software. Because of the dependencies of

--- Page 41 ---
other vendors, systems, and operations staff on this major software acquisition for the call center,
a shorter timeframe for this software purchase agreement was not practicable or prudent, and the
procurement was approved by the Board of Trustees.
Recommendation 1a.
MHBE concurs and is complying with the recommendation that, as required, it solicits
competitive bids when possible and practical, and it ensures proper procurement methods are
used when making procurements. MHBE does not concur with the recommendation only insofar
as MHBE disagrees that "long-term basis" necessarily includes, in every instance, contract terms
in excess of one year.
Recommendation 1b.
MHBE concurs with the recommendation.
In April 2015, MHBE’s Board approved a procurement procedure which details the steps and
documentation required for sole source, emergency and competitive bids. To build upon this
effort and to ensure continued development, implementation and monitoring of effective policies
and procedures, MHBE has hired a procurement consultant. The consultant is providing expert
guidance and assistance to MHBE in making final its policies and procedures, ensuring that all
staff is adequately trained, and fully implementing an effective monitoring process. MHBE’s
Board of Trustees is also actively engaged in overseeing this effort to ensure that MHBE meets
all required standards.
Recommendation 1c.
MHBE concurs with recommendation.
Effective April 2015, MHBE implemented the use of a new record retention system based on
solicitation numbers. Additionally, the procurement consultant is reviewing this system to refine
it further. Under this system, all critical documents relating to a procurement will be retained in
a procurement-specific file.
Recommendation 1d.
MHBE concurs with the recommendation.
MHBE now retains accurate documentation of materials received for review and approval by
MHBE’s Board of Trustees. In addition, MHBE Board meeting minutes now document
questions and concerns raised by the Board which relate to the contract under consideration.
Auditor’s Comment: Our audit findings identified instances in which MHBE did not
comply with the Board’s procurement policies. The fact that the MHBE Board ultimately
approved these contracts does not mitigate the need to follow policies designed to help

--- Page 42 ---
ensure the integrity of the procurement process. MHBE’s intended corrective actions will
address our recommendations.
Finding 2
MHBE made certain payments for contractual services without routinely obtaining or
evidencing its review of documentation supporting vendor billings.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHBE obtain from contractors adequate documentation, such as
employee time and payroll records, to support all billed charges, and perform a
documented review of the documentation to ensure that such charges are supported and in
accordance with the related contract terms prior to making payment.
MHBE Response to Finding 2
MHBE concurs in part with the finding, to the extent that vendors did not always submit
employee timesheets and payroll records. MHBE does not concur, however, that it did not
require, obtain, and review other documentation or backup for invoices. On the contrary, to
support their invoices, vendors provided summaries of work conducted during the service period,
and MHBE staff reviewed the work of these vendors during weekly meetings. MHBE reviewed
these summaries, and in conjunction with the weekly work review meetings, considered whether
billed charges were supported.
MHBE concurs with the recommendation. To that end, in May 2015, MHBE hired a Director of
the Project Management Office to supervise PMO contractors. The Director of the PMO
developed a process, which went into effect in June, 2015, for contractors to track their work
product and time expended. Additionally, MHBE has contracted with a procurement consultant
to establish additional policies and procedures for the submission and review of appropriate
documents in support of invoices. Such procedures will include testing and monitoring of
documentation to ensure charges are in accordance with related contracts.
Auditor’s Comment: While we were aware that MHBE reviewed documentation to help
ensure services were rendered, this review process does not address our concerns of
ensuring that billed hours were supported and in accordance with contract terms prior to
making payment. MHBE’s intended corrective actions will address our recommendations.
Connector Program Grants
Finding 3
MHBE had not verified the propriety of grant expenditures for the Connector Program
paid with State general funds and federal funds.

--- Page 43 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MHBE establish procedures to verify the propriety of expenditures
charged to Connector Program grants, including fiscal year 2014 activity and subsequent
grant years.
MHBE Response to Finding 3.
MHBE does not concur with the finding.
MHBE reviews and approves Connector entity performance and invoices prior to payment. On a
quarterly basis, MHBE reviews expenditure reports to ensure they align with the Connector
entity budgets as set forth in the grant agreement. Corroborating this practice, a review of federal
grant expenditures during the A-133 FY 2014 State Single audit found MHBE complied with
requirements regarding invoices and expenditures of federal grant funds.
MHBE concurs with the recommendation that MHBE establish documented procedures to verify
the propriety of expenditures charged to Connector Program grants. Since the OLA’s review,
MHBE has developed and implemented a more detailed financial monitoring policy and
procedure to ensure grantees spend and account for State funds in accordance with grant
agreements.
Auditor’s Comment: While we were aware of the reviews described in MHBE’s response,
we concluded that the reviews did not specifically ensure compliance of the aforementioned
State Law to determine whether the grantee spent and accounted for State aid in
accordance with the grant agreements. MHBE’s intended corrective actions will address
our recommendations.
Federal Funds
Finding 4
Federal fund reimbursement requests were not made timely, resulting in a loss of interest
income of $199,000.
Recommendation 4 -
We recommend that MHBE ensure that future requests for federal fund reimbursements
are made in a timely manner.
MHBE Response to Finding 4
MHBE concurs with the finding and with the recommendation.

--- Page 44 ---
MHBE concurs that the agency did not initially have a dedicated Chief Financial Officer and has
not submitted timely Medicaid claims. With respect to the causes for this untimeliness, however,
MHBE notes the following: In order to submit Medicaid claims on a timely quarterly basis,
claims must be submitted in a small window of time, within 30 days following the end of each
quarter. The information necessary to submit Medicaid claims, however, is not available until
the 15th day following the end of each quarter. Thus, any delay in this information may result in
claims being a quarter in arrears. MHBE does not create this information and must wait until it
is made available by a sister agency.
These constraints notwithstanding, MHBE has implemented a process to ensure that claims are
not more than a quarter in arrears and that appropriate claim percentages are utilized. In
addition, MHBE has had a dedicated Chief Financial Officer on staff since January 2014 to
oversee the claims submission for both accuracy and timeliness.
Finally, MHBE notes that per CFR Title 45 Subtitle a subchapter A Part 95 Subpart a Section
95.7, CMS allows for a two-year claim window and will fully reimburse State expenditures
claimed within two years.
Equipment
Finding 5
MHBE did not maintain adequate equipment inventory records, nor properly account for
all of its equipment.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MHBE comply with its Policy and
a. establish an independent control account and periodically reconcile the control
account to the detail records;
b. establish complete detail records reflecting all of MHBE’s equipment, including
individual item description, acquisition cost and date, and other unique identifying
information; and
c. ensure that all purchased equipment items are received prior to payment and
properly recorded in MHBE’s inventory records.
MHBE Response to Finding 5
MHBE partially concurs with the finding to the extent that MHBE did not initially implement
procedures to account for and control its equipment inventory. MHBE staff, however, initiated
steps to account for and control inventory purchased on its behalf by its primary IT vendor in late
2013 and early 2014. MHBE provided its primary IT vendor inventory tags to be placed on
MHBE equipment. A review by the Secretary of DoIT found that the primary IT vendor placed
“inventory tags on all equipment used or slated for use on the project regardless of whether or

--- Page 45 ---
not it was equipment purchased on behalf of mhbe [MHBE].” Investigation found that the
primary IT vendor had tagged equipment not owned by the State as belonging to MHBE. At the
completion of the inventory exercise, the Secretary and the primary IT vendor agreed that “All
schedule A and J 1 assets [, or those assets required to be purchased under the contract,] have
been identified” with a few acceptable substitutions which added more value to the State’s
inventory.
MHBE concurs with the recommendations.
Recommendation 5a.
MHBE concurs with the recommendation to establish an independent control account and
periodically reconcile the control account to the detail records. MHBE has transferred
procurement activities to its Finance Department and taken other steps to promote procurement
oversight and align processes to ensure accurate accounting of invoices for equipment purchased
on behalf of MHBE. The Inventory Manager, who reports to the Director of Administrative
Services, is responsible for documenting and tagging, or ensuring that “Accountable Parties”
designated by the vendors document and tag all equipment purchased. Using the Maryland
Inventory Tracking System (MITS), the Inventory Manager will be able to inventory all new,
lost or discarded equipment and periodically reconcile logs to control accounts once established.
MHBE targets reconciliation of its baseline control account to be completed by June 30, 2016.
Recommendation 5b.
MHBE concurs with the recommendation to establish complete detail records reflecting all of
MHBE’s equipment, including individual items’ cost and unique identifying information. After
adoption of the Capital Inventory Program policy, MHBE purchased the MITS in September
2014, which complies with Maryland Department of General Services and Inventory Standards
and Support Services Division’s standards for an electronic inventory system. The system
contains fields to capture detailed record information for each asset, including but not limited to
inventory number, description, manufacturer, vendor, sensitive item indicator and acquisition
cost. In September 2014, MHBE initiated the process of converting MHBE inventory into the
system and currently uses the system for new goods purchased.
Recommendation 5c.
MHBE concurs with the recommendation that all purchased items are to be received prior to
payment and properly recorded in MHBE’s inventory records when practicable. For those
instances in which purchased items are included in a contract or seed money is provided in
advance for capital items to be purchased, MHBE will follow its Capital Inventory Control
policy and protocol to ensure that accurate and appropriate documentation and inventory control
practices are followed.

--- Page 46 ---
Auditor’s Comment: The steps described as being initiated late 2013 and early 2014 are not
a part of an internal control structure to properly establish and maintain accountability
over equipment. Nevertheless, MHBE’s intended corrective actions will address our
recommendations.
Board of Trustees of the Exchange Meetings
Finding 6
The MHBE Board was found to have violated the Open Meetings Act by the State Open
Meetings Law Compliance Board.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the MHBE Board implement the recommendations of the Compliance
Board to ensure future compliance with the Open Meetings Act.
MHBE Response to Finding 6
MHBE concurs with the finding and recommendation. In response to the Compliance Board’s
decisions, MHBE has taken the following steps: 1) MHBE staff reviews Board meeting agendas
well in advance to determine whether items will need to be discussed in Closed Session; 2)
MHBE staff provides notice of closed sessions and agendas on MHBE's website in advance of
the meeting; 3) MHBE’s Board Chair reads the closing statement at each meeting; and 4) a
closed session report is made in open session at the conclusion of the closed session. MHBE
implemented these improvement practices in April 2014. In addition, MHBE’s Board member
orientation provides guidance and information about the Open Meetings Act.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7
MHBE inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information and federal tax
information in clear text.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MHBE
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII and FTI,
b. determine if this sensitive information is properly protected by encryption or other
substantial mitigating controls, and
c. use approved encryption methods to protect all sensitive PII and FTI that are not
otherwise properly protected.

--- Page 47 ---
Response to Finding 7:
The Agency concurs with the finding only to the extent that encryption was not among the
security controls implemented initially in the system, but it does not concur that sensitive
personally identifiable information (PII) and federal tax information (FTI) was therefore
inappropriately stored. Rather, MHBE protected all confidential data with substantial and
effective mitigating controls, in full compliance with Maryland’s Department of Information
Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy, cited by OLA.
DoIT’s policy, recognizing that time and cost constraints necessarily affect which types of
mitigating controls may be the most feasible and effective for an agency, provides that agencies
should protect confidential data with encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls. Accordingly, MHBE, unable initially to implement an encryption solution because of
time constraints, obtained federal approval and selected instead to put in place numerous other
significant mitigating security controls, like firewalls, management zones and access monitoring.
These controls effectively protected and prevented any PII or FTI from disclosure to
unauthorized persons.
Response to Recommendation a:
The Agency concurs with the recommendation and has completed the inventory of its systems
effective 3/30/2015.
Response to Recommendation b:
The Agency concurs with this recommendation. By 7/1/2015, MHBE had confirmed that all PII
and FTI is effectively and properly protected by encryption or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Response to Recommendation c:
The Agency concurs with this recommendation. After initial development and deployment of
the system for the 2014/2015 Open Enrollment period, MHBE implemented its plan in June,
2015 to augment its existing security controls through encryption of the main data base in the
application. As of 9/21/2015, MHBE has also completed implementation of additional
mitigating controls for other parts of the system.
Auditor’s Comment: The controls MHBE has identified as adequately protecting sensitive
PII and FTI (firewalls, management zones and access monitoring) provide a certain level of
protection for this data, which is also necessary for protecting its network, computer
systems and other types of data. However, extra precautions are needed to properly
safeguard sensitive PII and FTI, which generally include encryption, data truncation, or
data loss prevention controls. These protections were not implemented at MHBE.
Nevertheless, MHBE’s intended corrective actions will address our recommendations.

--- Page 48 ---
Finding 8
Administrative access to the MHBE network was excessive and access to critical
replacement Exchange System files was not properly restricted.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that
a. domain administrator and local server administrator privileges only be assigned to
users requiring such privileges,
b. modification access to critical application and web server files and directories be
limited to only those users who require such access, and
c. access to enrollment and report files be restricted to only those users who require
such access.
Response to Finding 8:
MHBE concurs with the finding to the extent that IT Administrators in some instances were
given more access than strictly necessary to complete their specific job duties. This access never
extended to any unauthorized individuals, however; all IT administrators were MHBE authorized
contractors or employees whose jobs involved system development or maintenance.
Response to Recommendation 8a:
The Agency concurs and has completed implementation of this recommendation effective
9/1/2015.
Response to Recommendation 8b:
The Agency concurs with this recommendation. MHBE has completed a role-based access
control for agency administrators, which is a prerequisite to completing implementation of this
recommendation, and will achieve full implementation after the upcoming open enrollment in
order to mitigate impact to critical systems.
Response to Recommendation 8c:
The Agency concurs and has completed implementation of this recommendation effective
9/1/2015.
Finding 9
MHBE lacked assurance as to the security over critical data on servers hosted by
contractors.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MHBE
a. obtain SOC reports for periods during which MHBE enrollment data are hosted by
the parent company of the primary contractor responsible for the original Exchange
System,

--- Page 49 ---
b. review all SOC reports and take appropriate action to ensure that any critical
operational and security-related concerns are properly addressed, and
c. attempt to amend the existing contract between MHBE and the primary hosting
contractor for the replacement Exchange System to mandate that comprehensive SOC 2
Type 2 reviews be performed at least annually for MHBE’s hosted operations and when
material services are provided by subcontractors.
Response to Finding 9:
MHBE concurs with this finding security requirements for State-Based Exchanges.
Response to Recommendation 9a:
MHBE concurs with the recommendation. MHBE has entered into a contract with the parent
company of the aforementioned contractor that will ensure that MHBE will receive the requested
information.
Response to Recommendation 9b:
MHBE concurs with the recommendation. As noted by OLA, the January, 2015 SOC report
already provided by the parent company does not find “any significant operational or security-
related concerns.” MHBE will continue to receive and review these reports.
Response to Recommendation 9c:
MHBE concurs with the recommendation. MHBE is reviewing the feasibility of amending the
contract with the current hosting vendor in order to receive the SOC 2 Type 2 reports of the
hosting contractor and relevant subcontractors annually instead of bi-annually. MHBE expects
to determine by 11/1/15 whether the hosting vendor will agree to enter into the proposed contract
modification. In the meantime, MHBE will continue to monitor the security controls and assure
their continued effectiveness as required by CMS.
Finding 10
The MHBE network was not properly secured at the hosting datacenter.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MHBE
a. identify how IDPS coverage should be best applied to encrypted network traffic to
these datacenter servers and subsequently implement such coverage; and
b. restrict, to the extent possible, network-level access by DHR and DHMH personnel to
the worker portal to only those individuals requiring such access.
Response to Finding 10:
MHBE concurs with the finding only to the extent that, as with most systems, MHBE’s hosting
data center network could be enhanced, and OLA recommended two areas of improvement.

--- Page 50 ---
MHBE does not, however, concur that the MHBE network therefore was not properly secured.
On the contrary, MHBE uses a layered approach to network security, as required by CMS, and
significant layers of compensating controls were present and effectively securing the network.
Response to Recommendation 10a:
MHBE concurs with the recommendation and is evaluating the feasibility of options to
implement it. If feasible, MHBE will develop an implementation plan by 11/1/2015 with a
targeted completion date of 3/1/2016.
Response to Recommendation 10b:
MHBE concurs with the recommendation. During the third quarter of 2015, MHBE IT Security
initiated a validation process to assess DHR and DHMH levels of access to the system in
anticipation of completing the build phase of an enterprise network which will provide MHBE
more control over the network. After completion of this enterprise network, MHBE will seek to
restrict DHR and DHMH network access to the worker portal to only those locations that require
such access. The Agency enterprise network is targeted for completion by 10/2/2015.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MHBE uses a layered approach to network security, an
important component of such an approach is the implementation of an intrusion detection
prevention system, which MHBE lacked. The Department of Information Technology’s
Information Security Policy requires all State agencies to use an intrusion detection
prevention system to inspect network traffic and protect agency networks. Nevertheless,
MHBE’s intended corrective actions will address our recommendations.

--- Page 51 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Steven P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Samuel Hur
Calvin Matthews, Jr.
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA, CFE
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Staff Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditor