Title: Judiciary - Judicial Information Systems
Date: 11/18/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d724560674493
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:09:21.651896
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Judiciary
Judicial Information Systems
August 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Network and Data Center Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – The Judicial Information Systems (JIS) maintained a circuit 5
court database which contained 150,454 unique social security
numbers with names and (in some cases) dates of birth without
adequate safeguards.
* Finding 2 – Network devices, used to help protect the JIS network, were 6
not configured to adequately secure connections from untrusted
sources and were not properly monitored, and password controls
did not properly protect the perimeter firewalls.
Finding 3 – Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage 7
for the network was not effectively deployed. In addition, updates
to the IDPS device and backups of the device configuration were not
properly performed, and administrative access to the device was not
properly restricted.
Finding 4 – JIS had not installed malware protection software on 151 9
servers and also lacked assurance that malware protection software
was installed on all of its workstations.
Finding 5 – Numerous contractors had unnecessary network-level 9
access to critical JIS computers and 42 publicly accessible servers
were located in the internal JIS network thereby exposing other
computers in the internal network to increased risk of attack.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Judiciary operates the Judicial Information Systems (JIS) on behalf of the
State court systems. JIS develops and maintains State court system applications,
operates a statewide computer network, and is responsible for data center
contingency planning. According to the State’s records, the JIS fiscal year 2015
expenditures totaled approximately $47.1 million.
JIS operates a mainframe computer for court applications (such as, district court
case management) and a server that supports the Traffic Processing Center (traffic
citations). In addition, there are six servers that support the Uniform Court
System (UCS), which provides court case management to 22 Circuit Courts. The
UCS supports case initiation, scheduling, disposition, expungement, and other
record keeping. JIS primarily serves three groups of users: public customers,
Judicial Data Center personnel, and remote Court users. JIS also supplies traffic
case dispositions and court case data processed by JIS to computer systems
maintained by the Motor Vehicle Administration and the Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services, respectively.
JIS also has a Wide Area Network (WAN) which operates on an infrastructure
owned and supported by a communications service provider. This WAN connects
users to the various component units of the Judiciary including the Administrative
Office of the Courts, the District Courts, and the Circuit Courts. The WAN is also
used to connect the remote court locations to the UCS. JIS staff connects to the
WAN to maintain the regional UCS servers and update the application software.
Additionally, the WAN is used for remote connectivity from court offices to JIS
mainframe applications. Furthermore, numerous local area networks, across all
remote court locations, can access the UCS and can access external agencies
through the Internet and networkMaryland.
Our audit focused exclusively on the computer and network operations of the JIS
data center. An audit of the JIS fiscal operations was conducted as part of the
audit of the Judiciary, and a separate report was issued on July 16, 2013.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 28, 2012. We determined that JIS
satisfactorily addressed two of the findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Network and Data Center Information Systems Security and
Control
Finding 1
The Judicial Information Systems (JIS) maintained a circuit court database
which contained 150,454 unique social security numbers with names and (in
some cases) dates of birth without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
JIS inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) in
clear text. Specifically, as of February 5, 2016, we identified a critical circuit
court database containing 150,454 unique social security numbers along with
names and (in some cases) dates of birth that were not encrypted. In addition, we
determined that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls.
This PII, which is commonly associated with identity theft, should be protected by
appropriate information system security controls. According to industry best
practices, as described by the State of Maryland Information Security Policy,
agencies should protect confidential data using encryption technologies and/or
other substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that JIS
a. perform an inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 2
Network devices, used to help protect the JIS network, were not configured
to adequately secure connections from untrusted sources and were not
properly monitored, and password controls did not properly protect the
perimeter firewalls.
Analysis
The network devices used to help secure the JIS network were not properly
configured, and monitored, and password controls did not properly protect the
perimeter firewalls.
 The network devices installed to protect the JIS network allowed unnecessary
and insecure connections to the internal network. Specifically, the perimeter
firewalls’ rules were not configured to adequately secure connections into the
network from the Internet, networkMaryland, and other untrusted sources, and
a critical router allowed unnecessary access to the JIS network from several
untrusted sources. In addition, many outdated rules existed on these firewalls.
Therefore, critical network devices were susceptible to attack which could
result in a loss of data integrity or the interruption of essential network
services. The Administrative Office of the Courts Judicial Information
Systems’ Information Security Policy states that information systems should
be configured to monitor and control communications at the external
boundaries of the information systems and at key internal boundaries within
the systems. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 The perimeter firewalls were not configured to send email alerts to firewall
administrators related to firewall problems and possible attacks on the
firewalls. In addition, firewall logs, which log a variety of network events and
sensitive actions as they occur, were not reviewed.
 Password controls did not ensure that the perimeter firewalls were properly
protected. Specifically, password controls over access to these firewalls did
not meet any of the State of Maryland Information Security Policy password
requirement best practices. For example, the minimum password length was
three characters and password complexity was not enforced.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that JIS
a. configure its firewalls and routers to achieve a “least privilege” security
strategy giving individuals, entities, and devices only those network access
privileges needed to perform assigned tasks (repeat);
6

--- Page 9 ---
b. configure the firewalls to send automatic email alerts to administrators
concerning high severity firewall operational events;
c. regularly review the firewalls’ logs using automated tools, and investigate
unusual and suspicious items, with such reviews and investigations being
documented and retained for future reference; and
d. enable the firewalls’ available password control settings to meet the
requirements of the State’s Information Security Policy.
Finding 3
Intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage for the network was
not effectively deployed. In addition, updates to the IDPS device and
backups of the device configuration were not adequately performed or
controlled, and administrative access to the device was not properly
restricted.
Analysis
IDPS coverage for the JIS network was configured to detect, but not block
malicious traffic, and was not used to analyze encrypted traffic entering the
network. Additionally, updates and backups to the IDPS device were not
adequately performed or controlled and administrative access to the device was
not properly restricted. Consequently, the network was highly susceptible to
malicious activity.
 The IDPS device was not configured to block malicious traffic intrusion
attempts identified by the device but rather was configured only to detect and
report suspected malicious traffic. In addition, at the time of our review in
January 2016, we found JIS had discontinued IDPS log reviews effective
February 2015 and only reviewed two IDPS daily summary reports.
However, these two reports did not contain detailed information and could not
be used to investigate potential network intrusions identified by the IDPS
device.
 IDPS coverage did not exist for encrypted traffic entering the JIS network.
We were advised by JIS personnel that host-based intrusion protection
systems (HIPS) were not in use on JIS servers that processed encrypted
traffic, and encrypted traffic was not decrypted for inspection by the JIS
network-based IDPS. The absence of IDPS coverage for such encrypted
traffic creates network security risk as such traffic could contain malicious
data which would not be detected or blocked. Complete IDPS coverage
includes the use of a properly-configured, network-based IDPS that decrypts
and analyzes encrypted traffic, and/or the effective use of a HIPS on critical
7

--- Page 10 ---
servers, to aid significantly in the detection and prevention of, and response
to, potential network security breaches and attacks.
 Updates to the IDPS device and backups of the device configuration were not
being performed, and administrative access to the device was not properly
restricted. Specifically, as of January 2016, IDPS signatures (used to detect
malicious traffic) had not been updated on the IDPS device for over 12
months because the device license expired on January 1, 2015. In addition, as
of January 2016, the device configuration files had not been backed up since
January 15, 2013. Finally, administrative access to the device was not
restricted to originate from only authorized sources.
Strong network security uses a layered approach, relying on various resources
structured according to assessed network security risks. A properly configured
IDPS can aid significantly in the detection/prevention of and response to potential
network security breaches and attacks. Also, the Administrative Office of the
Courts Judicial Information Systems’ Information Security Policy states that the
Judiciary will protect against malicious code and attacks by implementing
protections including the use of IDPS to monitor system events, detect attacks,
and identify unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential
information.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that JIS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its security risks from
network traffic to its critical servers and identify how IDPS coverage (for
both encrypted and unencrypted traffic) should be best applied to such
traffic;
b. based on the review and assessment of security risks, implement IDPS
coverage to address all network traffic flowing to its critical servers;
c. maintain an active license for its IDPS device and update the signatures
on the device as soon as they are released by the vendor;
d. regularly backup the configuration files for the IDPS device and store the
backup files offsite in a secure environmentally controlled location; and
e. limit remote administrative access to the IDPS device to authorized
sources that require such access.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 4
JIS had not installed malware protection software on 151 servers and also
lacked assurance that malware protection software was installed on all of its
workstations.
Analysis
Malware protection software was not installed on most servers, and JIS also
lacked assurance that malware protection software was installed on all of its
workstations.
 Malware protection software was not installed on most JIS servers. JIS
personnel advised us that the malware protection software was only installed
on certain publicly facing servers (for example web servers). We determined
that, as of November 2, 2015, 151 of 179 JIS servers which should have been
protected by malware protection software did not have such software
installed.
 JIS lacked assurance that malware protection software was installed and
operational on all of its workstations. We identified 203 of the 5,434 total JIS
workstations that either did not have malware protection software installed or
the installed software was not operational.
The Administrative Office of the Courts Judicial Information Systems’
Information Security Policy states that JIS must protect against malicious code,
virus or malware, by implementing procedures and solutions that, to the extent
possible, include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that JIS ensure that all of its computers (both servers and
workstations) which should be protected by malware protection software are
protected by such software.
Finding 5
Numerous contractors had unnecessary network-level access to critical JIS
computers, and 42 publicly accessible servers were located in the internal JIS
network thereby exposing other computers in the internal network to
increased risk of attack.
Analysis
Numerous contractors had unnecessary network-level access to critical JIS
computers, and 42 publicly accessible servers were located in the internal JIS
9

--- Page 12 ---
network thereby exposing other computers in the internal network to increased
risk of attack.
 Contractors had unnecessary network-level access to the JIS mainframe
computer and numerous JIS workstations. JIS was developing two significant
systems with extensive use of untrusted contractors. These contractors
worked on site at JIS headquarters. We determined that 30 of these on-site
contractors had unnecessary network-level access to the JIS mainframe and
numerous headquarters workstations.
 Forty-two publicly accessible servers were located in the JIS internal network
thereby potentially exposing the other JIS computers in the internal network to
increased risk of attack. These 42 servers, if compromised, could expose the
internal network to attack from external sources. These 42 servers were
deliberately placed in the internal network to address network response time
issues between these servers and backend database servers. However, JIS did
not institute compensating security controls, such as additional firewall
protections, to protect these 42 servers from attack.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that JIS
a. restrict each contractor’s network-level access to only those servers and
workstations that each contractor needs to access, and
b. implement compensating security controls to protect the aforementioned
42 servers from attack.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Judicial Information Systems (JIS) operated by the Judiciary.
Fieldwork associated with our audit of JIS was conducted during the period from
September 2015 to March 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine JIS’ internal
control over its data center and network and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer systems that support
the State courts and related agencies of the Judiciary.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included procedures and controls over the mainframe operating system, security
software, and databases. Our audit also included an assessment of the security
controls for the network infrastructure and critical network devices (for example
firewalls), as well as an assessment of the security controls related to JIS’ use of
malware protection software to protect JIS’ computers. We also determined the
status of the findings included in our preceding audit report on JIS.
JIS’ fiscal operations are audited separately as part of our audit of the Judiciary.
The latest report on the Judiciary was issued on July 16, 2013.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
JIS’ operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
JIS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal
control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance
that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records, effectiveness and
efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect JIS’ ability to operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply
with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes findings
regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to JIS that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Judiciary, on behalf of JIS, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 20 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Michael K Bliss, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Robert H. Dean
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditors