Title: Department of Budget and Management - Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
Date: 05/19/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067453e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:31:58.348821
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits
May 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Statewide Personnel System 4
Health Care Benefits Administration 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Administrative Fees
 Finding 1 –Controls Over Fee Payments Made to Health Care and 7
Prescription Drug Program Administrators Were Not Adequate
Program Audits
Finding 2 – Prescription Drug Program Audit Results Were Not 8
Adequately Pursued and Resolved
Reviews of Participant Eligibility for Health Care Claim Payments 9
Finding 3 – OPSB Did Not Have a Formal Policy On the Timeliness
of Performing Health Claim Eligibility Reviews
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – Personally Identifiable Information Was Inappropriately 10
Stored in Clear Text
Cash Receipts
 Finding 5 – Internal Controls Were Not Sufficient to Ensure That 11
All Collections Were Deposited
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 13
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits (OPSB) directs the development of State personnel
policies.1 OPSB also administers the health care benefit programs for State
employees and retirees as well as the flexible spending accounts for State
employees. OPSB has a variety of other responsibilities, including salary
administration and classification, recruitment and examination, and employee
relations.
Statewide Personnel System
OPSB uses various automated systems to provide personnel services to the
Maryland State Government. OPSB initiated a Statewide Personnel System
(SPS) project, which is intended to provide a comprehensive human resource
system through use of a commercial off-the-shelf software system. SPS is a
cloud-based application hosted and operated by a service provider, which is used
by numerous State agencies to record personnel transactions, such as
appointments, promotions, and salary adjustments. SPS replaced the former
personnel transaction system in November 2014, and will eventually replace the
Benefits Application System (BAS), which is used to support the administration
of employee health care benefits, and multiple agencies’ timekeeping systems.
The State’s Department of Information Technology procured the SPS contract on
behalf of DBM and OPSB. The contract value totaled approximately $44 million
and the contract received Board of Public Works approval in December 2013.
Implementation of the SPS was divided into two phases. Phase I included all
personnel transactions and reporting, and was implemented on November 14,
2014. Phase II will include employee benefits administration, time tracking, and
leave administration and is scheduled for implementation in November 2015. As
of December 2014, approximately $13 million had been paid to the vendor.
1OPSB’s responsibilities include those policies under the State Personnel Management System,
which apply to the employees in most State agencies. Certain agencies, primarily the Maryland
Department of Transportation and the University System of Maryland, maintain their own
personnel systems and related policies.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Health Care Benefits Administration
The State obtains health care coverage for its employees and retirees (including
their spouses, same-sex domestic partners, and dependents) through three major
health care insurance providers, which administer preferred provider organization
(PPO) and exclusive provider organization (EPO) plans. Mental health care
coverage is currently included in these health care plans, and dental insurance is
provided through two plans offered by two separate providers. The current
contracts for the health care plans cover the period from August 14, 2014 to
December 31, 2020, and the dental plan contracts are in effect from August 14,
2014 to December 31, 2019. The State also provides prescription drug coverage
through another administrator. The current contract for prescription drugs
became effective May 15, 2012 and, including renewal periods, continues through
December 31, 2017.
The State directly pays claims for the PPO, EPO, and prescription drug plans. It
self-funds these plans and accepts the risk for all medical and prescription costs.
Annual health care benefit costs have remained relatively consistent from fiscal
years 2011 through 2014 at approximately $1.2 billion. Health care enrollment
and costs paid in fiscal year 2014 for plan participants, which include State
employees, retirees, spouses, dependent children, direct pay participants, and
satellite agency participants (such as covered employees of local governments)
are summarized in the following table:
Number of Plan Participants in the State of Maryland’s Health Benefits Program
and the Related Costs for Fiscal Year 2014
Plan Type Enrollment Claims Paid Administrative Total
(as of 6/30/14) Expenses Payments
PPO 49,267 $ 326,600,148 $ 20,004,368 $ 346,604,516
POS 22,166 142,058,344 10,707,064 152,765,408
EPO 45,411 377,315,327 19,014,867 396,330,194
Prescription Drug 110,921 394,465,134 7,595,621 402,060,755
Mental Health 71,433 13,061,074 1,429,648 14,490,722
Totals $1,253,500,027 $ 58,751,568 $1,312,251,595
Source: OPSB records (unaudited)
Note: As of January 1, 2015, POS plans are no longer offered and mental health coverage is
included in the PPO and EPO plans.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report on OPSB dated December 14, 2011. We determined
that OPSB satisfactorily addressed six of the findings. The remaining two
findings are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Administrative Fees
Finding 1
Controls were not adequate over the payment of administrative fees for the
health care and prescription drug programs.
Analysis
The Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) had not established
adequate internal controls over the payment of health care and prescription drug
program administrative fees, which totaled approximately $49.7 million and $7.6
million, respectively in fiscal year 2014. These fees, which were paid to OPSB’s
health care and prescription drug program administrators, were calculated directly
by OPSB for the health care program and were invoiced by the administrator for
the prescription drug program.
With regard to the health care program, there was a lack of separation of duties in
that the same supervisory employee calculated the administrative fees and
approved and released the fees for payment. Specifically, a supervisor in OPSB’s
Employee Benefits Division calculated the monthly administrative fees based on
the rate specified in each administrator’s contract and the corresponding number
of participants served, and forwarded the calculations, which were not subject to
independent review and approval, to a subordinate employee who entered the
payments on the State’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS).
Subsequently, the supervisory employee who performed the calculations reviewed
the payments entered into FMIS and released them to the Comptroller of
Maryland’s General Accounting Division (GAD) for payment.
Furthermore, OPSB paid invoices for administrative fees received from its
prescription drug program administrator (based on enrollment counts) without
verifying these counts to independent documentation, such as OPSB internal
enrollment records.
Under these conditions, erroneous or improper administrative fee payments could
be made without detection. The lack of an independent review of fees paid to
health care administrators was also commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OPSB ensure that
a. an independent employee(s) verifies the administrative fee calculation,
reviews and approves the payments entered into FMIS, and releases them
for payment (repeat); and
b. invoices received for prescription drug program administrative fees are
verified to independent supporting documentation, such as internal
enrollment records, prior to payment.
We advised OPSB on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Program Audits
Finding 2
OPSB did not adequately pursue and resolve the results of an independent
audit of the prescription drug program.
Analysis
OPSB did not adequately pursue and resolve the results of an audit of the
prescription drug program conducted by an independent firm. The audit report
received from the firm for fiscal year 2012 activity indicated that OPSB’s
prescription drug program administrator had not met certain contractual
requirements relating to pharmacy discounts and rebate guarantees and, as a
result, owed the State approximately $1.5 million. The administrator disagreed
with the findings; however, in a September 2013 letter to the administrator, the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) disputed the administrator’s
position and requested payment for the stated amounts due. However, as of
February 2015, payment had not been received, and there was no documentation
that this matter had been pursued by the State beyond the September 2013 letter.
We were advised that OPSB is working with the Office of the Attorney General to
resolve this dispute and recover the appropriate funds. This prescription drug
program administrator was replaced by OPSB with the current administrator,
effective May 15, 2012.
OPSB contracted with a health analytics firm to annually conduct pharmacy
claims audits, assess the administration of the State’s prescription drug benefit
plan, and determine the program administrator’s compliance with contractual
requirements and established performance guarantees. The firm provides reports
to OPSB detailing its findings for each fiscal year, including its conclusions as to
any amounts owed to the State as a result of those findings.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPSB
a. ensure that audit report findings of the independent firm are pursued
and resolved in a timely manner, and that documentation evidencing
resolution is maintained; and
b. resolve the fiscal year 2012 prescription drug audit results, and in
conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General, pursue collection of
any amount due.
Reviews of Participant Eligibility for Health Care Claim Payments
Finding 3
OPSB had not established a formal policy to ensure the timely initiation and
completion of participant eligibility reviews.
Analysis
OPSB had not established a formal policy to ensure that reviews to identify health
care claims paid for ineligible individuals are initiated and completed in a timely
manner. Although OPSB advised that such reviews should be initiated at the end
of each benefit plan year, OPSB did not retain documentation evidencing when
the reviews for benefit years 2010 through 2013 had been started. Furthermore,
OPSB had not established the timeframe for completing each review. According
to OPSB’s records, the combined review for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 was not
completed until November 2013, and the review for fiscal year 2012 claim
activity was not completed until October 2014. The review for the fiscal year
2013 claim activity was in progress as of October 2014. Delays in initiating and
completing reviews could adversely affect the recovery of improper claim
payments. According to OPSB, improper payments identified during the fiscal
year 2010 to 2012 claim activity reviews totaled approximately $3.5 million.
OPSB also did not timely refer to the State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU)
certain delinquent accounts attributable to improper claim payments identified
during the 2010 to 2012 reviews. For these reviews, 1,565 delinquent accounts
totaling approximately $790,000 were referred to CCU. Our test of 22 of these
accounts found that 21 accounts totaling approximately $52,000 were not
submitted to CCU until 20 to 175 days after the submission dates required by
regulation. State regulations generally require that three written demands for
payment be made at 30-day intervals. If payment is not received within 75 days
of the original demand for payment, outstanding accounts should be transferred to
CCU for further collection efforts.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Using its eligibility records and the health care claim payment records of the
State’s health care administrators, OPSB identifies claims payments made for
participants who may be ineligible at the time the health care services were
rendered by providers. The claims are then investigated to identify any improper
claims and the reason, such as because participants were improperly deemed
eligible on the OPSB’s records, participants did not pay their premium, or health
care administrators paid claims in error. For claims paid due to administrator
error, OPSB recovers the actual claim amount paid by the administrator. For
other improperly paid claims due to participant ineligibility, OPSB’s policy is to
attempt to recover from the participant the lesser of the claim paid or the related
plan premium amount. Participants who fail to pay the amount due are referred to
CCU.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OPSB
a. establish a formal policy regarding the timeframe for initiating and
completing eligibility claim reviews, including the related documentation
requirements; and
b. submit delinquent accounts to CCU in accordance with State regulations.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
OPSB inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information in
clear text.
Analysis
OPSB inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) in
clear text.
 Full social security numbers of employees, retirees, and their dependents,
along with associated full names and dates of birth were stored in unencrypted
form in the BAS production database. We determined that 489,177 unique,
unencrypted social security numbers were stored in this database.
 Full social security numbers of employees, retirees, and their dependents,
along with associated full names, dates of birth, and addresses were stored in
unencrypted form in various files on two OPSB servers. For example, we
determined that one of these files contained 96,332 unique social security
numbers.
10

--- Page 13 ---
 Sixty-four active accounts had unnecessary read access to all BAS database
tables including the tables including the aforementioned sensitive PII. As a
result, these employees could read and copy the sensitive PII.
BAS, and its underlying database, are used by OPSB to administer health care
benefits for the more than 254,000 active, retired, direct pay, and satellite
participants, and their dependents. The BAS database contains sensitive PII (that
is, full names, addresses, social security numbers, and dates of birth) for
employees, retirees, and dependents. This PII, which is commonly sought by
criminals for use in identity theft, should be protected by appropriate information
system security controls. The State of Maryland Department of Information
Technology’s Information Security Policy states that agencies should protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that OPSB
a. encrypt all database tables and files containing sensitive PII, and
b. restrict read access to sensitive PII to only personnel who require such
access for their job responsibilities.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Internal controls were not sufficient to ensure that all collections were
deposited.
Analysis
Controls were not adequate over cash receipts, which totaled approximately $53.5
million during fiscal year 2014. OPSB’s collections consist primarily of
prescription drug rebates and premium payments for the State health insurance
paid by certain participants, such as local governments for their covered
employees.
 Verifications to ensure that all recorded collections were deposited were not
adequately performed. Although checks were recorded on a manual log by
the employee who first received them, that initial record was not used for
verification purposes. Instead, the checks were given to a second employee
who prepared an automated master check log which was used for the deposit
verification. In addition, verifications were performed only on a monthly
11

--- Page 14 ---
basis. As a result, there was a lack of timely assurance that all checks initially
received and recorded were deposited.
 Three employees who handled cash receipts also had the capability to post
manual payments to the automated accounts receivable records without
independent supervisory review and approval. A similar condition regarding
a lack of independent supervisory review and approval for payments posted
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
The Comptroller of Maryland's Accounting Procedures Manual states that the
reconciliation of cash receipts to deposit be performed using source
documentation by an employee independent of the cash receipts functions.
Furthermore, the Manual also requires segregation of the cash receipts handling
duties from the cash receipts and accounts receivable record keeping functions.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that OPSB
a. use the initial record of checks received for verifying collections to
deposit,
b. perform deposit verifications on a more frequent basis,
c. segregate the duties of processing cash receipts and maintaining accounts
receivable records, and
d. establish independent supervisory review and approval of manual
payment entries to the automated accounts receivable records (repeat).
We advised OPSB on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) – Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB) for the
period beginning November 3, 2010 and ending April 15, 2014. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OPSB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included OPSB’s payment of State employees and retirees
health insurance and prescription drug benefit claims, monitoring of health care
and prescription drug benefit administrators, monitoring prescription drug
discounts and rebates, information system security, and cash receipts. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to OPSB by the DBM
– Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll and
procurement) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the
Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
OPSB’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from OPSB’s Benefits Administration System for the purpose of
testing certain attributes and functions, such as program participant eligibility and
OPSB’s monitoring efforts. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
13

--- Page 16 ---
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
OPSB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect OPSB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OPSB that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DBM to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of
OPSB, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise DBM regarding the results of our review of its response.
14

--- Page 18 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB)
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Audit Period: beginning November 3, 2010 and ending April 15, 2014
Administrative Fees
Finding 1
Controls were not adequate over the payment of administrative fees for the health care and
prescription drug programs.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OPSB ensure that
a. an independent employee(s) verifies the administrative fee calculation, reviews and approves
the payments entered into FMIS, and releases them for payment (repeat); and
b. invoices received for prescription drug program administrative fees are verified to
independent supporting documentation, such as internal enrollment records, prior to
payment.
We advised OPSB on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
DBM OPSB Response 1:
We agree with the recommendations as follows:
a. OPSB has implemented an independent verification of both the health care and prescription
drug program administrative fee calculation. The Accounting Manager now forwards a
completed administrative fee calculation package to the Fiscal Director for review and
approval (release) of the transmittal for payment.
b. Since the inclusion of the EGWP (Employer Group Waiver Plans) in January 2014, OPSB
now prepares two separate prescription drug program administrative fee payments each
month in lieu of vendor generated invoices. The payments are calculated based on internal
enrollment counts contained in the Benefits Administration System (BAS) and are checked to
ensure consistency with the contract rates.
Program Audits
Finding 2
OPSB did not adequately pursue and resolve the results of an independent audit of the
prescription drug program.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OPSB
a. ensure that audit report findings of the independent firm are pursued and resolved in a timely
manner, and that documentation evidencing resolution is maintained; and

--- Page 19 ---
b. resolve the fiscal year 2012 prescription drug audit results, and in conjunction with the Office
of the Attorney General, pursue collection of any amount due.
DBM OPSB Response 2:
We agree with the recommendations as follows:
a. OPSB currently has documented procedures in place to track external audit findings for
performance failure remedies. Depending on the contract, we may be limited legally to
reimbursement of the remedies and may not be able to collect additional amounts noted in
the audit report. However, OPSB agrees to enhance its tracking to include all amounts
deemed to be legally collectable and to establish stronger guidelines to ensure that all
external audit findings related to remedies and recoveries are pursued, resolved and
documented in a timely manner.
b. OPSB is working with the DBM-Office of the Secretary, the Procurement Division and the
Maryland Attorney General’s Office to resolve the dispute and outstanding amounts owed to
the state as a result of the 2012 prescription drug audit. In June 2013, the independent auditor
reported that the prescription drug program administrator failed to meet certain performance
guarantees and pricing standards. The administrator agreed to and made payment related to
the performance guarantees. However, the administrator disputed the challenge to its pricing
standards based on technical arguments associated with the pricing presented in its RFP
response. The State considered but disagreed with the administrator’s position. Despite
multiple rounds of correspondence, the parties have been unable to resolve the dispute. The
administrator was subsequently purchased by a current State vendor. OPSB is hopeful that
this development will benefit the State favorably. Correspondence was mailed April 30 again
requesting payment, and our AAGs will evaluate a contract claim against the administrator
based on its response, with particular sensitivity to the filing of a claim if it fails to remit
payment due without sufficient explanation.
Reviews of Participant Eligibility for Health Care Claim Payments
Finding 3
OPSB had not established a formal policy to ensure the timely initiation and completion of
participant eligibility reviews.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OPSB
a. establish a formal policy regarding the timeframe for initiating and completing eligibility
claim reviews, including the related documentation requirements; and
b. submit delinquent accounts to CCU in accordance with State regulations.
DBM OPSB Response 3:
We agree with the recommendations as noted below:
a. OPSB’s goal is to ensure the successful completion of all eligibility audits no later than one-
year after the close of the plan year. We will complete an updated written policy that

--- Page 20 ---
incorporates the current Billing Logic, project schedule and other components of the audit
process to ensure timely completion of the audits.
b. OPSB has received approval from CCU to deviate from CCU’s policy to allow us to send
two demand notices (45 days each) with subsequent submission of all delinquent accounts to
CCU no earlier than 90 days from the date of first notice. This new policy has already been
implemented and will be incorporated into the formal written eligibility audit policy.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
OPSB inappropriately stored sensitive personally identifiable information in clear text.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that OPSB
a. encrypt all database tables and files containing sensitive PII, and
b. restrict read access to sensitive PII to only personnel who require such access for their job
responsibilities.
DBM OPSB/DoIT Response 4:
We agree with the recommendations as follows:
a. The planned migration of BAS to Workday in Fall 2015 will provide encryption of sensitive
PII within its databases along with all data backups. In addition, all files now stored on the
BAS file servers or transferred to and from various vendors are encrypted.
b. Read access to sensitive BAS PII has been modified through a newly established group.
Access is now limited to only those individuals who need it to perform their job duties.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Internal controls were not sufficient to ensure that all collections were deposited.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that OPSB
a. use the initial record of checks received for verifying collections to deposit,
b. perform deposit verifications on a more frequent basis,
c. segregate the duties of processing cash receipts and maintaining accounts receivable records,
and
d. establish independent supervisory review and approval of manual payment entries to the
automated accounts receivable records (repeat).
We advised OPSB on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.

--- Page 21 ---
DBM OPSB Response 5:
OPSB agrees with and has addressed the recommendations as noted below:
a. and b. OPSB has consolidated its initial record of receipts to the automated master check log
which is used for verification of deposits on a weekly basis. Further, OPSB has again
formally contacted the health care and prescription drug carriers to ensure that they use the
existing lockbox specifically established for the collection of cash receipts by OPSB. This
will significantly reduce the dollar value and volume of checks received.
c. and d. The three individuals noted above that had access to manual posting in the BAS have
had their access removed, thus resolving the segregation of duties and supervisory review
recommendations in c. and d.

--- Page 22 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CISA, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Andrew S. Bien
Richard Tran
Kimberly J. Wagner
Staff Auditors