Title: State Board of Elections
Date: 06/10/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d7245606743d8
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:38:20.764101
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Board of Elections
April 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERvIcES
OFFIcE Of LEGISLATIVE AuDITs
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Wirren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ, BarnickelIII, CPA
ExecutiveDirector LegislativeAuditor
April 24, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the State Board ofElections (SBE) for the period beginning
August 23, 2012 and ending October 22, 2015. SBE is responsible for managing
and supervising elections and voter registrations in the State. SBE directs,
supports, monitors, and evaluates the activities ofeach ofthe 24 local boards.
Our audit disclosed SBE did not establish certain controls to maintain the integrity
ofthe Statewide voter registration records and to protect certain voter data. For
example, user access to the voter registration system was not effectively
controlled; consequently, numerous system users had unnecessary access to the
voter registration database, which was removed after our inquiries. We also noted
that SBE did not ensure that personally identifiable information from the database
was either properly safeguarded when transmitted to a third party contractor or
removed from its own records. In this regard, the fill social security numbers
from over 590,000 voters were retained by SBE in the database even though only
the last four digits are needed.
Regarding the voting process, we noted that SBE did not adequately authenticate
certain voters who reciuested absentee ballots for primary and general elections.
We also noted that a certain critical voting system was not backed-up offsite when
in use during elections and was not addressed in SBE’s Disaster Recovery Plan.
Our audit also disclosed internal control and recordkeeping deficiencies related to
the procurement ofcontracts and the monitoring ofcertain payments. for
example, for two contracts tested, awarded as single sources and valued at $18.8
million, SBE could not support the awards were in the State’s best interest. We
also identified overpavments under a staffing services contract.
301 ‘West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
•
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll free in Maryland 877-486-9964 fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
SBE’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis audit by
SBE.
Respectfully submitted,
72) ‘L
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Information System Network 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Statewide Voter Registration
Finding 1 – SBE did not ensure the accuracy of the data recorded in 6
the voter registration system (MDVOTERS) or whether related user
access was appropriate.
Finding 2 – SBE did not ensure that personally identifiable information 8
from the MDVOTERS database provided to an external third
party was properly safeguarded.
Finding 3 – SBE unnecessarily retained personally identifiable 9
information within the MDVOTERS database.
Absentee Ballots
Finding 4 – SBE did not adequately authenticate certain voters who 10
requested absentee ballots.
Backup of Critical Files and Disaster Recovery
Finding 5 – A critical voting system was not backed up offsite and was 11
not properly addressed in the SBE Disaster Recovery Plan.
Procurement Process
Finding 6 – Controls were not in place over the receipt and opening of 12
certain bids, and SBE could not support that two single source
contract awards were in the State’s best interest. Additionally, SBE
did not publish certain contract awards in eMaryland Marketplace.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 7 – SBE did not have a comprehensive process in place to 14
ensure that certain billed work was in accordance with approved
contract terms or was adequately documented.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Fiscal Year-End Accounting
Finding 8 – At the 2015 fiscal year-end, SBE had an unexplained deficit 15
fund balance and had recorded certain unsupported revenues
to eliminate deficits.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Election Law Article, Section 2-101 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
established the State Board of Elections (SBE) under the direction of a five-
member Board appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the
Senate. In addition, in accordance with Section 2-201 of the aforementioned
Article, the Governor has appointed local election boards within each of the
State’s 24 subdivisions. Each local board is charged with overseeing the conduct
of all elections within its respective jurisdiction.
SBE is responsible for managing and supervising elections and voter registrations
in the State. SBE directs, supports, monitors, and evaluates the activities of each
local board. In addition, SBE administers sections of the Election Law Article
that govern the receipt and expenditure of funds for election campaigns, and
administers the Public Financing Act, which provides for public financing of the
campaigns of eligible gubernatorial candidates who elect to use such funds. SBE
also serves as a depository for election and registration records, campaign
financial reports, and other election information. According to the State’s
records, during fiscal year 2016 SBE had 41.8 authorized positions and operating
expenditures totaling approximately $21.0 million.
Information System Network
To support State of Maryland voter registration and elections activities (including
online voter registration), SBE maintains a local area network for its headquarters
operation, which includes servers that support election management, campaign
finance reporting, and email communications. The SBE headquarters network is
connected to the Internet and SBE uses networkMaryland for its wide area
network connections to the 24 local boards of elections, 5 warehouses, and 2
offsite data centers where the centralized voter registration application resides.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report on SBE dated March 24, 2014. We determined that
SBE satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Statewide Voter Registration
Background
State and federal law require the State Board of Elections (SBE) to establish,
maintain, and administer a Statewide voter registration database. The Statewide
voter registration system (MDVOTERS) contains the State’s official voter
registration database and is separate from the Statewide electronic voting system.
Employees from each of the State’s 24 local boards of election (LBE) are
primarily responsible for processing (adding, deleting, changing) voter
registration data on MDVOTERS, but SBE maintains MDVOTERS and assumes
a monitoring responsibility for ensuring that the LBEs are properly processing
voter data.
In addition, SBE, in concert with approximately 20 other states and the District of
Columbia, takes part in an initiative to help ensure the accuracy of voter
registrations (such as identifying voters registered in multiple states). Under a
multi-state compact, SBE provides certain information on MDVOTERS to the
nonprofit Electronic Registration Information Center (ERIC), which includes the
name, date of birth, driver’s license number, and last four digits of the social
security number for each registered voter in Maryland. ERIC compares voter data
from various sources and provides the states’ election officials with reports of
potential ineligible voters. ERIC makes use of a third-party vendor to store and
process the collected voter data.
According to SBE records, there were 3,763,838 active registered voters in
MDVOTERS as of December 2015, and 260,179 new voters were added to the
database and 264,787 were removed during calendar year 2015.
Finding 1
SBE did not ensure the accuracy of the data recorded in MDVOTERS or
whether related user access to the system was appropriate.
Analysis
SBE did not have a comprehensive oversight process in place to ensure the
accuracy of the data recorded in MDVOTERS and the appropriateness of related
user access to the system. While SBE was responsible for the accuracy of
MDVOTERS and the granting of related user access, it relied on the LBEs to
conduct monthly investigations of certain potential irregularities in MDVOTERS
data and to review the continued appropriateness of certain user access.
6

--- Page 9 ---
• SBE did not ensure LBEs followed up on reports of possible ineligible voters
received from ERIC. SBE receives reports of possible ineligible voters every
other month from ERIC (such as voters who were registered in another state
or recorded as deceased on the federal Death Master File) which are
distributed to the LBEs. For example, a January 2016 ERIC report included
5,871 voters registered in Maryland who may be deceased.
Although the LBEs routinely reported the results of their investigations to
SBE, SBE did not verify that LBEs properly investigated the individuals on
the reports and took appropriate corrective action. Our review of a limited
number of voters from the January 2016 report confirmed that the LBE in
question took appropriate corrective action regarding the tested voters.
• Effective controls were not established over the assignment of user access;
consequently, numerous users had unnecessary access to MDVOTERS.
Access to MDVOTERS is controlled via a two-step login process, whereby, a
user must first login to a private virtualized environment (PVE), which then
passes the users to MDVOTERS and enables them to use a second unique
login id to actually access MDVOTERS. As of March 2016, there were 448
users with PVE access, while as of January 2016 there were 1,039 user names
in MDVOTERS.
SBE did not conduct any review of the propriety of user access granted to
MDVOTERS nor verify that LBEs, which were delegated this
responsibility, had actually reviewed user access assigned to its personnel.
Furthermore, the list of PVE user login ids that was forwarded to the LBEs
each month for review was incomplete because it did not include all users
with PVE access. As a result, numerous users had potentially unnecessary
user access to MDVOTERS and the PVE. For example, our review of
user access records found the following.
 22 users had PVE access although these users did not require such
access to perform their job duties (including 15 LBE employees, 4
SBE employees, and 3 contractor employees).
 14 LBE users with PVE access were excluded from the SBE-
maintained list based on our comparison of access capabilities
obtained from MDVOTERS versus users on the SBE-prepared list.
 619 usernames in MDVOTERS had no login activity in the last 6
months.
7

--- Page 10 ---
 24 users had administrative rights in MDVOTERS (such as adding and
removing users), but had not recently functioned in an administrator
capacity. As of January 28, 2016, none of these 24 users had used
these rights for at least one year or had ever used those rights.
In response to our audit inquiries, SBE removed the PVE access for the
aforementioned 22 employees, the MDVOTERS access for 446 of the
aforementioned 619 usernames, and the administrative rights for 22 of
aforementioned 24 usernames. SBE management advised us that the access for
the remaining users was still necessary.
The State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy requires agencies to monitor
their information system controls to ensure that the controls are operating as
intended. The Policy also requires proper account management practices, such as
obtaining authorization from appropriate officials to issue user accounts to
intended individuals and disabling user accounts when no longer needed, which is
immediately upon user exit from employment or 60 days for inactive accounts.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SBE
a. ensure, at least on a test basis, that LBEs investigate registered voters on
the ERIC reports and take appropriate corrective action; and
b. in conjunction with the LBEs, establish a periodic process to monitor and
review PVE and MDVOTERS access for appropriateness, removing any
access not needed for an individual’s job duties.
Finding 2
SBE did not ensure that personally identifiable information from the
MDVOTERS database provided to an external third party was properly
safeguarded.
Analysis
SBE did not ensure that personally identifiable information (PII) from the
MDVOTERS database shared with ERIC was properly safeguarded. ERIC uses a
third-party contractor to store and process the data, which includes the name, date
of birth, driver’s license number, and last four digits of the social security number
for each registered voter in Maryland.1 State law defines any record containing
an individual’s name combined with a driver’s license number as PII.
1 As noted in Finding 3, for certain registered voters SBE has recorded the full social security
number in MDVOTERS.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Our review disclosed that SBE did not require independent reviews be performed
of ERIC or its contractor to ensure the Maryland voter data provided to these
parties were secure. Although ERIC claims that data are subject to a “data
anonymization” process that converts information into an indecipherable string of
characters, SBE does not have assurances as to the adequacy of this process and
the security over the MDVOTERS data hosted by the parties.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organization controls. Based on this
guidance, customers, such as SBE, may obtain from service organizations an
independent auditor’s report referred to as a Service Organization Controls (SOC)
2 type 2 report. Such a report contains the service organization’s description of
its system and the results of the auditor’s examination of the suitability of the
system design and operating effectiveness of the controls for a specified period.
A SOC 2 type 2 report could include an evaluation of security, availability of
data, processing integrity, confidentiality of data, and privacy of data over the
hosted environment.
We did note that the third-party contractor had obtained a SOC 1 type 2
examination, for the period from October 1, 2014 to March 31, 2015, with the
related report dated June 19, 2015, although SBE had not obtained a copy of this
report to assess the adequacy and comprehensiveness of the review.
Nevertheless, a SOC 1 report is a report that would not usually provide the
necessary assurances as a SOC 2 report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SBE
a. require periodic SOC 2 Type 2 reviews for ERIC and service
organization contractors that host PII via a service level agreement; and
b. perform timely reviews of the SOC 2 reports, determine if they
adequately address necessary controls and, for any weaknesses noted,
ensure that necessary corrective action is taken.
Finding 3
SBE unnecessarily retained personally identifiable information within the
MDVOTERS database.
Analysis
SBE unnecessarily retained personally identifiable information (PII) within its
MDVOTERS database. Specifically, as of August 8, 2016, the MDVOTERS
database contained names and the full nine-digit social security numbers (SSN)
9

--- Page 12 ---
for 592,236 (or 14 percent) of the more than 4,100,000 voters (active and
inactive) in this database, even though the full SSN is neither necessary nor
required for voter registration purposes. This sensitive PII is commonly sought
by criminals for use in identify theft.
There are several methods for Maryland citizens to register to vote, including the
use of a hard copy voter registration form, which requires that voters provide a
Maryland driver’s license number or Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration
issued ID number, or the last four digits of their SSN. SBE uses this information
to validate the identity of the potential voter. Upon validation, this information is
entered into the MDVOTERS system and is saved to the MDVOTERS database.
We were advised by SBE personnel that some registrants using the hard copy
registration form voluntarily listed their full SSN despite not being required to do
so. Further, for hard copy registrations with the full SSNs recorded, SBE
instructed the local boards of elections’ staff to enter all nine SSN digits into the
MDVOTERS system (which will accept the nine digits in the SSN field).
If PII breaches occur, organizations can incur excessive unplanned costs and
damaged reputations. Accordingly, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology recommends that organizations should collect and retain PII only
where such information is essential to meet an authorized business purpose.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SBE
a. amend the MDVOTERS system’s SSN field to limit the field input length
to four characters; and
b. remove all full SSNs currently recorded in the MDVOTERS database,
and just retain the four digits as needed.
Absentee Ballots
Finding 4
SBE did not adequately authenticate certain voters who requested absentee
ballots.
Analysis
SBE did not adequately authenticate certain voters who requested absentee ballots
during primary and general elections. Depending on the process used, certain
voters were only required to authenticate themselves by providing information
(first and last name, date of birth, and address) that is publicly available.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Accordingly, for these voters, SBE lacked assurance that the person requesting
the absentee ballot, and completing and submitting the absentee ballot, is the
registered voter that they purported to be.
Consequently, the risk exists that an individual or group could submit fraudulent
absentee ballots in an attempt to influence the results of a specific election, or,
could cause legitimate voters to vote by a provisional ballot on election day
(which may be invalidated because the records show that an absentee ballot had
already been cast by that voter).
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SBE strengthen the authentication process for voters
requesting absentee ballots by requiring additional non-public information
such as the last four digits of the voter’s social security number and
validating this information.
Backup of Critical Files and Disaster Recovery
Finding 5
A critical voting system was not backed up offsite and was not properly
addressed in the SBE Disaster Recovery Plan.
Analysis
The Electronic Pollbook Interchange and Conversion (EPIC) system was not
backed up offsite when in use during voting periods and was not properly
addressed in the SBE Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP). The EPIC system is used to
identify citizens who have voted in a particular election (including early voting)
and is also used for the same-day voter registration process during early voting.
We determined that although the EPIC database was backed up to a server that
resided at the same location as the server hosting the production EPIC database, it
was not backed up offsite. Therefore, if a disaster occurred at the facility housing
both the production and backup databases, during the period from the beginning
of early voting to election day, it would not be readily possible to completely
recreate the database.
We also noted that the SBE DRP did not specifically identify how the
communication link between the facility hosting the EPIC production server and
the early voting sites could be readily re-created in the event of a disaster at the
hosting facility. Given the importance of the EPIC system during early voting the
11

--- Page 14 ---
detailed enumeration of the procedures necessary to create this communication
link is critical.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SBE
a. backup the EPIC database on a daily basis to an offsite location, during
periods when it is in use; and
b. update its DRP to include the detailed procedures necessary to quickly
recreate the communication link between the EPIC production server
and the early voting sites in the event of a disaster at the location hosting
the EPIC production server.
Procurement Process
Finding 6
Controls were not in place over the receipt and opening of certain bids, and
SBE could not support that two single source contract awards were in the
State’s best interest. Additionally, SBE did not publish certain contract
awards in eMaryland Marketplace.
Analysis
SBE did not have adequate safeguards in place to secure competitive bids that
were electronically received and document that two employees were present for
bid openings. Also, SBE could not support its determinations that, for the two
procurements we tested, the use of a single source procurement method was in the
State’s best interest. SBE did not publish certain contract awards in eMaryland
Marketplace (eMM) as required.
Our test of eight contracts procured during our audit period, which were
collectively valued at $75.3 million, disclosed the following conditions:
• SBE did not properly secure electronically received bids. Specifically, for
four procurements tested totaling $40.4 million, the bids were received via
emails sent to the procurement officer without any password protection to
ensure bids were not prematurely accessed. Consequently, there is a risk that
confidential competitive information could be accessed and disclosed without
detection to other prospective bidders prior to the bid due date.
• SBE did not document that two employees were present for the bid opening
for the six competitively procured contracts tested totaling $73.3 million (the
other two procurements tested were not competitively bid).
12

--- Page 15 ---
• SBE could not support its determination that the prices of two contracts,
valued at $18.8 million and awarded as single sources were fair and
reasonable and, therefore, in the State’s best interest. SBE prepared the
required written determinations justifying the single source award of each
contract, purportedly based, in part, on analyses of new versus old labor rates
from the preceding contract. However, SBE could not provide us with formal
documentation of either analysis. We reviewed the labor rates for one of these
contracts totaling $12.2 million, but were unable to readily draw any
conclusion as to the favorability of the new rates, since the rates combined
several cost elements beyond direct labor, making it difficult to compare to
the old contract.
• SBE did not publish the awards for four procurements totaling $34.9 million
on eMM as required by State procurement regulations.
State procurement regulations require bids to be secured and opened in the
presence of at least two State employees. The regulations further require that
when only one bid is received, an award may only be made to the bidder if the
procurement officer determines that the price submitted is fair and reasonable.
Finally, the regulations require contract awards greater than $25,000 be published
on eMM within 30 days of the contract award.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SBE
a. ensure electronically received bids are properly secured,
b. document the opening of competitive bid proposals in the presence of at
least two State employees,
c. ensure the justifications for written determinations of single source
contract awards are supported, and
d. publish contract awards on eMM.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Contract Monitoring
Finding 7
SBE did not have a comprehensive process in place to ensure that certain
billed work was in accordance with approved contract terms or was
adequately documented.
Analysis
SBE did not have a comprehensive process in place to ensure that certain vendor
payments were in accordance with approved contract terms or adequately
supported to document the services billed.
• SBE paid its existing data center hosting vendor a fee for additional hosting
services, using the terms of the existing contract, without entering into a
contract modification or obtaining DoIT approval for the modification. The
original contract was procured under a DoIT Master contract. Under such
contracts, DoIT requires a change order form, justification for the change,
scope of work, and cost break down to be submitted to DoIT for approval for
contract modifications. SBE paid the vendor $47,380 ($11,845 per month) for
the additional hosting services from October 2015 through January 2016,
representing approximately 10 percent of total billings for that period. This
hosting services contract was for approximately $6.6 million for the period
from January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2016.
• SBE did not adequately monitor payments made for labor costs related to a
staffing services contract for workers needed to carry out election activities,
resulting in overpayments of $52,600. Specifically, although SBE central
office personnel reviewed timesheets for individuals billed on the contract,
they did not require an election judge or other SBE employee on site with the
vendor’s employees to verify the propriety of the hours charged. SBE advised
us that it had an applicable approval process in place, but the process was not
documented.
Our test of four invoices totaling $119,000 disclosed that SBE paid an
incorrect rate for one labor category, with SBE paying $41.50 per hour versus
the contract rate of $28.50 per hour. We estimated that for the 2014 primary
and general elections, SBE paid $78,000 for the labor supplied under this
category, which included $25,000 in overpayments due to the use of the
incorrect rate. We expanded our review of vendor billings for those elections
and found that SBE had paid for 1,661 hours of overtime totaling $82,870,
even though the contract prohibited any overtime charges. Payment of these
hours at overtime rates resulted in approximately $27,600 in excess payments
14

--- Page 17 ---
versus if the payments had been made at the regular contractual rates. This
staffing services contract including all modifications totaled approximately
$5.8 million for the period from March 20, 2014 to December 31, 2016.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that SBE
a. execute contract modifications, as required, establishing all terms and
conditions including services to be provided and related costs;
b. submit contract modifications for approval, as required;
c. establish procedures to ensure and document that services are rendered
prior to payment;
d. ensure payments to the vendor are in accordance with all contract terms
and conditions; and
e. pursue recovery of the aforementioned $52,600 in inappropriate
payments.
Fiscal Year-End Accounting
Finding 8
At the 2015 fiscal year-end, SBE had an unexplained deficit fund balance and
had recorded certain unsupported revenues to eliminate deficits.
Analysis
At June 30, 2015, SBE had an unexplained combined deficit fund balance of $3.4
million (a special fund deficit of $7.5 million and non-budgeted fund surplus of
$4.1 million) and recorded unsupported federal and special fund revenues of
$746,000 and $569,000, respectively, to eliminate deficits.
• SBE had not investigated and it could not adequately explain the cause(s) for
the fiscal year-end fund balances. Although the failure to properly account for
the recovery of funds for certain SBE expenditures from local jurisdictions
and/or local boards of elections2 could be an underlying cause, SBE’s
accounts receivable records we reviewed did not indicate a current collection
problem that would have contributed to a deficit situation. It is possible that
SBE could have posted those expenditures and related reimbursements
incorrectly, but this would not explain the existence of a year-end combined
deficit balance in special funds and non-budgeted funds.
2 Quarterly, SBE bills the 23 counties and Baltimore City for a share of SBE operating costs and
the new Statewide voting system. In addition, SBE processes the employee payroll for 20 LBE,
which is recovered from the LBEs (or their respective local government).
15

--- Page 18 ---
In August 2015, as part of the year-end closing process, the Comptroller of
Maryland – General Accounting Division’s (GAD) transferred the balance in
the non-budgeted funds to the special fund account to eliminate a portion of
the deficit special fund balance at year-end. This resulted in a special fund
deficit of $3.4 million on the State’s accounting records that was addressed by
recording certain supported revenue (such as quarterly billings amounts due
from the local boards and jurisdictions), as well as certain unsupported
revenue amounts noted below.
• GAD, in consultation with SBE, recorded federal and special fund revenue
totaling approximately $746,000 and $569,000, respectively, without
regard to the ultimate collectability of those revenues. These revenues
were recorded to offset a federal fund deficit balance and the remaining
special fund deficit balance after the non-budget fund balance transfer and
recordation of supported revenues noted above.
In addition, in our January 25, 2017 report on the Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2016, we commented that
SBE recorded federal fund revenue totaling $523,000 to offset a deficit
balance in a related federal fund source. However, all of these revenues
may not be received from the federal government. To the extent that
revenues are not available, general fund appropriations (or deficiency
appropriations) may be needed to eliminate any resulting deficits.
GAD’s year-end budget closeout instructions require that proper detailed
documentation be maintained by State agencies to support their accounting
transactions and for audit.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SBE
a. ensure that all applicable financial transactions are properly recorded
and supported; and
b. investigate the cause(s) of the aforementioned June 30, 2016 fiscal year-
end deficit fund balance, take appropriate corrective action, and make
any necessary adjustments in the accounting records.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Board of Elections
(SBE) for the period beginning August 23, 2012 and ending October 22, 2015.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SBE’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, voter
registration system and local election board oversight, accounts receivable, cash
receipts, equipment, and payroll. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of SBE’s compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including SBE.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SBE’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
17

--- Page 20 ---
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from SBE’s MDVOTERS for the purpose of testing
user access. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SBE’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SBE’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also include findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SBE that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
SBE’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SBE regarding the results of our
review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX
MARYLAND,
STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS
P0. BOX 6486, ANNAPOLIS, MD 21401-0486 PHONE (410) 269-2840
David]. McManus, Jr., Chairman Linda H. Lamone
Patrick]. Hogan, Vice Chairman Administrator
Michael R. Cogan
Kelley A. Howells Nikki Charlson
Gloria Lawlah Deputy Administrator
April 19, 2017
Via Electronic Mail and DGS Courier
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department ofLegislative Services
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore MD 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
Thankyou for the opportunity to respond to the Legislative Auditor’s audit report for
the period from August 22, 2012, through October 22, 2015.
The audit has been very informative, and we are pleased to report thatwe have
addressed all ofthe audits recommendations. Enclosed is the full response to the audit
report, including specifics steps taken for each recommendation.
Ifyou have any questions, please feel free to contact me.
Sincerely,
Linda H. Lamone
State Administrator
Enclosure
FAX (410) 974- 2019 Toll Free Phone Number (800) 222-8683 151 West Street Suite 200
MD Relay Service (800) 735-2258 http://www.elections.maryland.gov Annapolis, Maryland 21401

--- Page 22 ---
Response to Legislative Audit Report
Submitted by
Linda H. Lamone, State Administrator
Maryland State Board of Elections (SBE)
April 19, 2017
Statewide Voter Registration – Background
Finding 1 – SBE did not ensure the accuracy (opfg t.h 6e) d ata recorded in MDVOTERS or
whether related user access to the system was appropriate.
Agency Response (pgs. 6-8)
: Starting with ERIC’s January 2017 file, SBE audits local boards of elections’
processing of reports from the Electronic Registration Information Center (ERIC). This review
process ensures that the local boards of elections are properly processing ERIC reports.
SBE complies with the State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy and prevents access to
the private virtualized environment (PVE) on which MDVOTERS resides for users who do not
access the PVE for 60 days. The automated process of inactivating the user’s access to the PVE
prevents the user from accessing any data in MDVOTERS. Only SBE can re-activate a user’s
access to an inactivated PVE account.
In addition to complying with the State’s Information Security Policy, SBE periodically reviews
who has access to the PVE and MDVOTERS. Monthly, the local boards of elections review a
system-generated list of individuals with access to the PVE and provide SBE with any
u pdates. SBE provides the vendor hosting the PVE with the necessary access changes. SBE
Rpeesrpfoornmses tao q Rueacrotmermlye rnedvaiteiwon o 1f MDVOTERS accounts that have been disabled.
SBE has implemented these recommendations.
a. Since January 2017, SBE has ensured – through testing – that the local boards of elections
properly investigated registered voters on ERIC reports and performed the appropriate
correction action.
b. SBE has developed and implemented a process to review periodically access to the PVE
and MDVOTERS for appropriateness and removing any access not needed for an
Findiinndgi v2i d–u SaBl’sE jdoibd d nuotite esn. sure that personally identifiable information from the
MDVOTERS database provided to an external third party was properly
safeguarded
Agency Respon. s(ep:gs. 8-9)
As explained in the audit report, ERIC is a multi-state consortium, and
Maryland is one of 21 participating states . ERIC has a board of directors, and the board of
d irectors has a Privacy and Technology Advisory Board to review security protections and
provide advice to the board of directors.
There are various standards – Service Organization Controls (SOC), National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), and International Standards Organization (ISO) – on which

--- Page 23 ---
State Board of Elections
Response to Legislative Audit Report (August 23, 2012 – October 22, 2015)
Page 2 of 7
an audit can be based. While OLA recommendations a SOC audit, ERIC’s advisory board
recommended and ERIC’s board of directors approved a security man agement plan based on
I SO standards. The advisory board is currently considering the appropriate audit standard for
ERResIpCo annsde twoi Rll emcoamkem ae nredcaotmionm 2e ndation to ERIC’s board of directors.
a. Since SBE, as an individual ERIC member, does not have the authority to dictate security
policy of ERIC, an independent organization with a board of directors, SBE is not able to
require periodic SOC 2 Type 2 reviews for ERIC and service organization contractors.
b . SBE will perform timely reviews of all security reports obtained by ERIC and ensure that
Finditnhge 3n e–c SeBssEa ruyn cnoercreescstiavrei layc trieotna iisn etadk pene.r sonally identifiable information within the
MDVOTERS database.
Agency Response (pgs. 9-10)
: Based on language in the second paragraph of this finding, one might
conclude that a Maryland driver’s license number, a State ID card issued by the Maryland
Motor Vehicle Administration, or the last four digits of an applicant’s Social Security number
(SSN) is only required if an applicant uses the paper version of the voter registration
application. This information is required for all new applications, not just paper
applications. Since the online voter registration system prevents a user from entering a full
nine-digit SSN, the only way SBE or a local board of elections will receive a full nine-digit SSN is
on a paper application.
Although SBE had full SSNs for about 6% of Maryland’s registered voters, SBE uses best
practices to secure the data maintained in MDVOTERS. Access to the system is res tricted to
S tate and local election offices and requires two step log in process. The system is constantly
mReosnpiotnosree dto b Rye ac owmemb ehnodsatitniogn c o3m pany using industry standard tools and analytics.
SB E has implemented these recommendations.
a. As of January 2017, users cannot enter full nine-digit SSNs in MDVOTERS.
b . As of January 2017, all full nine-digit SSNs have been removed from MDVOTERS. If a
Findirnegc o4r –d ShBasE adni dS SnNo,t i ta idse oqnulya ttehley l aasutt hfoeunrt dicigaittes coef rtthaei nSS vNo.t ers who requested absentee
ballots.
Agency R(epsgp.o 1n0s-e1: 1)
Implementing OLA’s recommendation would create a new requirement for
absentee voting; that is, a voter must have a Social Security number to vote an absentee
ballot. This would remove absentee voting as a voting option for voters who do not have a
SSN. Because neith er federal law nor State law currently require a Social Security number to
r egister to vote, SBE will seek advice from the Attorney General’s office on the legality of this
recommendation.

--- Page 24 ---
State Board of Elections
Response to Legislative Audit Report (August 23, 2012 – October 22, 2015)
PRaesgpeo 3n soef t7o Recommendation 4
all
SBE will seek advice from the Attorney General’s office on the legality of requiring a Social
S ecurity number for absentee voters and if it permissible, whether it would require a
lFeignidsliantgiv 5e –ch Aa ncgriet.i cal voting system was not backed up offsite and was not properly
addressed in the SBE Disaster Recovery Plan.
Agency Response (pgs. 11-12)
:
In August 2016, SBE made the necessary changes to include the Electronic Pollbook
Interchange and Conversion (EPIC) data in the offsite backup. This change ensured that all
data nee ded to check in voters during early voting and on election day for the 2016 General
E lection was backed up and stored at an offsite location. SBE will continue this backup
process.
SBE is currently working with another governmental agency to host a backup server to mirror
the EPIC production server. This project will provide a continuous, alternative
c ommunications link for EPIC during early voting. This mirror will be in place for the 2018
eRleescptoionnses aton dR ewcoilml bmee anpdpartoiopnr i5a tely documented in SBE’s Disaster Recovery Plan.
a. When the EPIC database is used, SBE will continue to perform a daily backup of the EPIC
database and store the backup at an offsite location during periods when it is in use.
b. SBE will update its Disaster Recovery Plan to include the detailed procedures necessary
to recreate quickly the communication link between the EPIC production server and the
early voting centers if there is a disaster at the location hosting the EPIC production
Findisnegr v6e –r. C ontrols were not in place over the receipt and opening of certain bids, and
SBE could not support that two single source contract awards were in the State’s best
interest. Additionally, SBE did not publish certain contract awards in eMaryland
Marketplace.
Agency Respons(epgs . 12-13)
:
Receiving Electronically Submitted Bids
The four procurements OLA tested and referenced in this finding were procurements where
technical and financial proposals were sent via separate emails with the type of proposal
(“Technical” or “Financial”) in the subject line of the email. Three procurements were
conducted under the State’s Department of Information Tec hnology’s (DoIT) Consulting and
T echnical Services (CATS+) Task Order Request for Proposals (TORFP) process, and the fourth
procurement was a competitively bid, sealed procurement.
When SBE’s Procurement Officer receives the proposals submitted by email (two emails per
proposal), she stores in her password protected, maryland.gov email account the emails and
attachments. After the proposal deadline, she provides to the evaluation committee the

--- Page 25 ---
State Board of Elections
Response to Legislative Audit Report (August 23, 2012 – October 22, 2015)
Page 4 of 7
technical proposals and after the technical rankings were finalized, the finbaenfcoiarle proposals. To
document this process, SBE’s Procurement Officer requires that each member of the evaluation
committ ee acknowledge in writing that technical rankings were assigned the financial
p roposals were opened. This was the process followed for all four of the procurements tested
by OLA.
For TORFPs, SBE’s Procurement Officer reminds all potential offerors of DoIT’s instructions to
submit financial proposals with password protection. Although this requirement is the
r esponsibility of the Offerors, SBE’s Procurement Officer has been and will continue to provide
to potential offerors frequent reminders.
Although OLA identified as a risk that confidential bid information could be shared with
annoot ther prosnpoetc tive bidder before proposals are due, OLA did not find that this occurred.
Providing this type of information is illegal and unethical, and SBE’s Procurement Officer has
and will share confidential bid information with anyone prior to the appropriate time
in the procurement process. This means that the evaluation committee is not prov ided with
the financial proposals until after the technical evaluation is complete and other offerors are
not provided grand to tals of other proposals until after an award decision is made.
Opening Bids Process
Although Regulation 21.05.03.02G of the Code of Maryland Regulations requires that two
individuals be present when proposals are open, it does not require that the two individuals
document this process. In response to OLA’s re commendation, SBE now requires that the two
i ndividuals who are present when a proposal is open document their presence by signing a
document created by the Procurement Officer.
Determining Whether Single Source Procurement is in Best Interest of the State
Both of the tested contracts – data center hosting and application maintenance – were
competitively bid using the CATS+ TORFP process. As required by DoIT, both TORFPs were
sent to all master contractors in the appropriate functional areas. The sco pe of work for these
c ontracts is specialized, but in an effort to increase competition, SBE removed several
minimum qualifications that were required in previously issued TORFPs.
Although SBE received only one bid for each contract, multiple master contractors reviewed
and considered the TORFPs, as evidenced by the “no bid” forms returned by 14 master
contractors for the data center hosting contract and 14 master contractors for the application
maintenance contract. B ecause only pre-approved CATS+ vendors can bid on TORFPs,
e Maryland Marketplace and other ways to increase competition cannot be used to solicit bids
to increase competition.
After deeming the bids as susceptible for award and in the best interests of the State, SBE
prepared for DoIT, the control agency for both procurements, a document explaining why the
proposed pricing was in the best interest of the State and a justification for awarding the
contracts to the sole bidder. The pricing justification compared the proposed rates against
posted labor rates, previous years’ rates, and historical pricing and was consistent with the

--- Page 26 ---
State Board of Elections
Response to Legislative Audit Report (August 23, 2012 – October 22, 2015)
Page 5 of 7
forthcoming requirements of BPW Advisory 2016-1. The justification for awarding a contract
for the sole bidder includes comparing DoIT’s CATS+ rates against the proposed rates, SBE’s
outreach to solicit bids, and the number of “no bid” responses received. DoIT deemed SBE’s
justificaAtuiodni tsourf’fsi cCieonmt manedn ta:p pSrBoEv’esd p trhicei ncgo njutsrtaicfitcsa. t i ons for both contracts made reference to
performing comparisons of the proposed rates to those from other sources; however, at the
time of our audit, SBE was unable to provide formal documentation supporting the analysis
for either of these contracts.
While OLA does not believe that SBE’s justifications were sufficient, SBE and DoIT, by its
approval of the contracts, believe otherwise. SBE met all objective requirements for award to
a single bidder. While OL A disagrees with DoIT’s approval of SBE’s award recommendations,
S BE did not violate State procurement procedures and justified why these awards were in the
best interest of the State.
Publication of Certain Contract Awards
Although during most of the audit period, SBE did not publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace, SBE’s Procurement Officer notified in writing contractors who submitted
proposals of SBE’s award decision and offered a debriefing. For RFPs, letters were sent by
certified mail and emailed as a secondary method of communication to Offerors with award
notification information. For TO RFPs, the master contractors were notified by email. Since
c ontractors frequently requested debriefings, it is evident that the contractors received SBE’s
notification of contract award.
In the fall of 2015, SBE’s Procurement Officer learned about the requirement to post on
eMaryland Marketplace certain contract awards. Since that meeting and before the auditors
identified this deficiency, SBE’s Procurement Officer poste d on eMaryland Marketplace
c ontract award notices for certain procurements over $25,000. This includes retroactive
pRoessptionngs eo ft oa wRaecrdom nmoteicnedsa itsiosune 6d on or after June 12, 2013.
a. SBE will continue to properly secure all proposals and remind Offerors to password
protect their financial proposals when electronic proposals are accepted.
b. As of February 2016, SBE requires that the two individuals who are present when
proposals are open document their presence.
c. SBE will continue to justify single bid awards in accordance with DoIT guidelines and
obtain all necessary control agency approvals before finalizing contract awards.
dF.indiSnBgE 7 w –i lSl BcoEn dtiindu neo tto h pauvbel iash c ocemrtparienh ceonnstrivacet p arwoacredsss oinn peMlaacrey tlaon edn Msuarrek etthpalat ccee.r t ain
billed work was in accordance with approved contract terms or was adequately
documented.
(pgs. 14-15)

--- Page 27 ---
State Board of Elections
Response to Legislative Audit Report (August 23, 2012 – October 22, 2015)
PAaggeen c6y oRfe 7s ponse
not
: For certain contracts, SBE has separated the contract and project
management duties. This means that the individual who is the contract manager is an
individual who has a project management responsibili ties. This separation of duties will
r educe the burden of one person performing both duties and ensure that all contract
modifications are properly processed and approved.
For the 2016 General Election, SBE used an online timekeeping system to manage and verify
billable hours. With this system, SBE could, in real time, know where most of the temporary
staffing support were working and for how long. This information was us ed to verify the
propriety of the hours charged. SBE intends to continue to use this or a similar system as the
Rpreismpoanryse m toe tRheocdo mfomr menadnaatgioinng 7 a ll contract resources in future elections.
a. SBE will execute contract modifications, as required and establish all terms and
conditions, including services to be provided and related costs.
b. SBE will submit to the contract agency contract modifications for approval.
c. SBE will continue to ensure that services are rendered prior to payment and ensure that
documentation establishing that services are rendered are updated and retained.
d. SBE’s contract managers are required to verify that invoices and subsequent payments to
vendors are in accordance with the contract. SBE conducts periodic internal audits of
contracts and these audits include verifying that the amount paid to the vendor
corresponds to the amount in the contract.
e . SBE is working with the Attorney General’s Office to identify how to recover the charges
Findibnigll e8d – a At tin tchoer r2e0c1t 5ra ftiessc aaln yde iamrp-eronpde, rSlBy Ep ahiadd o avenr utinmeex. plained deficit fund balance and
had recorded certain unsupported revenues to eliminate deficits
Agency Response: . (pgs. 15-16)
SBE’s federal funds were initially and incorrectly recorded as “accrued
revenue.” Since no additional federal funds were received or are expected, SBE should have
p osted a journal entry moving special funds to cover the federal fund deficit. This journal
entry would have covered incurred expenditures.
The special fund deficit of $3.4 million on the State’s accounting records was due to the ACH
payments received and posted to a single project cost account (PCA). At year end clo sing, the
C omptroller’s General Accounting Division (GAD) posts journal entries to move revenue
generated from SBE’s county billings from the payroll PCA to the Special Fund PCA.
Because SBE cannot change the policy and procedures of Banking Services to post ACH
payments to multiple PCAs, SBE must use journal entries to move the revenue to the
appropriate PCAs. Star ting July 1, 2016, SBE posts a special fund revenue journal entry each
m onth. This will replace the need for GAD to post a revenue journal entry annually without
pRreosppoenr sree tcoo nRceiclioamtimone.n dation 8

--- Page 28 ---
State Board of Elections
Response to Legislative Audit Report (August 23, 2012 – October 22, 2015)
Pa ge 7 of 7
a. SBE will ensure that all applicable financial transactions are properly recorded and
supported.
b. SBE is reconciling federal and special fund balances to ensure that revenue was received
to cover incurred expenditures. This reconciliation process will be complete in fiscal
year 2017.

--- Page 29 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditor
Steven D. Bryant
Information Systems Staff Auditor