Title: Executive Department - Office of the Governor - Boards, Commissions, and Offices - Governor's Office for Children - Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Date: 08/13/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d7245606743f6
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:41:50.892792
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Executive Department
Office of the Governor
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Governor’s Office for Children
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
November 2019
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Craig J. Zucker (Senate Chair) Delegate Shelly L. Hettleman (House Chair)
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Andrew P. Cassilly
Senator Guy J. Guzzone Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Michael A. Jackson
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Douglas J.J. Peters Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Karen Lewis Young
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Organizational Change 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention Grants
Finding 1 – The Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention did 6
not have a comprehensive methodology for awarding certain Local
Law Enforcement grants, and did not verify expenditure and
performance data reported by grantees.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2 – Malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide the 8
Executive Department with adequate assurance that its computers were
properly protected.
Equipment
Finding 3 – The Executive Department did not complete physical 9
inventories of its sensitive equipment, and did not periodically reconcile
control accounts with the detailed records.
Cash Receipts
Finding 4 – The Executive Department did not have adequate procedures 10
and controls to ensure that all collections were deposited.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Executive Department – Office of the Governor provides oversight, guidance,
and coordination to units within the Executive Department and to other budgetary
units within the Executive Branch of State government. The Department also
provides the public with information about the Governor’s policies and goals, and
about the functions of State government. According to the State’s accounting
records, the Office of the Governor’s expenditures were approximately $10.6
million for fiscal year 2018.
The Boards, Commissions, and Offices unit consists of various entities, including
the Governor’s Office of Community Initiatives and the Governor’s Office of
Crime Control and Prevention (GOCCP), which were created by statute or
executive order to provide planning and coordination for Executive Branch
functions. According to the State’s accounting records, these entities’
expenditures were approximately $160.1 million during fiscal year 2018.
The Governor’s Office for Children promotes the State’s vision for a stable, safe,
and healthy environment for children and families and, according to the State’s
accounting records, this Office’s expenditures were approximately $1.4 million
during fiscal year 2018.
The Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing advocates for and promotes the
general welfare of individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing, and provides,
advocates for, and coordinates the adoption of public policies, regulations, and
programs that will benefit deaf and hard of hearing individuals. According to the
State’s accounting records, this Office’s expenditures were approximately
$374,000 during fiscal year 2018.
Organizational Change
During our audit period, two budgetary units that we previously audited as
separate entities were transferred to the Executive Department, consistent with
State budget law. Specifically, Chapter 143, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective
July 1, 2016, transferred the Maryland State Board of Contract Appeals
(MSBCA) to the Executive Department – Boards, Commissions, and Offices. In
addition, Chapter 422, Laws of Maryland 2018, effective July 1, 2018, created the
Victim Services Unit (VSU) under GOCCP to coordinate the State’s
responsibilities concerning services to victims. This law also transferred the
existing oversight functions and operations of the Criminal Injuries Compensation
4

--- Page 7 ---
Board (CICB) from the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services to
the VSU. The last separate audits of the MSBCA and the CICB were through
June 30, 2016 and June 30, 2018, respectively; consequently, the activities of
MSBCA for the period from July 1, 2016 through November 18, 2018 and the
activities of CICB (and VSU) for the period from July 1, 2018 through November
18, 2018 were included in the scope of this audit.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 4, 2015. We determined that the
Department satisfactorily addressed these findings. We will determine the status
of the two findings contained in our final CICB report dated November 2, 2018
during our next audit of the Executive Department – Office of the Governor. The
preceding audit report of MSBCA dated January 11, 2017 did not contain any
findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention Grants
Finding 1
The Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention did not have a
comprehensive methodology for awarding certain Local Law Enforcement
grants, and did not verify expenditure and performance data reported by
grantees.
Analysis
The Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention (GOCCP) did not have a
comprehensive methodology for selecting grantees to be awarded discretionary
Local Law Enforcement (LLE) grants and for allocating grant funds. In addition,
GOCCP did not verify expenditure and performance data reported by grantees.
GOCCP awards LLE grants to government entities and private organizations
throughout Maryland to help prevent and investigate crimes (including gun
violence, internet crimes against children, and domestic violence). According to
its records, during fiscal year 2018, GOCCP awarded LLE grants totaling $31.4
million, comprised of $17 million awarded in accordance with statute or
budgetary appropriation, and $14.4 million that was awarded at GOCCP’s
discretion.
There was No Comprehensive Methodology for Awarding Discretionary Grants
GOCCP did not have a comprehensive methodology for selecting entities to
receive discretionary grant funds and for determining the amounts awarded.
While GOCCP policy states that it strives for a competitive and transparent LLE
grant application process, the policy did not specifically require that GOCCP
discretionary grants be competitively awarded. In addition, the policy did not
provide sufficient guidance for determining award amounts for those grants that
had been competitively solicited. The policy provided for grant applications to be
scored based on factors including the applicant’s ability to achieve program goals,
the population served, and the justification for the funding requested. However,
the policy did not specify how the scores influenced the amount of funding
awarded.
Our test of funds awarded under seven discretionary grant programs, totaling $6.8
million in fiscal year 2018, disclosed that GOCCP had only scored the
applications for four grant programs totaling $4.8 million and the scores did not
appear to correlate to the funding awarded. In addition, for two grant programs
tested, funds totaling $381,000 were not awarded on a competitive basis; rather,
the grantees were individually selected for an award by GOCCP personnel.
6

--- Page 9 ---
For one grant program (Maryland Victims of Crime) tested, GOCCP received 38
applications. Our review of these application scores disclosed that four
applications, each for $100,000 in grant funds, received the same score but were
awarded different amounts. Specifically, each applicant received a score of 92
(out of 100), but the awards ranged from $40,000 to $70,000. GOCCP could not
explain the basis for the different award amounts or the rationale for those grants
awarded without a competitive process.
Grant Expenditures and Performance Measure Data Were Not Verified
GOCCP did not have a comprehensive process for the periodic review and
verification of LLE grantees’ (both statutory and discretionary) expenditures and
performance measures. To monitor grantees, GOCCP conducted triennial audits
of grantees and reviewed quarterly grantee reports, which contained expenditure
data and performance results, to ensure that grant funds were spent in accordance
with the related grant agreements.
However, during the review of quarterly reports, GOCCP did not require the
grantees to submit supporting documentation for expenditure data (such as payroll
registers) and performance results (such as internal documents or reports of gun
seizure or gun-related arrest activity).
Regarding grant-related expenditures, GOCCP management advised us that
personnel reviewed the support for reported grant expenditures during grantee
audits. However, these audits were only conducted triennially and were not
performed for all grantees. Specifically, as of April 4, 2019, GOCCP had not
conducted audits of 126 grantees (57 percent) that were awarded $29.4 million
during the period from January 21, 2015 through November 18, 2018, according
to GOCCP records. In addition, we were advised by GOCCP management that
they did not verify the performance data during those triennial audits that were
conducted.
Consequently, there is no assurance that all grant funds were expended in
accordance with the related grant agreements and that all grantees (both statutory
and discretionary) were achieving the grant programs’ intended objectives, as
specified in the grant awards.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that GOCCP
a. enhance its policy to provide a comprehensive methodology for
evaluating LLE grant applications and for making award decisions,
including the required use of a competitive award process, as
appropriate;
7

--- Page 10 ---
b. ensure discretionary grants are awarded in compliance with the
established policy and that documentation is retained for audit purposes;
and
c. verify grant expenditures and performance measure achievement by
obtaining and periodically reviewing supporting documentation related
to quarterly reports, and conducting audits for all grantees.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) provides information
technology (IT) support services to most of the Executive Department’s Offices
and Commissions, including the Office of the Governor. These support services
include:
 network firewalls and IT security services (such as firewall and intrusion
detection prevention systems operations and maintenance),
 IT service desk assistance,
 hardware support,
 software support (including malware protection support), and
 DoIT maintenance of key Executive Department applications.
The Executive Department also uses the DoIT-operated statewide network
services for connections to the Internet and to its internal network.
Finding 2
Malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide the Executive
Department with adequate assurance that its computers were properly
protected.
Analysis
Malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide the Executive
Department with adequate assurance that its 231 active computers (as of June 6,
2019) were properly protected. Specifically, numerous Executive Department
workstations had not been updated with the latest releases for a certain software
product known to have significant security-related vulnerabilities. Although the
vendor for this software product frequently provides software patches to address
these vulnerabilities, these workstations had not been updated for these patches.
As of June 2019, we noted that 110 of 116 workstations identified as having the
software product installed were running outdated software versions, where the
older installed versions had software release dates that ranged from October 2017
8

--- Page 11 ---
to January 2019. In addition we identified 10 Executive Department computers
that were operating without installed malware protection software.
The State of Maryland Information Technology Security Manual requires that
agencies protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by
implementing anti-malware solutions that, to the extent possible, include a
capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Executive Department, in conjunction with DoIT
a. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for
commonly vulnerable applications on all computers, and
b. ensure that all computers are operating with installed and current
versions of the malware protection software supported by DoIT.
Equipment
Finding 3
The Executive Department did not complete physical inventories of its
sensitive equipment, and did not periodically reconcile control accounts with
the detailed records.
Analysis
The Executive Department did not complete physical inventories of its sensitive
equipment, and did not periodically reconcile its equipment control account
balances with the related detailed records as required. According to the Executive
Department’s records, as of June 30, 2018, the value of its equipment totaled
approximately $3.8 million. The Office of the Governor’s Finance Office (GFO)
controls and accounts for equipment assigned to the Office of the Governor and
provides certain support services (such as maintaining equipment control
accounts) to the units within the Executive Department, as well as to other
budgetary units including the Department of Disabilities, the Maryland Energy
Administration, and the Secretary of State. Each unit was responsible for
conducting its own equipment physical inventories.
 As of March 2019, GFO had not completed its fiscal year 2018 physical
inventory of sensitive equipment for the Office of the Governor. Specifically,
247 sensitive equipment items totaling approximately $320,000 had not been
located. According to the Executive Department’s records, the value of
Office of the Governor’s sensitive equipment totaled approximately $706,000
as of June 30, 2018.
9

--- Page 12 ---
 The GFO did not periodically reconcile its equipment control accounts with
the related detail records of the Office of the Governor or for any of the six
units tested receiving support services. As a result, differences were not
identified and investigated. For example, as of June 30, 2018, the Office of
the Governor’s equipment balance, according to its detail records, totaled
$1,261,780, which exceeded the related control account balance of $1,074,218
by $187,562. The Executive Department could not readily explain these
differences.
The Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual requires
that annual physical inventories be conducted for sensitive equipment and that
missing items are to be investigated, reported to DGS, and removed from the
detail records. The Manual also requires that equipment control accounts be
maintained on a current basis and be periodically reconciled with the detail
records.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Executive Department comply with the
requirements of the DGS’ Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we
recommend that the Executive Department
a. conduct complete physical inventories of its sensitive equipment items
and promptly investigate all missing equipment (including those noted
above), and
b. periodically reconcile control accounts balances with the related detail
records and investigate any differences.
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
The Executive Department did not have adequate procedures and controls to
ensure that all collections were deposited.
Analysis
The Executive Department did not establish adequate controls over collections
received from its various units. Specifically, certain collections were not
immediately recorded and restrictively endorsed, and deposits were not made
timely and independently verified. These collections were initially received at the
various Executive Department units and forwarded to the GFO for deposit and
recordation in the State’s accounting records. According to State records, the
10

--- Page 13 ---
GFO processed cash receipts totaling approximately $909,000 during fiscal year
2018, of which 96 percent ($874,000) related to collections received at the units.
 Checks received at certain units were not recorded and restrictively endorsed
immediately upon receipt. For example, checks received at the Governor’s
Office of Community Initiatives, which totaled approximately $247,000 in
fiscal year 2018, were handled by at least two employees prior to being
recorded and endorsed.
 Certain units did not timely process checks and forward them to the GFO for
deposit. The Executive Department used a courier to transfer collections from
the units to the GFO on a daily basis. Our test of 15 deposits forwarded to the
GFO by four units, totaling approximately $329,000, disclosed that 8 deposits
from three units totaling $295,000, were forwarded to the GFO between 3 and
7 business days after initial receipt at the unit. Consequently, these 8 deposits
were not deposited timely in accordance with State policy.
 The GFO employee responsible for verifying that all checks were deposited
also initially received the checks from the units and, consequently, was not
independent of the cash receipts process.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires
immediate recording and restrictive endorsement of checks. Additionally, the
Manual requires that a reconciliation of the initial record of collections to the
amounts deposited be performed by an employee independent of the cash receipts
function, and that deposits be made by the next business day.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Executive Department ensure that collections are
a. recorded and restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt,
b. processed and forwarded by the units to the GFO for timely deposit, and
c. verified to deposit by an employee independent of the cash receipts
functions.
We advised the Executive Department on accomplishing the necessary
separation of duties using existing personnel.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Executive Department for the period beginning January 21, 2015 and ending
November 18, 2018.
Office of the Governor
Boards, Commissions, and Offices
Governor’s Office for Children
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Department’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, equipment, disbursements, grants,
federal funds, information systems, and payroll. Our audit included various
support services (such as payroll and processing vendor payment transmittals)
provided by the Executive Department – Office of the Governor on a centralized
basis to certain units and agencies within the Executive and Administrative
Control area of State Government (such as the Maryland Energy Administration,
Department of Disabilities, and Secretary of State). As previously requested by
the Governor’s Office, our audit also included activities related to the operation
and maintenance of Government House (for example, inventory record keeping),
even though the Department of General Services receives an appropriation for and
performs these activities. We also determined the status of the findings contained
in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of the Department’s compliance with those laws and regulations
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
12

--- Page 15 ---
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including the
Department.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Department’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Department’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Department’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
13

--- Page 16 ---
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to Department that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as
an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
14

--- Page 18 ---
Executive Department
Office of the Governor, Boards, Commissions, and Offices, Governor’s Office
for Children, Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Agency Response Form
Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention Grants
Finding 1
The Governor’s Office of Crime Control and Prevention did not have a comprehensive
methodology for awarding certain Local Law Enforcement grants, and did not verify
expenditure and performance data reported by grantees.
We recommend that GOCCP
a. enhance its policy to provide a comprehensive methodology for evaluating LLE grant
applications and for making award decisions, including the required use of a
competitive award process, as appropriate;
b. ensure discretionary grants are awarded in compliance with the established policy and
that documentation is retained for audit purposes; and
c. verify grant expenditures and performance measure achievement by obtaining and
periodically reviewing supporting documentation related to quarterly reports, and
conducting audits for all grantees.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide NA
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: FY20
Please provide details of Beginning in FY 19, GOCCP has implemented the consistent use of a
corrective action or standard application spreadsheet documenting award making decisions.
explain disagreement. The summary tab of this spreadsheet includes the criteria used for
making award decisions, listed in priority order, as well as a breakdown
of awards by jurisdiction. Beginning with FY 20 applications, the
detailed tab of this spreadsheet now consistently includes
narrative/comments from reviewers and internal staff that directly ties to
the award decisions based on the criteria publicized in the Notice of
Funding Availability (NOFA).
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: FY20
Please provide details of GOCCP will complete a thorough review of all discretionary, state
corrective action or funded grant programs to ensure compliance with the award process
explain disagreement. based on merit and eligibility. This will include review of the history of
the funding and the associated bill that initially established the funding.
Additionally, GOCCP has established a Team Share Drive within google
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 19 ---
Executive Department
Office of the Governor, Boards, Commissions, and Offices, Governor’s Office
for Children, Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Agency Response Form
in which all grant staff have access to historical data. Beginning FY 20,
all final application documents, including the final application
recommendations spreadsheet for each funding source is retained within
this Team Share Drive for future reference.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: FY20-FY21
Please provide details of GOCCP has undertaken several new initiatives recently, and will
corrective action or continue to restructure risk assessment and monitoring processes to
explain disagreement. include review of progress /performance measures report to support
fiscal reimbursement requests submitted on a quarterly basis by sub-
recipients. Collectively in FY 20, program managers will have the
capacity to extract on a quarterly basis, award-level data from GOCCP’s
electronic Grants Management System (GMS) and dashboards to make
informed decisions. In FY 21, GOCCP will complete an objective risk
assessment tool for all subgrantees to determine audit and monitoring
activities proportional to risk levels. This process will resemble pre-
award to post-award risk levels consistent with corresponding initiatives
supported by Governor’s Grants Office. This tool will resemble
guidance provided for Federal grants in 2 CFR Part 200.331. GOCCP
will begin communicating this requirement to all grantees starting in
Spring/Summer 2020.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2
Malware protection controls were not sufficient to provide the Executive Department with
adequate assurance that its computers were properly protected.
We recommend that the Executive Department, in conjunction with DoIT
a. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for commonly vulnerable
applications on all computers, and
b. ensure that all computers are operating with installed and current versions of the
malware protection software supported by DoIT.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide As of 10/30/19 all 235 computers were running either of two operating
additional comments as systems found in our reporting. All devices are reporting into the DoIT
deemed necessary. malware prevention software management console.
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 20 ---
Executive Department
Office of the Governor, Boards, Commissions, and Offices, Governor’s Office
for Children, Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/19
Please provide details of DoIT now uses a specific software product for application patching of
corrective action or commonly vulnerable applications and operating systems. Additionally,
explain disagreement. DoIT is in the process of deploying another separate software product
using agents to scan for missing patches and vulnerabilities due to
misconfiguration of software. DoIT has scheduled deployment of this
other software product and its agents to the Governor’s Office systems
on 11/12/2019. This will complete rollout to DoIT environment.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/31/19
Please provide details of DoIT believes that the discrepancy in device counts found was due to a
corrective action or difference in the way devices were counted. We believe that many of
explain disagreement. these devices were removed from production as part of the remediation
effort for an older installed operating system and that the 235 devices
currently reporting are an accurate representation of the current
production environment. All systems are running a supported version of
the DoIT malware prevention software product.
Equipment
Finding 3
The Executive Department did not complete physical inventories of its sensitive equipment,
and did not periodically reconcile control accounts with the detailed records.
We recommend that the Executive Department comply with the requirements of the DGS’
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that the Executive Department
a. conduct complete physical inventories of its sensitive equipment items and promptly
investigate all missing equipment (including those noted above), and
b. periodically reconcile control accounts balances with the related detail records and
investigate any differences.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide NA
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 21 ---
Executive Department
Office of the Governor, Boards, Commissions, and Offices, Governor’s Office
for Children, Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The Executive Department is actively working with DoIT and has
corrective action or located many of the items noted as ‘missing’. The Executive
explain disagreement. Department will continue to manage the sensitive inventory and
accordingly utilize DGS forms EPDs & Missing/Stolen for reporting.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of One GFO employee is responsible to update and oversee the inventory
corrective action or control accounts for each unit, reconcile to the T100 reports, and ensure
explain disagreement. accuracy of each submission as dictated by DGS requirements.
Furthermore, in FY20 each unit will be required to submit a mid- and
end-cycle inventory for better management of office equipment.
Page 4 of 5

--- Page 22 ---
Executive Department
Office of the Governor, Boards, Commissions, and Offices, Governor’s Office
for Children, Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
The Executive Department did not have adequate procedures and controls to ensure that
all collections were deposited.
We recommend that the Executive Department ensure that collections are
a. recorded and restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt,
b. processed and forwarded by the units to the GFO for timely deposit, and
c. verified to deposit by an employee independent of the cash receipts functions.
We advised the Executive Department on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide NA
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of Checks are received via mail and courier. Upon receipt, envelopes are
corrective action or opened, date stamped and endorsed “For Deposit Only” on the same
explain disagreement. business day. The Units internally log each check and create a
supporting memo prior to forwarding to the GFO.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
The Units forward the checks and supporting memos to the GFO within
two business days of receipt.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Immediately
Please provide details of One GFO employee has been identified to verify the deposit. This
corrective action or employee does not handle the checks upon receipt. Their responsibility
explain disagreement. is to verify the deposit has occurred utilizing the deposit slip stamped by
the bank. Once this is received, the deposit entry in made in FMIS.
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 23 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Thomas L. Allen, III
Matusala Y. Abishe
Staff Auditors