Title: Maryland Economic Development Corporation
Date: 12/03/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743c8
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:36:25.363931
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Economic Development Corporation
January 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO), which functions
under the provisions of Title 10, Subtitle 1 of the Economic Development Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland, is constituted as a public instrumentality of
the State of Maryland. MEDCO’s goal is to assist in the expansion,
modernization, and retention of existing Maryland businesses and to attract new
businesses to the State. MEDCO also owns and manages certain properties and,
upon request, assists local jurisdiction projects, and borrows money and issues
bonds for financing this assistance. Since its creation in 1984 through June 30,
2014, MEDCO has undertaken 254 projects.
MEDCO is managed by a 12-member Board of Directors appointed by the
Governor. The administrative affairs and technical activities of MEDCO are
directed and supervised by an executive director who is appointed by the Board,
subject to the approval of the Governor.
According to MEDCO’s audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2014 and
2015, MEDCO owned and managed 15 operating facilities and its non-recourse
debt totaled $705 million and $723 million, respectively. This debt represents
obligations related to the operating facilities of MEDCO and is to be retired solely
from the operating revenues of the respective facilities. MEDCO is not liable to
bondholders and lenders in the event of project/borrower default. The debt
consists primarily of revenue bonds issued by MEDCO (which are not obligations
of the State of Maryland) and loans from government agencies (for example, the
Maryland Department of Commerce).
Based on a review of MEDCO’s annual activities report for the fiscal year ending
June 30, 2015 and discussions with management personnel, we noted that 2 of its
15 operating facilities were financially troubled. A resort and conference center
was classified as a “non-performing” project because its debt service payment
was only partially made and certain financial covenants were not met. A student
housing project was classified as a “watch” project, in part, because it did not
meet its required debt coverage ratio. As a result, MEDCO worked with the
parties involved with these projects and engaged management consultants to
identify various improvement strategies that are in the process of being
implemented.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Organizational Change
Effective October 1, 2015, in accordance with Chapter 141, Laws of Maryland
2015, the principal economic development entities in the State, including
MEDCO, were restructured under the newly created Secretary of Commerce. As
the Secretary of Commerce already serves on the MEDCO Board of Directors,
MEDCO does not anticipate this organizational change having any significant
impact on its operations.
Financial Statement Audits
MEDCO engaged an independent accounting firm to audit its financial statements
for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2013, 2014, and 2015. In the related audit
reports, the firm stated that MEDCO’s financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of MEDCO and the changes in its
financial position and cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated December 3, 2012. We determined that MEDCO
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Maryland Economic Development Corporation’s (MEDCO) internal
control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MEDCO. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Economic
Development Corporation (MEDCO) for the period beginning May 18, 2012 and
ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MEDCO’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, and a review of
MEDCO projects. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report.
MEDCO engaged an independent accounting firm to audit its financial statements
for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2013, 2014, and 2015. In the related audit
reports, the firm stated that MEDCO’s financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of MEDCO and the changes in its
financial position and cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. We
have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage pertaining to MEDCO’s debt financing and payroll. Our audit
procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MEDCO’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
5

--- Page 8 ---
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MEDCO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditor