Title: Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund - January 1, 2009 to December 31, 2009
Date: 03/05/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744fd
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:23:45.265674
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund
January 1, 2009 to December 31, 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
March 5, 2010
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
As required by the Insurance Article, Section 19-808 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have audited the receipts and disbursements of the Maryland Health
Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1, 2009
and ending December 31, 2009.
The Fund is administered by the Commissioner of the Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA), and consists primarily of revenues generated by an annual
premium tax imposed on health maintenance organizations and managed care
organizations. The Fund serves several purposes, including retention of certain
health care providers in the State by subsidizing their medical professional
liability (malpractice) insurance premiums for a specified number of years, and by
increasing certain rates paid to providers by the Maryland Medical Assistance
program (Medicaid) and payments to managed care organizations that serve that
program. Beginning in fiscal year 2010, Fund revenue is no longer allocated for
the purpose of subsidizing malpractice insurance premiums, although eligible
subsidy requests applicable to previous years may still be paid.
Our audit did not include procedures designed to verify the propriety of the
subsidy payments made to medical professional liability insurers since State law
requires MIA to conduct annual audits of each insurer for this purpose.
A schedule of the Fund’s financial activity for the 2009 calendar year is included
in this report. As disclosed in that schedule, the Fund’s cash balance was
approximately $24.3 million as of December 31, 2009.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by MIA.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Establishment and Purpose of the Fund
The Insurance Article, Section 19-802 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
established the Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund effective
April 1, 2005. The law provides that the Fund will serve several purposes,
including retention of certain health care providers in the State, by subsidizing
their medical professional liability (malpractice) insurance premiums for a
specified number of years, and by increasing fee-for-service rates paid to
providers by the Maryland Medical Assistance program (Medicaid) and payments
to managed care organizations that serve that program. The Fund is administered
by the Commissioner of the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA).
The Fund consists primarily of revenues generated by an annual premium tax
imposed on health maintenance organizations and managed care organizations.
All revenues are initially deposited into the Fund, and then allocated, in
accordance with a schedule established in the law, to two accounts: the Rate
Stabilization Account and the Medical Assistance Program Account. Amounts
allocated to the Rate Stabilization Account are paid, in accordance with
established criteria, to medical professional liability insurers who apply to MIA
for rate subsidies on behalf of insured health care providers. Amounts allocated
to the Medical Assistance Program Account are paid by MIA to the State’s
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to increase payments to Medicaid
providers and managed care organizations. The law provides that revenue
allocations to the two accounts continue through fiscal year 2009. Beginning in
fiscal year 2010, all Fund revenues, less certain administrative costs, are to be
allocated to the Medical Assistance Program Account.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated March 6, 2009. We determined that MIA
satisfactorily addressed that finding.
Financial Information
On page 4 is a summary of the receipts and disbursements for the Maryland
Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1,
2009 and ending December 31, 2009, based on the State’s accounting records.
This summary is not intended to and does not provide the financial position and
3

--- Page 6 ---
results of operations in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Specifically, certain financial statements and disclosures (for example, balance
sheet, summary of significant accounting policies) have not been provided as
would be required had this summary been prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
January 1, 2009 to
December 31, 2009
RECEIPTS:
Premium taxes $ 84,939,911
Premium tax exemption value (1) 9,382,946
Interest income 1,223,776
Total receipts 95,546,633
DISBURSEMENTS:
Payments to medical professional liability insurers $ 5,363,781
Payments to Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (2) 129,111,279
Administration expenses 272,704
Total disbursements 134,747,764
EXCESS OF DISBURSEMENTS OVER RECEIPTS (39,201,131)
FUND BALANCE (cash basis), December 31, 2008 63,465,004
FUND BALANCE (cash basis), December 31, 2009 $ 24,263,873
(1)
Premium tax exemption value represents amounts paid by non-profit health maintenance organizations in
lieu of premium taxes.
(2)
Includes $22.3 million transferred to DHMH’s Medical Care Programs Administration in May 2009 as
part of a deficiency appropriation approved by the Board of Public Works.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Fund’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant instances
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to MIA that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MIA. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
As required by the Insurance Article, Section 19-808 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have audited the receipts and disbursements of the Maryland Health
Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1, 2009
and ending December 31, 2009. The Fund is administered by the Commissioner
of the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA). The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
The objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s receipts and
disbursements and related records and internal control, and to evaluate
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also
determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
The areas addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, and
certain required audits of Fund activity performed by MIA. Our audit procedures
included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and
records, and observations of Fund operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives.
MIA is required by law to annually audit each medical professional liability
insurer that applied for a subsidy payment from the Fund to verify application
information submitted by the insurer; accordingly, our audit did not include
5

--- Page 8 ---
procedures designed to verify the propriety of the amounts requested by medical
professional liability insurers and the disposition of such payments.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Fund by MIA.
These support services (such as maintenance of accounting records and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MIA.
MIA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control over the Fund. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Laura J. Hilbert, CFE
Senior Auditor
Michael D. Cheese
Ryan P. Stecher
Staff Auditors