Title: Department of Transportation - Maryland Aviation Administration
Date: 11/16/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674296
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:41:02.442879
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Transportation
Maryland Aviation Administration
October 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Federal Funds
Finding 1 – MAA did not comply with requirements of a federal noise 5
compatibility program and, as a result, $4.6 million in related
expenditures were not reimbursed with federal funds.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2 – MAA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that all 6
collections, which totaled $141 million during fiscal year 2015, were
deposited and that deposits were made timely.
Purchases and Disbursements
* Finding 3 – Proper internal controls were not established to ensure 7
independent approvals for purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Vehicle Maintenance
Finding 4 – MAA did not competitively procure vehicle and equipment 8
maintenance services or use a Statewide contract when available.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) is responsible for the operation,
maintenance, protection, and development of the Baltimore/Washington
International (BWI) Thurgood Marshall Airport and the Martin State Airport, and
operates a program to foster, develop, and regulate aviation within the State.
According to the State’s records, MAA’s expenditures totaled approximately
$311 million (special funds of $279 million and federal funds of $32 million)
during fiscal year 2015. Special fund revenue generated by airport operations
totaled approximately $224 million; the amount by which special fund
expenditures exceeded special fund revenue was funded by the State’s
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF). According to MAA’s records, during fiscal
year 2015, approximately $78 million of other revenue (passenger facility
charges, customer facility charges, and a portion of parking revenue) was also
generated and used for debt service and capital project expenditures. As needed,
funding for capital projects is also provided by the TTF.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of eight findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 16, 2012. We determined that MAA
satisfactorily addressed seven of these findings and one is repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Federal Funds
Finding 1
The Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) did not comply with
requirements of a federal noise compatibility program and, as a result, $4.6
million in related expenditures were not reimbursed with federal funds.
Analysis
MAA did not comply with requirements of a federal noise compatibility program
and, as a result, $4.6 million in related expenditures were not reimbursed with
federal funds set aside for this purpose. As of September 30, 2015, MAA had
$12.4 million in an escrow account established for the noise compatibility
program; however, no program costs had been reimbursed from this account.
Instead, MAA advised that these costs were recovered through airline landing
fees.
The noise compatibility program provides funding for residential sound insulation
projects and for the acquisition of properties in areas exposed to significant
aircraft noise. Federal funding is available to reimburse 80 percent of eligible
expenditures, while 20 percent is required in State matching funds. MAA advised
that it suspended the noise compatibility program in 2012 because of difficulty in
complying with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reimbursement
requirements.
In response to our inquiries during the audit, MAA determined that it had spent
$5.7 million for sound insulation projects during the period between 2003 and
2012, but it had not obtained reimbursement for the federal portion of these
expenditures, totaling $4.6 million. MAA also determined that $2.7 million of the
$4.6 million would not qualify for reimbursement because the expenditures
related to projects that were completed outside of the allowed airport perimeter or
because MAA could not locate documentation that identified the associated
properties. While MAA subsequently requested reimbursement for the remaining
$1.9 million, the FAA denied the request in October 2015 because the project
expenditures identified were not eligible; specifically, MAA did not comply with
certain program requirements such as pre-construction and post-construction
noise level testing of residential properties.
MAA contends that all noise compatibility program costs have been included in
its calculation of the landing fees charged to the airlines and, therefore, have been
recovered. However, rather than requiring the airlines to absorb these costs,
5

--- Page 8 ---
MAA should be more diligent in complying with program requirements which
would allow it to use the federal funding available in the escrow account.
This escrow account was established when the FAA changed the noise
compatibility program in 2008 and required MAA to develop a plan to dispose of
excess land that was originally purchased with federal funds as part of the
program and deposit the federal proceeds into an escrow account. These
proceeds, which were primarily received since 2012, represent the only funding
source available for reimbursement of subsequent noise compatibility program
expenditures, subject to FAA’s authorization. However, as of September 30,
2015 no funds had been requested for reimbursement from the account. As
allowed by federal regulations, MAA advised us it plans to use these escrow
funds on eligible airport improvement projects as well as the noise compatibility
program.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MAA establish and implement formal procedures to
ensure compliance with applicable program requirements and request
reimbursement for all eligible expenditures from the federal funds available
for this purpose.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
MAA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that all collections, which
totaled $141 million during fiscal year 2015, were deposited and that deposits
were made timely.
Analysis
MAA did not have an adequate procedure to ensure all collections were deposited
and that deposits were made timely. According to agency records, collections
processed during fiscal year 2015, which included receipts from airport tenants
and airlines, totaled approximately $141 million.
Specifically, MAA personnel did not use the initial record of receipts to perform
the deposit verifications. Rather the deposited collections were only compared to
the amounts recorded in the State’s accounting records. As a result, there is a lack
of assurance that all collections were deposited. The Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Procedures Manual requires a reconciliation of collections recorded
upon receipt to the bank deposit.
6

--- Page 9 ---
In addition, our test of 10 daily deposits totaling approximately $44 million
disclosed that all collections were deposited either two or three days after receipt.
We were advised by MAA that this delay occurred because the armored courier
service MAA used to transport its deposits to the bank could not make same day
deposits. Alternatively, the controls over collections, including the security over
the checks and the timeliness of deposit, could be enhanced if MAA requested its
tenants, especially airlines, to remit funds electronically. The Comptroller of
Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that collections be deposited
no later than one business day after the date of receipt.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MAA
a. ensure deposit verifications are performed using all initial receipt
records, and
b. pursue other arrangements to enhance the accountability and timeliness
of deposits such as requesting that collections be remitted electronically.
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 3
Proper internal controls were not established to ensure independent
approvals for purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Analysis
The security features available within the Maryland Department of
Transportation’s Financial Management Information System (MDOT FMIS) were
not fully used by MAA to establish proper internal controls over the processing of
purchasing and disbursement transactions. Specifically, MAA had not established
adequate electronic approval paths over all critical purchasing and disbursement
transactions for 9 of its 143 departments, including 6 accounts payable
departments.
Consequently, 14 employees could process critical transactions without the
system requiring an independent individual to approve those transactions.
Specifically, 10 employees could initiate and approve purchase orders without
independent approval. Four other employees could initiate and approve
disbursements without independent approval.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Although our testing did not disclose any improper disbursements, unauthorized
transactions could be processed and may not be readily detected. During fiscal
year 2015, through May 2015, MAA used FMIS to process disbursements totaling
approximately $230 million. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MAA fully use available FMIS security controls by
establishing independent electronic approval requirements for all critical
purchasing and disbursement transactions (repeat).
Vehicle Maintenance
Finding 4
MAA did not competitively procure certain vehicle and equipment
maintenance services or use Statewide contracts when available.
Analysis
MAA did not consistently comply with State procurement regulations regarding
the use of competitive procurements and Statewide contracts for certain vehicle
and equipment maintenance services. In addition, certain disbursements were
made with corporate purchasing cards without documentation identifying the
vehicle or equipment being serviced. We tested 24 corporate purchasing card
transactions between April 2014 and June 2015 totaling $49,000 for vehicle and
equipment maintenance services.
• Our testing disclosed that MAA made 17 purchases from the same two
vendors for vehicle and equipment maintenance services without
consolidating these purchases, soliciting competitive bids, and entering into
contracts with the vendors. We subsequently determined that MAA made
repeated purchases from these two vendors during fiscal years 2013 through
2015. Specifically, purchases from the vehicle maintenance vendor totaled
approximately $277,000 and purchases from the equipment maintenance
vendor totaled approximately $138,000 during this period.
We also noted that certain vehicle maintenance services procured in 12
transactions, totaling approximately $24,000, may have been available under a
Statewide contract (including 9 of the aforementioned 17 purchases). While
we were advised by MAA that certain cost savings were achieved by using
alternate vendors, no documentation of this assertion was maintained. By
8

--- Page 11 ---
procuring these services in this manner, MAA’s leverage as a high-volume
purchaser may not have been maximized.
State procurement regulations generally specify that contracts in excess of
$25,000 shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, and that
procurements exceeding $5,000 have written contracts. State procurement
regulations also generally require the use of Statewide commodity contracts
when available.
• Vendor invoices for purchases of vehicle and equipment maintenance services
were not adequately supported. Our testing disclosed that 13 transactions
totaling approximately $31,000 were not supported by documentation that
identified the specific MAA vehicle or equipment being serviced. Without
this information being furnished by the vendor there is no assurance that the
vehicle or equipment serviced belonged to MAA.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MAA
a. comply with State procurement regulations by using a formal written
procurement process for purchases that are reasonably expected to
exceed $25,000, ensuring procurements exceeding $5,000 have written
contracts, and using existing Statewide contracts for all applicable
services; and
b. ensure documentation supporting corporate purchasing card
transactions contains information that clearly identifies that the services
provided were applicable to MAA.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) for the period
beginning August 1, 2011 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MAA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements for architectural
and engineering and construction contracts and operating expenditures, as well as
cash receipts. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services (such as, processing of
personnel transactions and maintenance of employee leave records) provided by
the State Highway Administration to MAA. These payroll support services are
included within the scope of our audit of the State Highway Administration.
Our audit also did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance
with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MAA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MAA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MAA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
10

--- Page 13 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and the Maryland Department of
Transportation’s Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and
expenditure data) and from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as
part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits
and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that
the data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
MAA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MAA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MAA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Maryland Department of Transportation, on behalf of
MAA, to our findings and recommendations in included as an appendix to this
11

--- Page 14 ---
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MAA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Aviation Administration
Draft Audit Report Responses
August 1, 2011 to June 30, 2015
Federal Funds
Finding 1
The Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) did not comply with
requirements of a federal noise compatibility program and, as a result, $4.6
million in related expenditures were not reimbursed with federal funds.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MAA establish and implement formal procedures to
ensure compliance with applicable program requirements and request
reimbursement for all eligible expenditures from the federal funds available
for this purpose.
MAA Response:
The MAA concurs with the auditors’ recommendations.
As indicated in the analysis, MAA continued a Homeowner Sound Insulation
Program, for all properties within the 75 DNL that had requested improvements,
well after Federal Airport Improvement Program Noise funding ceased to be
available, and the potential for reimbursement from Noise Land Disposal
Proceeds was questionable.
Beginning in 2016, funds in the Noise Land Disposal Account have been used on
eligible airport improvement projects based on the hierarchy defined under the
Noise Land Management and Requirements for Disposal of Noise Land or
Development Land Funded with AIP dated June 2014. Reimbursement from
federal sources for our past Sound Insulation Program is not available. The State
payments made over the audit period were included in the annual rates and
charges billed to the airlines per the Use and Lease Agreement. All State paid
costs have been recovered from the airlines. MAA was diligent in complying with
noise program requirements which would allow it to use federal funding available
in the escrow account. There were numerous correspondences between MAA and
FAA since 2012 which demonstrated MAA’s efforts in complying with noise
program requirements. However, as MAA was not able to collect reimbursement
for noise expenditures from federal sources, it collected this cost from the
airlines.
1

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Aviation Administration
Draft Audit Report Responses
August 1, 2011 to June 30, 2015
On August 30, 2016, the FAA announced that the 14 CFR Part 150 Noise
Exposure Maps for BWI Marshall Airport are in compliance with applicable
requirements with an effective date of August 31, 2016. This will allow the MAA
to move forward with new programs for Sound Insulation and Voluntary
Acquisition for eligible properties that fall within the 65 DNL, and homeowners
interested in participating.
In the interim, the FAA has been working on an Updated Advisory Circular of
Sound Insulation Guidelines which will provide airports standardized procedures
in management and oversight for sound insulation programs and the associated
grant requirements. The Circular will include the noise testing methodology and
detailed procedures to ensure programs are implemented consistent with FAA
policies.
Our plan is to begin the new programs once the FAA Updated Advisory Circular
is available and MAA can develop Standard Operation Procedures (SOP)
consistent with that guidance. MAA currently has approximately $1.1 million in
the escrow account to begin the program and is moving forward with some
additional noise property sales that will provide additional funding. MAA’s SOP
will insure that the 20 percent State match and 80 percent Federal soundproofing
funds, for eligible costs, are authorized and reimbursed in a timely manner. The
State match payments will continue to be included in the annual rates and charges
billed to the airlines per the Use and Lease Agreement.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
MAA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that all collections, which
totaled $141 million during fiscal year 2015, were deposited and that deposits
were made timely.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MAA
a. ensure deposit verifications are performed using all initial receipt
records, and
b. pursue other arrangements to enhance the accountability and timeliness
of deposits such as requesting that collections be remitted electronically.
2

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Aviation Administration
Draft Audit Report Responses
August 1, 2011 to June 30, 2015
MAA Response:
The MAA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation.
a. The MAA Accounting Office performs an independent review process for
every deposit. As of December 2015, the cashier creates a certificate of
deposit by using the initial records of cash and checks, which include pre-
numbered cash receipts and the checks received prior to sending it to the bank,
and initials it when completed. Another independent employee verifies the
original records of cash and checks received to the MAA certificate of deposit
form, and initials it when completed. A third independent employee verifies
the MAA certificate of deposit form (which has already been verified to the
original cash receipts and checks) to the daily bank journal and bank
statement.
b. MAA creates a deposit of all receipts daily. These deposits are picked up by a
contracted armored service every day to deliver the deposits to the bank vault
within a day. This usually equates to the deposit being posted to the bank
within 2 business days due to timing. In consultation with the General
Accounting Division, they have stated that this meets the requirement for
timely deposit as proscribed in the Accounting Procedures Manual. The
armored car company has stated that it is not possible for them to do a same
day deposit.
MAA encourages all tenants to pay by ACH or wire transfer, however cannot
mandate this as a practice. In September 2016, MAA sent a mass distribution
email to all of our customers, recommending that they take advantage of
paying MAA by ACH. MAA also inquired into remote deposit but was
denied that option by the State Treasurer’s Office (STO) because of the low
volume of checks MAA receives. In addition, STO stated to MAA that “This
is not an internal control problem because MAA did its part in getting the
deposits to the courier timely.”
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 3
Proper internal controls were not established to ensure independent
approvals for purchasing and disbursement transactions.
3

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Aviation Administration
Draft Audit Report Responses
August 1, 2011 to June 30, 2015
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MAA fully use available FMIS security controls by
establishing independent electronic approval requirements for all critical
purchasing and disbursement transactions (repeat).
MAA Response:
The MAA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation.
MAA worked with The Secretary’s Office (TSO) to determine what needed to be
modified to correct these inadequate approval paths. Those corrections were
applied in December 2015. In addition, TSO has created a security report that is
sent quarterly to MAA to assist in identifying any future inadequate approval
paths. TSO staff will follow up with MAA in October 2016 to review the
approval paths to determine if they could be further strengthened.
With regard to the auditor’s analysis of the 10 employees that could initiate and
approve purchase orders without independent approval, MAA provides the
following explanation. MAA agrees that these 10 employees could initiate and
approve purchase orders; however FMIS approval paths established by MAA
required an independent final approval from an independent employee in MAA’s
Budget Office. In addition, from December 2015 through April 2016 MAA
changed the security for these 10 employees so that some could initiate and some
could approve purchase orders, but none could both initiate and approve. The
requirement that an independent employee from the MAA Budget Office provide
a final approval for all purchase orders remained.
With regard to the auditor’s analysis of the 4 employees that could initiate and
approve disbursements without independent approval, MAA provides the
following explanation. The Accounts Payable Technicians create and approve
invoices and direct vouchers as part of their job duties. These invoices and direct
vouchers do not interface into State FMIS (nor are they sent to the General
Accounting Division for payment) until they are independently reviewed and
approved by an Accounts Payable Supervisor (TSO FMIS designated 1VP
approval process) and an additional independent employee (TSO FMIS
designated 2VP approval process). Beginning in December 2015, this review is
manually documented and retained as a historical record. The review is also
electronically documented by these individuals approving the disbursements
within FMIS and attaching their user IDs to these transactions. In addition to the
1VP and 2VP approval processes, all invoices and direct vouchers are manually
approved by an authorized invoice approver (e.g. contract manager, buyer, end
user, requestor etc.) and he/she is independent from the Accounts Payable office.
4

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Aviation Administration
Draft Audit Report Responses
August 1, 2011 to June 30, 2015
Vehicle Maintenance
Finding 4
MAA did not competitively procure certain vehicle and equipment
maintenance services or use Statewide contracts when available.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MAA
a. comply with State procurement regulations by using a formal written
procurement process for purchases that are reasonably expected to
exceed $25,000, ensuring procurements exceeding $5,000 have written
contracts, and using existing Statewide contracts for all applicable
services; and
b. ensure documentation supporting corporate purchasing card
transactions contains information that clearly identifies that the services
provided were applicable to MAA.
MAA Response:
The MAA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation.
a. MAA has a policy in place where we follow State procurement regulations for
formal written procurements over $25,000; ensuring procurements exceeding
$5,000 have written contracts, and using existing statewide contracts.
The Office of Procurement is working with Vehicle & Equipment
Maintenance to generate contracts for items which are not available through
Statewide contracts and are frequently purchased by Vehicle & Equipment
Maintenance. The contracts are estimated to be in place around December 1,
2016.
b. Beginning June 2016, MAA required the vendor to document the vehicle
information on the invoices where feasible. For cases where this is not
practical, the MAA technician, after service is performed or the parts are
installed at MAA’s auto shop, will record the vehicle information on work
order/invoice as appropriate. In addition, the MAXIMO system captures the
work order, vehicle identification and the associated invoice information.
5

--- Page 21 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Matusala Y. Abishe
Jaime A. DeWitt, CPA
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors