Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents - Baltimore
Date: 10/14/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745d4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:32:30.670631
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
Baltimore
June 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Baltimore (RICA) is a
mental health residential treatment facility of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene. RICA serves adolescents and their families from the Central
Maryland region, the Eastern Shore, and parts of Western Maryland. The services
provided include inpatient and outpatient treatment, education services, and
community service programs. RICA is licensed to treat a maximum of 45
inpatients. During fiscal year 2013, it had a daily average of 36 inpatients and 55
outpatients under treatment. According to the State’s records, RICA’s
expenditures totaled approximately $12.9 million during fiscal year 2013.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated December 2, 2011. We determined that RICA
satisfactorily addressed the finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Cash receipts were not always deposited timely.
Analysis
RICA did not always deposit cash receipts, which totaled approximately $1.8
million during fiscal year 2013, in a timely manner. The majority of these
receipts are received in check form from local jurisdictions for educational
services provided to adolescents from the related jurisdictions. Our test of 44
checks totaling approximately $912,000, received during fiscal years 2013 and
2014, disclosed 30 checks totaling approximately $484,000 were deposited from
two to ten business days after the receipt date.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that cash
receipts be deposited no later than one business day after the date of receipt.
Since the majority of these collections are from local jurisdictions for educational
3

--- Page 6 ---
services provided, the processing of cash receipts could be enhanced by requiring
the jurisdictions to use electronic funds transfer.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that RICA
a. ensure that all cash receipts are deposited in a timely manner, as
required; and
b. pursue the use of electronic funds transfer for payments from local
jurisdictions.
Procurement
Finding 2
RICA did not comply with State procurement regulations when purchasing
dietary items.
Analysis
RICA purchased dietary items directly from one vendor without considering
availability and pricing from Department of General Services’ approved statewide
contracts as required under State procurement regulations. Our test of 12
disbursements made during the period from fiscal year 2012 through fiscal year
2014 (as of January), totaling approximately $150,000, disclosed two
disbursements for dietary items to the same vendor totaling $27,370 for which
RICA did not have a contract. Upon inquiry, we were advised that this vendor
was routinely used for purchases of dietary items without considering the
availability of a statewide contract or obtaining competitive bids. Consequently,
there is a lack of assurance that the State obtained these items at the lowest cost.
For example, our review of items purchased totaling $596, disclosed that the same
items and quantities could have been purchased using a statewide contract at a
savings of 19 percent. RICA purchased the vast majority of its dietary items from
the aforementioned vendor. During the period from fiscal year 2012 through
fiscal year 2014 (as of January), payments to this vendor totaled approximately
$211,000.
State procurement regulations generally specify that statewide contracts be used
when available for commodity purchases. In the absence of a statewide contract,
State procurement regulations also generally specify that contracts in excess of
$25,000 shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, and that procurements
exceeding $5,000 must also have written contracts.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that RICA comply with State procurement regulations with
respect to using statewide contracts and, in the absence of a statewide
contract, ensuring procurements are properly solicited and documented.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Baltimore
(RICA) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period
beginning March 22, 2011 and ending March 23, 2014. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine RICA’s financial
transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurements and disbursements,
working funds, and payroll. We also determined the status of the finding included
in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
RICA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
5

--- Page 8 ---
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
RICA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
Our audit did not disclose any conditions that we consider to be significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect RICA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This
report does include findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to RICA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of RICA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
RICA‐Baltimore
Legislative Audit
March 22, 2011 to March 23, 2014
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Cash receipts were not always deposited timely.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that RICA
a. ensure that all cash receipts are deposited in a timely manner, as required; and
b. pursue the use of electronic funds transfer for payments from local jurisdictions.
Administration’s Response
The Agency concurs with the finding and recommendations.
a. Effective immediately, all cash receipts will be deposited after the day of receipt,
no later than the first working day, or at least weekly whenever receipts
accumulate to $500, according to the guidelines of the State Comptroller’s
Accounting Procedures Manual.
b. Effective immediately, the agency’s fiscal officer will pursue the use of electronic
funds transfer for payments from local jurisdictions in accordance with the General
Accounting Division’s Accounting Procedures Manual.

--- Page 11 ---
Procurement
Finding 2
RICA did not comply with State procurement regulations when purchasing dietary items.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that RICA comply with State procurement regulations with respect to using
statewide contracts, and, in the absence of a statewide contract, ensuring procurements
are properly solicited and documented.
Administration’s Response
The Agency concurs with the finding and recommendation. Effective immediately, the
Agency’s procurement officer will ensure that all procurement regulations are properly
documented and solicited as required. The Agency’s procurement officer will procure dietary
items utilizing statewide contracts when applicable. All Category III solicitations will be posted
to eMaryland Marketplace; and contracts in excess of $25,000 will be awarded by competitive
sealed bidding, as required by Statement Procurement regulations.

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Senior Auditor