Title: Maryland Department of Health - Potomac Center
Date: 01/03/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067455a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:16:34.222507
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Potomac Center
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Potomac Center is a State residential facility for adult individuals with
intellectual disabilities. It is located in Hagerstown, Maryland and serves
individuals from the entire State. The Center provides services intended to
maximize the physical, intellectual, emotional, and social development of
individuals who have borderline to profound intellectual disabilities. It also
provides habilitative services to expedite the return of individuals to a less
restrictive environment. Furthermore, the Center operates a Transitions Program
to serve individuals who have both intellectual disabilities and mental illness and
to provide a therapeutic habilitation model before discharge to the community.
The Center, which is a budgetary unit within the Maryland Department of
Health’s Developmental Disabilities Administration, has a licensed capacity of 63
residents. During fiscal year 2016, the Center had an actual average daily
population of 39 residents. According to the State’s records, the Center’s fiscal
year 2016 expenditures totaled approximately $13.9 million.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 7, 2014. We determined that the
Center satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Payroll
Finding 1
The Center did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the
propriety of time recorded and processed for direct care workers.
Analysis
The Center did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure the propriety of
time recorded and processed for its direct care workers. According to the State’s
records, payroll expenditures related to direct care workers totaled approximately
$2.5 million in calendar year 2016. Unlike the Center’s other employees who
recorded their time directly into the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for
3

--- Page 6 ---
supervisory approval and processing, direct care workers completed manual time
records from which another employee recorded hours worked in SPS. However,
the manual time records were not approved by the workers’ immediate
supervisors. In addition, although a human resources supervisor subsequently
reviewed and approved the time recorded in SPS for these employees, the
supervisor did not review the time records supporting these entries. As a result,
there was a lack of assurance that the time recorded in SPS for direct care workers
was proper.
We judgmentally selected for testing nine overtime payments made to direct care
workers during fiscal year 2017. Our test disclosed four payments for which the
total overtime hours recorded in SPS for the applicable pay periods differed from
the hours recorded on the corresponding manual time records, in each case by one
half hour to three hours. Although these differences were not significant, they
support the need for an adequate verification of time recorded. In addition, State
regulations require that the employee and the employee’s supervisor sign the
employee’s time record as an attestation to the record’s accuracy and
completeness.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Center
a. ensure that direct care workers’ manual time records are approved by
their immediate supervisors, and
b. ensure that the approved manual time records for the direct care workers
are reviewed by the supervisor responsible for approving the time
recorded in SPS.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Potomac Center, a unit of the
Maryland Department of Health’s Developmental Disabilities Administration, for
the period beginning June 10, 2013 and ending May 17, 2017. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
4

--- Page 7 ---
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, and payroll. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Center by the
Department. These support services (such as certain payroll and purchasing
functions, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Department’s Office of the Secretary
and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Center’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from the Statewide Personnel System (SPS) for the
purpose of testing certain payroll and leave transactions, including the conversion
of employee data to SPS. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
5

--- Page 8 ---
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Center’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Center that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Department’s response, on behalf of the Center, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Senior Auditor
Albert E. Davison
Staff Auditor