Title: Department of Human Resources - Office of the Secretary and Related Units
Date: 11/30/2007
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d724560674466
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:57:01.968946
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Resources
Office of the Secretary and Related Units
June 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Reorganization 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Special Fund Budgetary Closeout
Finding 1 – DHR Recorded Unsupported Special Fund Revenues 9
to Offset Deficit Balances
Maryland Legal Services Program
 Finding 2 – DHR Did Not Ensure the Propriety of the Payments to Certain 10
Legal Firms
Grants Management
 Finding 3 – DHR Lacked Sufficient Procedures and Accountability Over 12
Certain Grants
Information Systems Security and Control
 Finding 4 – DHR Had Not Established Sufficient Monitoring Controls 13
Over Certain Users’ Access
Finding 5 – Assignment of Critical Privileges and Access and Monitoring 14
Controls Over Mainframe Systems Were Not Sufficient
Finding 6 – Database Controls Were Not Sufficient to Protect Critical Data 16
 Finding 7 – Certain DHR Networks Were Not Adequately Secured 17
Electronic Benefits Transfer System
Finding 8 – A Vendor Report Did Not Address Several Key Security Controls 18
Contractual Services
Finding 9 – DHR Did Not Document Its Rationale for Not Assessing 19
Liquidated Damages
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on
Department of Human Resources (DHR) and Related Units
June 2014
 DHR recorded unsupported special fund accrued revenues of
approximately $11.5 million and $15.2 million at June 30, 2012 and June
30, 2013, respectively, for the Local Department Operations Assistance
Payments program. These revenues were recorded to eliminate the
deficit balances in the assistance program’s special funds (Finding 1).
DHR should only record revenues in accordance with the General Accounting
Division’s closing instructions and take appropriate actions to eliminate the
deficit balance.
 Adequate procedures had not been established to ensure that payments
made to legal firms on behalf of indigent individuals were proper and
that the firms provided the related services. Such payments totaled $13.7
million during fiscal year 2012 (Finding 2).
DHR should ensure that payments made to legal firms are only for those
individuals for whom DHR is responsible to provide legal services and should
conduct on-site monitoring to ensure that the related services were provided.
 DHR did not adequately monitor certain grantees to ensure that grant
funds were spent as intended and services were performed in accordance
with the grant agreements. For example, although the grantees were
required to provide expenditure reports on a regular basis, DHR did not
independently verify the accuracy of these reports (Findings 3).
DHR should adequately monitor its grantees to ensure that funds were spent
and services were performed in accordance with grant agreements.
 Numerous security and control issues were noted in regard to DHR’s
information systems. For example, the assignment of critical privileges
and user access capabilities to mainframe systems were not sufficiently
restricted to properly protect the systems (Findings 4 - 7).
DHR should take the recommended actions to improve security and controls
over its information systems.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 DHR’s oversight of its electronic benefits transfer system and contractual
services could be improved (Findings 8 and 9).
DHR should take the recommended actions to improve its oversight in these
areas.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Human Resources (DHR) provides intervention services to
stabilize families and vulnerable adults, encourages financial independence by
providing temporary support and transition services, and provides for the welfare
of children at risk. To deliver these services, DHR is organized into seven
budgetary units. This audit included the operations of the Office of the Secretary,
which provides overall direction and coordination for all DHR programs and
activities; the Operations Office, which provides core administrative services to
DHR units; and the Office of Technology for Human Services, which is
responsible for the overall management and direction of DHR’s information
systems. The remaining four units of DHR are audited and reported upon
separately.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2013, expenditures for the
three units included in this audit totaled approximately $142 million.
Reorganization
Chapter 356, Laws of Maryland 2011, effective July 1, 2011, transferred the
Sexual Assault Crisis Programs and the Domestic Violence Programs from the
Department of Human Resources - Office of the Secretary to the Governor’s
Office of Crime Control and Prevention. The scope of this audit included the
activities of these programs through June 30, 2011. Activities subsequent to the
transfer will be included in our audit of the Executive Department.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 11, 2011. We determined that DHR
satisfactorily addressed five of the findings. The remaining four findings are
repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Special Fund Budgetary Closeout
Finding 1
The Department of Human Resources (DHR) recorded unsupported special
fund revenue transactions to offset deficit balances which resulted from
expenditures exceeding revenues in one program.
Analysis
DHR recorded unsupported special fund revenue transactions to offset deficit
balances which resulted from expenditures exceeding revenues in one program.
Specifically, during the fiscal year budgetary closeout process, DHR recorded
special fund revenue transactions totaling approximately $11.5 million and $15.2
million to offset deficit balances that existed in the Local Department Operations
Assistance Payments program as of June 30, 2012 and June 30, 2013,
respectively. According to DHR records, these deficits resulted from special fund
expenditures incurred which exceeded related revenues in each fiscal year dating
back to 2010.
For example, according to the financial information provided by DHR, in fiscal
year 2013 this program incurred special fund expenditures totaling approximately
$18.7 million. During that year, the program received revenues of $15 million
which was not sufficient to cover those expenditures. Furthermore, because of the
deficit of $11.5 million that existed at June 30, 2012, revenues received during
fiscal year 2013 were needed to cover the prior year’s expenditures, leaving only
$3.5 million available to fund fiscal year 2013 expenditures. The resulting $15.2
million deficit was offset by the unsupported revenue transactions recorded at
June 30, 2013.
If special funds are not available for the recorded revenue transactions, general
fund appropriations (or deficiency appropriations) may ultimately be needed to
eliminate the resulting deficits. This issue has been commented upon in our
budget closeout reviews for the last two years, most recently in our special report
entitled Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2013,
dated January 13, 2014.
DHR management personnel advised us that the revenues recorded were proper,
because it received sufficient revenue in subsequent years although these revenues
were not received within 60 days of the fiscal year-end. However, closing
instructions issued by the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting
Division’s (GAD) require that revenue should be recognized at year-end only
9

--- Page 12 ---
when revenues are available and measurable (collectible within 60 days of the end
of the fiscal year). Additionally, we noted that GAD’s Accounting Procedures
Manual states that special fund appropriations can only be expended to the extent
that an agency realized revenue sufficient to fund the appropriation.
The Local Department Operations Assistance program receives special funds
from various sources. For example, the program pursues payment of child
support for individuals receiving certain types of cash assistance. In these cases, a
portion of child support collections may be owed back to the program. In other
cases, DHR may provide assistance payments in advance of determining an
individual’s eligibility for federal funding, with the advanced payments being
reimbursed once federal eligibility is approved and funding is received.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHR
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are appropriately recorded
in accordance with GAD’s closing instructions,
b. implement corrective action to resolve the deficit balance, and
c. ensure that expenditures do not exceed the related revenue realized.
Maryland Legal Services Program
Finding 2
DHR did not ensure that payments to legal firms on behalf of indigent
individuals were proper and did not perform site visits to ensure that
required services were provided.
Analysis
DHR did not ensure that payments to legal firms on behalf of indigent individuals
were proper, and it did not perform site visits to ensure that legal firms provided
the required services. State regulations require DHR to contract with legal firms
to represent indigent adults in Adult Protective Services proceedings, and to
represent children in Children in Need of Assistance and Termination of Parental
Rights cases. According to State records, payments to 12 legal firms during fiscal
year 2012 totaled $13.7 million.
 Although the legal firms submitted invoices listing the individuals served,
DHR paid the firms without verifying that it was responsible for providing
legal services to these individuals. Such verifications could be done by
reviewing a copy of the court order, appointing the legal firm as the
representative, for the individuals. Generally, the legal firms are paid a flat
10

--- Page 13 ---
fee per case. A similar condition regarding not verifying the propriety of
payments to legal firms was noted in our preceding audit report.
 DHR did not perform annual site visits (quality control reviews), as provided
for in the contracts, for 8 of the 12 firms during fiscal years 2011 and 2012.
In addition, for the 8 site visits performed, DHR did not maintain adequate
documentation supporting what was reviewed and the conclusions reached.
These site visits can be used to help ensure compliance with the contract terms
and could help verify the propriety of the amounts billed. For example, these
visits could help ensure legal firms were providing the required number of
hours for each case, attorneys had a sufficient number of contacts with the
client, the attorney/client ratio was reasonable, and that the overall quality of
services performed was adequate, as provided for by the contract. A similar
condition regarding not performing site visits has been commented upon in
our two preceding audit reports.
 As of March 2013, DHR had not obtained the required annual reports for
fiscal years 2011 and 2012 from 11 of the 12 firms. In addition, DHR did not
take any follow-up actions (such as, contacting the firms) to obtain these
reports. The contract requires the legal firms to submit annual reports with
information such as caseload per attorney. These reports are to assist DHR in
monitoring contractual requirements.
As a result of these conditions, there was a lack of assurance that amounts paid for
legal services were proper and that the related services were provided in
accordance with the contract terms.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHR
a. verify that payments made to legal firms are only for individuals for
whom DHR is responsible to provide legal services (for example, require
legal firms to submit copies of the court orders appointing the firm as the
representative) (repeat);
b. conduct on-site monitoring to ensure that amounts invoiced were proper
and services were provided in accordance with the contract terms
(repeat) and maintain adequate documentation of the site visits; and
c. take appropriate follow-up actions to ensure the legal firms submit
annual reports as required.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Grants Management
Finding 3
DHR lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over certain grants.
Analysis
DHR lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over certain grants. DHR’s
Office of Grants Management provides funding to a network of community and
faith-based organizations, local departments of social services, and other state and
local agencies.
 DHR did not independently verify that grant funds were spent as intended.
Our test of 27 disbursements totaling approximately $1.5 million related to 15
grants (such as grants for the Maryland Emergency Food Program and for
Emergency Transitional Housing Services) disclosed that DHR did not obtain
sufficient supporting documentation for 24 disbursements totaling
approximately $1.4 million. Although the grant agreements required grantees
to provide expenditure reports on a regular basis, DHR did not independently
verify the accuracy of the reports by obtaining supporting documentation. For
example, DHR did not obtain appropriate documentation, such as food and
hotel receipts, to support expenditures made by grantees for emergency and
traditional housing services provided to the homeless.
 DHR did not ensure that assistance activity reports (such as the number of
individuals served) required by the grant agreements, were submitted by the
grantees. Additionally, DHR did not ensure that annual site visits, required by
the grant agreements, were performed. Our test of 15 grants totaling
approximately $11.3 million disclosed that, for 12 grants totaling
approximately $10.8 million, 113 of the 119 activity reports required to be
submitted in fiscal year 2012 were not on file. Additionally, site visits were
not performed for 13 grants totaling $10.9 million during fiscal year 2012.
Site visits are performed to ensure that services were provided in accordance
with the terms of the grant agreements.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2012, expenditures to grantees
totaled $14.4 million. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHR
a. independently verify, on a test basis, that grant funds are spent as
intended (repeat);
b. ensure that all required reports are submitted, including the missing
reports noted above (repeat); and
c. ensure that annual site visits are performed (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The DHR Office of Technology for Human Services (OTHS) is responsible for
the overall management and direction of DHR’s information systems. These
systems include critical applications such as the mainframe-based Clients’
Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES), the mainframe-based
Child Support Enforcement System (CSES), and the server-based Children’s
Electronic Social Services Information Exchange System (CHESSIE).
These systems are used to provide eligible persons public assistance, food stamps,
child support payments, and foster care payments. Maintenance and operation of
these information systems are provided by a combination of outsourced services
and DHR personnel. OTHS operates both an internal network at DHR’s
headquarters and a wide area network which connects to DHR’s locations
throughout the state. Additionally, DHR obtains Internet and Statewide
Government Intranet connectivity from networkMaryland.
In addition to these systems, DHR also uses the State’s Financial Information
Management System (FMIS) to process purchasing and disbursement
transactions. FMIS has security features to establish independent online
approvals for purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Finding 4
DHR had not established sufficient controls to ensure the propriety of actions
taken by certain users in its automated payment systems.
Analysis
DHR had not established sufficient controls to ensure the propriety of actions
taken by users with unrestricted access to the electronic benefit and payment
menu screens in CARES. Additionally, DHR did not fully use the security
features available on FMIS.
13

--- Page 16 ---
 Sixteen employees had been granted unrestricted access to critical CARES
files. CARES is used to authorize public assistance and food stamp benefits
and, therefore, a user with unrestricted access could both add and approve a
case for benefits without independent supervisory review and approval.
According to DHR’s records, benefits and payments totaling approximately
$1.3 billion were processed via CARES during fiscal year 2012. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 DHR established online approval rules over certain critical procurement
transactions, including purchase orders. However, these rules permitted the
return of the documents to the employees initiating the transactions after the
independent approvals were obtained. As a result, 17 employees who had the
ability to initiate these transactions could modify the transactions after the
related approvals were obtained, without detection. During fiscal years 2010
through 2012, DHR used the State’s accounting system to process purchase
orders totaling approximately $96 million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that
a. critical actions taken on CARES by users with unrestricted access be
subject to independent supervisory review and approval, at least on a test
basis (repeat); and
b. available FMIS security features be used to properly control purchasing
transactions, including ensuring that these transactions cannot be
modified by the initiator after the related approvals are obtained.
Finding 5
Assignment of critical privileges and user access and monitoring controls
over mainframe systems were not sufficient to properly protect these
systems.
Analysis
The assignment of critical privileges as well as user access and monitoring
controls over mainframe systems were not sufficient to properly protect these
systems.
 Numerous users were inappropriately assigned critical database roles in the
CARES and CSES databases including the system administrator (two users)
and system operator (nine users) roles. Furthermore, mainframe security
software access rules allowed many users unnecessary direct modification
access to certain critical production programs and files. As a result of these
14

--- Page 17 ---
conditions, these users could make unauthorized changes to critical production
tables, files, and programs.
 Although direct modifications to numerous tables in the CARES and CSES
databases were logged, the modifications were not included on security
reports for subsequent review. For example, an important daily security
report, which reflects direct changes to other critical database tables, was not
reviewed for the 10-month period ending December 2012.
 Two users were inappropriately granted security software privileges that
allowed them to make changes to critical mainframe files without being
logged. In addition, six users were granted privileges which allowed them to
change security software log settings without detection.
 Security software reports did not include the use of certain critical commands
or commands issued by users with certain critical privileges. In addition,
although a report of changes to security software settings was generated daily;
there was no evidence that this report was reviewed for propriety. As a result
of these conditions, changes to critical security software settings and user
profiles were not subject to review for propriety.
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) Information Security Policy
states that each agency must establish an authorization process which specifically
grants access to information ensuring that access is strictly controlled, audited,
and that it supports the concepts of “least possible privileges” and “need-to-
know.” This policy further requires that information systems must generate audit
records for all security-relevant events, and procedures must be developed to
routinely review audit records for indications of unusual activities, suspicious
activities or suspected violations, and findings must be reported to appropriate
officials for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHR
a. grant critical database roles and restrict access to critical mainframe
production programs and files to only those individuals who require such
roles/access for their job responsibilities,
b. ensure that direct modifications to critical database tables are included
on security reports for subsequent managerial review,
c. perform regular documented reviews of the security reports of direct
changes to critical database tables and of changes to security software
settings and retain these reviews for future reference,
15

--- Page 18 ---
d. grant security software privileges in a manner that ensures that all
changes to critical files and log settings are logged for subsequent review,
and
e. ensure that security software reports include the use of all critical
commands and commands issued by users with critical privileges.
Finding 6
CHESSIE database controls were not sufficient to properly protect critical
data.
Analysis
CHESSIE database controls were not sufficient to properly protect critical data.
 Direct modifications to all CHESSIE database tables were not logged. As a
result of this condition, direct changes to critical data would not be readily
detectable by DHR management.
 Database level auditing (for example, changes to audit settings and grants of
authority) was not enabled except for critical event failures. In addition,
reports of events that were logged were not generated. Therefore,
unauthorized activities affecting the integrity of the production database could
go undetected by management.
 Numerous users were inappropriately assigned critical database roles
including the system administrator (six users) and database administrator (four
users). As a result of this condition, these users could make unauthorized
changes to critical production files.
 Numerous users were inappropriately assigned critical database table
privileges (for example delete, update, and insert). As a result, many of these
users could make unauthorized changes to tables related to payments, rates,
and eligibility.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHR
a. log all direct modifications to critical CHESSIE database tables, generate
periodic reports of these modifications, perform documented reviews of
these reports, and retain these reviews for future reference;
b. enable database level auditing for all critical security events, generate
periodic reports of these events, perform documented reviews of these
reports, and retain these reviews for future reference; and
16

--- Page 19 ---
c. grant critical database roles and table privileges to only those individuals
who require such capabilities for their job responsibilities.
Finding 7
DHR’s internal network and the vendor network that contained the
mainframe and servers which hosted critical DHR systems were not
adequately secured.
Analysis
DHR’s internal network and the vendor network that contained the mainframe
and servers which hosted critical DHR systems were not adequately secured.
DHR operated firewalls at its network interfaces and several virtual private
network connections. In addition, DHR was responsible for the configuration of
the vendor maintained firewall that protected the vendor network that contained
the mainframe and servers that hosted the CARES, CSES, and CHESSIE systems.
 Firewall rules allowed insecure and unnecessary connections to the DHR
internal network. Specifically, we noted that multiple county government
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses could access the DHR mainframe and
numerous DHR IP addresses over all ports. Most of this access was not
necessary. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 DHR allowed unnecessary virtual private network connections from several
untrusted parties to the DHR internal network. For example, as of the time of
our review on December 18, 2012, a contractor could access the entire DHR
internal network over all ports via a virtual private network to setup and
maintain DHR network equipment. However, the contract with this vendor
had expired on December 31, 2011. Therefore, this connection gave this
vendor unauthorized and unnecessary network-level access to the entire DHR
internal network for almost a year.
 Firewall rules were not configured to adequately secure the connections into
the vendor’s network that hosted CARES, CSES, and CHESSIE. For
example, a third-party vendor which required limited access to the mainframe
that hosted these systems could access the mainframe over all ports. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
As a result, these areas were susceptible to attacks which could result in a loss of
data integrity, the destruction of critical files, and the interruption of critical
network services.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHR
a. configure its firewalls and virtual private networks to achieve a “least
privilege” security strategy giving individuals and devices only those
privileges needed to perform assigned tasks (repeat); and
b. require the vendor that hosts CARES, CSES, and CHESSIE to configure
the aforementioned firewall to properly protect the critical devices on the
network hosting these systems (repeat).
Electronic Benefits Transfer System
Background
DHR contracted with a vendor to implement, operate, and maintain a web-based
Electronic Benefits Transfer System (EBTS) for the State of Maryland Public
Assistance and Food Stamp Benefit Programs. The contract between DHR and
the vendor for the EBTS service covered an initial period from May 2007 to
February 2011, plus two optional renewal periods (of two years each), that
extended the contract through February 2015, with a cost of approximately $24.6
million through February 2015. The vendor procured an independent review over
its EBTS service to be performed in accordance with the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants’ Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagement
16 and received a Service Organization Controls (SOC) report for the period July
1, 2011 through June 30, 2012. The report was issued on August 14, 2012.
Finding 8
The SOC report on the DHR EBTS provider did not address several key
security controls.
Analysis
The SOC report on the DHR EBTS vendor did not address several key security
controls necessary for the EBTS service. For example, we noted that the report
did not state that vulnerability scanning and patch management policies and
procedures existed and had been implemented or that intrusion detection, malware
prevention, and antivirus protection had been implemented. Furthermore, the
report did not stipulate that disaster recovery and business continuity policies,
processes, and procedures existed and had been regularly tested. Finally, we
noted that the SOC report did not provide test results evidencing that reports of
privileged user access activities, authorized and unauthorized access attempts, and
information security events were actually generated and retained.
18

--- Page 21 ---
The aforementioned security controls not addressed by the SOC report are
required either by DHR’s contract with the EBTS vendor or DoIT’s IT Security
Policy.
We were advised by DHR personnel that they had not examined the SOC report
to assess whether the scope of the work performed included a review and
appropriate tests of all necessary controls that should exist within the EBTS
vendor’s environment to properly secure DHR data. Without a detailed
examination of the report, DHR lacked assurance that adequate controls existed
over the EBTS vendor’s system and processes.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that, for future SOC reviews of the EBTS vendor’s service,
DHR obtain and review the vendor’s SOC reports, determine if the related
reviews adequately addressed the aforementioned EBTS security concerns,
and ensure that the vendor implements all critical recommendations made in
the reports.
Contractual Services
Finding 9
DHR did not document its rationale for not assessing liquidated damages.
Analysis
DHR did not document its rationale for not assessing liquidated damages against a
vendor for qualifying conditions, as stipulated in the related contracts. This
vendor is responsible for hosting the EBTS as well as for application maintenance
and enhancement services. Specifically, we were advised by DHR management
that there were five instances between July 2010 and August 2012 in which DHR
notified the vendor that it was responsible for computer failures (such as, systems
being inaccessible). The notifications further stated that DHR may impose
liquidated damages totaling $373,500, unless the vendor could demonstrate that it
was not responsible for the failures.
Our review of the aforementioned five notifications disclosed that, for three
notifications, DHR did not have any documentation explaining why liquidated
damages totaling $341,000 were not assessed. For example, on July 8, 2011,
DHR notified the vendor that it may impose liquidated damages totaling $50,000
because the food stamp benefit system was inaccessible. In this case, liquidated
damages were not assessed, and DHR could not provide us with documentation
explaining this decision. We were advised by DHR management that it did not
ultimately impose liquidated damages related to these three notifications because
19

--- Page 22 ---
the failures were eventually resolved. For the remaining two notifications, DHR
assessed liquidating damages totaling $7,500 for one instance and had adequate
supporting documentation to explain why damages were not assessed for the other
instance.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHR formally document its reasons when liquidated
damages are not assessed against vendors when qualifying conditions occur.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Human Resources and related units (DHR)
for the period beginning November 17, 2009 and ending August 12, 2012. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHR’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included electronic benefit transfers, grants, legal services,
purchases and disbursements, information systems security and control,
equipment, and payroll.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DHR’s operations and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit included various support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by
DHR’s Office of the Secretary and related units to the other units of DHR.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of DHR’s compliance with federal laws
and regulations pertaining to those programs, because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including DHR.
DHR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect DHR’s ability to
maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes
findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to DHR
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DHR’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHR regarding the results of our
review of its response.
22

--- Page 26 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Special Fund Budgetary Closeout
Finding 1
The Department of Human Resources (DHR) recorded unsupported special
fund revenue transactions to offset deficit balances which resulted from
expenditures exceeding revenues in one program.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHR
a. ensure that all year-end revenue transactions are appropriately recorded
in accordance with GAD’s closing instructions,
b. implement corrective action to resolve the deficit balance, and
c. ensure that expenditures do not exceed the related revenue realized.
Department’s Response
Recommendations (a), (b), and (c): The Department believed that the closing
was conducted properly and that it complied with GAD closing instructions. The
Department will review GAD policy regarding year-end closings for all future
closings with particular attention to the issues raised in the audit and make sure
that accrued revenue and related expenditures are recorded in compliance with the
GAD's closing instructions.
Maryland Legal Services Program
Finding 2
DHR did not ensure that payments to legal firms on behalf of indigent
individuals were proper and did not perform site visits to ensure that
required services were provided.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHR
a. verify that payments made to legal firms are only for individuals for
whom DHR is responsible to provide legal services (for example, require
legal firms to submit copies of the court orders appointing the firm as the
representative) (repeat);
b. conduct on-site monitoring to ensure that amounts invoiced were proper
and services were provided in accordance with the contract terms
(repeat) and maintain adequate documentation of the site visits; and

--- Page 27 ---
c. take appropriate follow-up actions to ensure the legal firms submit
annual reports as required.
Department’s Response
Recommendation a: The Department agrees with this recommendation and had
made this change prior to the draft audit finding. The Department regularly
reviews every invoice that is submitted by the vendor for billing proficiency as a
standard practice. In addition, DHR has always required all attorneys in the Court
Appointed Attorneys Program (CAAP) responsible for handling Children in Need
of Assistance (CINA) to submit court orders with each invoice, indicating that
they have been appointed by the Judiciary for representation. Now DHR requires
all CAAP attorneys in CINA and Adult Protective Services to follow the same
procedure. DHR will audit the invoices submitted by the vendors for
comprehensive evaluation using DHR approved methodology.
Recommendation b: The Department agrees with this recommendation and had
made this change prior to the draft audit finding. A contract monitoring plan was
developed and implemented. The contract monitoring plan requires annual
monitoring of the providers files and attorney performance in court. DHR revised
the contract monitoring form to be completed by the contract compliance
monitors to document the performance of the providers and the sufficiency of the
provider’s files. The contract monitors produce a contract monitoring report that
documents the monitoring information, identifies any deficiencies and requests
corrective action plans.
Recommendation c: The Department agrees with this recommendation and had
made this change prior to the draft audit finding. DHR implemented a process
that requires that an annual notification is sent to the providers to request the
annual reports. Additional notifications are generated to notify the providers
when the annual reports have not been submitted in a timely fashion. DHR
followed the new process and requested that the providers submit the annual
reports for FY2012. As of April 2013, DHR had received the annual reports from
all of the contracted providers for FY2012.
Grants Management
Finding 3
DHR lacked sufficient procedures and accountability over certain grants.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHR
a. independently verify, on a test basis, that grant funds are spent as
intended (repeat);

--- Page 28 ---
b. ensure that all required reports are submitted, including the missing
reports noted above (repeat); and
c. ensure that annual site visits are performed (repeat).
Department’s Response
Prior to responding to the individual recommendations in the audit, DHR would
like to acknowledge that it became aware of insufficient and inadequate
monitoring of grants in the Office of Grants Management during the time period
of the audit. As a result, the Department made several personnel changes in the
Office including removing the director of the Office and some members of the
staff in February 2012. The Department also moved the Office under the Family
Investment Administration to ensure that the Administration could more closely
monitor the programs.
Recommendation a: The Department agrees with this recommendation and had
implemented controls to improve accountability and streamline the delivery of
service in July 2012 prior to the audit. Specifically:
 All vendors were reminded of the receipting process, timeframes and
deliverables;
 The Program Administrator now reviews all receipts that are submitted
to ensure that they meet standards of accountability and all vendors
have been required to submit any missing monthly expenditure and
activity reports. Through these reports and site visits, one vendor in
each jurisdiction was identified as a sample to verify that grant funds
were spent as intended;
 Records of these verifications are being kept on file in the Bureau of
Grants Management office and the results of the reviews are
documented in the case records of the vendors;
 In the event the vendor fails to provide the receipts or submits
questionable receipts, they are contacted immediately to resolve the
problem. Failure to meet receipt compliance will result in ineligibility
for future funding; and
 The Department has created a schedule of site visits for the entire fiscal
year. Expenditure reports were submitted by all grantees for the fiscal
year 2013.
Recommendation b: The Department agrees with this recommendation and had
made this change prior to the audit. In December 2012, Program Administrators
for all programs began reviewing and assessing all reports that are submitted for
accuracy, and notifying the organization when their report has not been submitted
by the 15th of the month following the report month. All of the programs have

--- Page 29 ---
established due dates and any incidents of non-compliance result in the grantee’s
ineligibility for the following year. The paper reports are inserted into a binder
and are logged on a spreadsheet in the office’s shared drive noting the location of
the binder. For FY 2013, 498 reports were received and inserted in binders.
Recommendation c: The Department agrees with this recommendation and had
made this change prior to the audit. The site visit process was redeveloped in
September 2013 to ensure that visits to each grantee are made at least once a year,
with the schedule beginning in October and ending in March. The visits have
been jurisdictionally distributed with the monitor being responsible for all
programs within their assigned county. For example, the monitor who has been
assigned to Allegany County must perform a site visit for all programs in that
jurisdiction. Reports are completed and inserted within the grantee’s case record.
Assessments that are problematic are immediately addressed in writing with a
time line for resolution.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
DHR had not established sufficient controls to ensure the propriety of actions
taken by certain users in its automated payment systems.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that
a. critical actions taken on CARES by users with unrestricted access be
subject to independent supervisory review and approval, at least on a test
basis (repeat); and
b. available FMIS security features be used to properly control purchasing
transactions.
Department’s Response
Recommendations a: The Department agrees with this recommendation and will
conduct a documented independent supervisory review and approval process
focusing on changes that may affect recipient’s benefits.
Recommendation b: The Department does not concur that proper internal
controls were not established over the processing of purchasing transactions. No
one in the Department can initiate and post a critical procurement document
(purchase order, blanket purchase order, direct purchase order, and increasing
change order) without the use of an approval path requiring authorization by a
separate employee. In the cases where a requisition is used to create a purchase
order or blanket purchase order, an on-line approval path is used for the
requisition; direct purchase orders have an online approval path; and, increasing

--- Page 30 ---
change orders have a manual approval process requiring written requests. The
Department would also like to note that neither the Department nor OLA auditors
have found any instances of inappropriate modification to an approved direct PO
under the current and long standing policy.1
Finding 5
Assignment of critical privileges and user access and monitoring controls
over mainframe systems were not sufficient to properly protect these
systems.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHR
a. grant critical database roles and restrict access to critical mainframe
production programs and files to only those individuals who require such
roles/access for their job responsibilities,
b. ensure that direct modifications to critical database tables are included
on security reports for subsequent managerial review,
c. perform regular documented reviews of the security reports of direct
changes to critical database tables and of changes to security software
settings and retain these reviews for future reference,
d. grant security software privileges in a manner that ensures that all
changes to critical files and log settings are logged for subsequent review,
and
e. ensure that security software reports include the use of all critical
commands and commands issued by users with critical privileges.
Department’s Response
Recommendations (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e): The Department agrees with the
finding and all recommendations were completed by July 18, 2013.
1 Auditor Comment: The report noted that DHR had not established sufficient controls in FMIS
since seventeen employees could initiate and approve purchasing transactions. In its response,
DHR disagreed with the recommendation and stated that no individual could initiate and post
purchase orders without an independent approval. We subsequently revised our report to clarify
that the approval paths allowed the initiators to modify the purchase orders after they were
approved. The revisions to our report were provided to the Department and it elected not to
modify its response. The finding regarding the lack of controls over purchasing transactions is
still valid.

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 6
CHESSIE database controls were not sufficient to properly protect critical
data.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHR
a. log all direct modifications to critical CHESSIE database tables, generate
periodic reports of these modifications, perform documented reviews of
these reports, and retain these reviews for future reference;
b. enable database level auditing for all critical security events, generate
periodic reports of these events, perform documented reviews of these
reports, and retain these reviews for future reference; and
c. grant critical database roles and table privileges to only those individuals
who require such capabilities for their job responsibilities.
Department’s Response
Recommendation a: The Department agrees with the finding and the
recommendation was completed by June 30th, 2013. Specifically, the
Department logs all direct modifications to critical CHESSIE database tables,
generate periodic reports of these modifications, perform documented reviews of
these reports, and retain these reviews for future reference.
Recommendation b: The Department has attempted to enable this type of
auditing in CHESSIE on two previous occasions and, in each instance, the
enabling of this functionality caused the system to become unstable and
inaccessible for users. The Department will again test the viability of this
approach and expects to complete testing of this approach in July 2014. If
successful, the Department will implement these changes to our production
environment.
Recommendation c: The Department disagrees that it was inappropriately
granting critical database roles – security reviews were conducted for those
granted access. It is our understanding that the basis of this finding was instead
that auditors believed the review should be conducted with more strict criteria.
The Department will review its security procedures in this area and make any
necessary changes to ensure that it grants critical database roles and table
privileges only to employees who require such access. 2
2 Auditor Comment: DHR’s response indicated disagreement with the finding. Specifically,
DHR disagreed that it was inappropriately granting critical database roles and indicated that
security reviews were conducted for those granted access. DHR further stated that it believed that
the basis of our finding was that its security review should be conducted with more strict criteria.
However, our assessment that numerous employees were assigned critical database roles and table
privileges that were not needed to perform their job duties was based, in part, on representations of
DHR personnel. Nevertheless, DHR’s response specified the actions that will be taken which, if
implemented, should fully address the audit recommendation.

--- Page 32 ---
Finding 7
DHR’s internal network and the vendor network that contained the
mainframe and servers which hosted critical DHR systems were not
adequately secured.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHR
a. configure its firewalls and virtual private networks to achieve a “least
privilege” security strategy giving individuals and devices only those
privileges needed to perform assigned tasks (repeat); and
b. require the vendor that hosts CARES, CSES, and CHESSIE to configure
the aforementioned firewall to properly protect the critical devices on the
network hosting these systems (repeat).
Department’s Response
Recommendations (a) and (b): While the Department believes that the audit
narrative overstates the vulnerability to its systems relating to this finding, the
Department has complied with the recommendations (a) and (b). In addition, as
of July 30, 2013 the Department and the vendor that hosts CARES, CSES and
CHESSIE have complied with the recommendations.
Electronic Benefits Transfer System
Finding 8
The SOC report on the DHR EBTS provider did not address several key
security controls.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that, for future SOC reviews of the EBTS vendor’s service,
DHR obtain and review the vendor’s SOC reports, determine if the related
reviews adequately addressed the aforementioned EBTS security concerns,
and ensure that the vendor implements all critical recommendations made in
the reports.
Department’s Response
Recommendation: The Department disagrees with this finding. There are no
federal, state or DoIT requirements that require a SOC audit of this nature. In
fact, the Department and the federal government currently require an annual

--- Page 33 ---
SSAE 16 audit and both the Department and its vendor comply with that
requirement.
The Department will, however, assess the additional security requirements
recommended by OLA and see if additional auditing is feasible within the
existing contract. Future contracts for an EBT vendor will require the
aforementioned type of SOC audit, as recommended by the auditor, in addition to
the SSAE 16 audit.3
Finding 9
DHR did not document its rationale for not assessing liquidated damages.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DHR formally document its reasons when liquidated
damages are not assessed against the EBTS vendor when qualifying
conditions occur.
Department’s Response
The Department disagrees with the finding that it did not document its rationale
for not assessing liquidated damages against the vendor.
The vendor’s contract states that upon issuing a cure letter, the contractor bears
the responsibility to provide evidence in response to the cure letters that the
incidents were the results of excusable failure, a force majeure event, or a failure
due to third party event, not just that the vendor had to demonstrate it was not
responsible for the failures.
The contract also states that “DHR shall adopt a reasonable standard of review,
which takes into consideration the totality of the circumstances”. DHR is not
obligated, to provide written documentation to the vendor of its disposition of
liquidated damages post reviewing contractor response(s) to the initial cure letter.
DHR is only obligated to review written vendor response(s) and consequent
corrective action plans, remedial measures etcetera, and monitor them for
execution or completion or simply decide to move forward with imposing the
3 Auditor Comment: DHR’s response indicates disagreement with the finding. Specifically,
DHR’s response stated there are no federal, state or DoIT requirements that require a SOC audit of
this nature and that the Department and federal government require an annual SSAE 16 audit and
both the Department and the vendor comply with the requirement. Our finding acknowledged that
the DHR EBTS vendor had a SOC (SSAE) report, but noted that the report did not address
whether the vendor had implemented several key security controls, which are required by either
DHR’s contract with the EBTS vendor or DoIT’s IT Security Policy Nevertheless, DHR
indicated that certain actions would be pursued for the existing contract and for future contracts
for EBTS services.

--- Page 34 ---
liquidated damages. Upon receiving the vendor response, DHR carefully
considers all facets of the issue to arrive at a decision of whether or not to impose
liquidated damages.
In all instances where DHR issued a cure letter, the vendor has responded in
writing to the Department’s cure letter by either immediately remedying the
situation, explaining that the failure was due to a third party action for which the
vendor is not responsible, or by presenting or, planning to present in the near
future, a detailed corrective action plan. In this case, the vendor’s corrective
action involved conducting a series of on-going executive level meetings as an
effective and interactive method to find solutions in the State’s best interest.
These discussions with DHR resulted in the vendor investing $2.7 million in
system upgrades – significantly more than the proposed liquidated damage of
$341,000 and a greater value to the taxpayers.4
4
Auditor Comment: The report noted that DHR did not document its rationale for not assessing
liquidated damages against a vendor when there were qualifying conditions. In its response, DHR
disagreed with the finding and indicated that the contractor bears responsibility for providing
evidence as to why damages should not be assessed and DHR is not obligated to provide written
documentation to the vendor of its decision. Our report does not recommend that DHR provide
such documentation to the vendor. Rather, DHR should retain documentation on file that
demonstrates, as required by the contract, that DHR adopted a reasonable standard of review,
which takes into consideration the totality of the circumstances. Such documentation would
indicate the factors considered and substantiate that the decision made was in the best interest of
the State.

--- Page 35 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Sytems Audit Managers
Nichole M. Becker
Julia M. King
Howard A. Marzolf, III, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditors
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Andrew S. Bien
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Samuel Hur
Jeneba R. Jalloh
Staff Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Staff Auditor