Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
Date: 10/27/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743a2
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:22:47.713512
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
October 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (CICB) makes financial aid awards to
innocent victims of crime or to their families. To be eligible for such aid, the
victim must have sustained a physical injury or death, or suffered psychological
injury, as a direct result of a crime and must have had a minimum of $100 in
unreimbursed expenses and/or lost at least two continuous weeks of earnings or
support. CICB is a unit of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services.
State law established the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund as a special non-
lapsing fund to be used for the payment of criminal injury awards and related
administrative costs. The Fund is administered by CICB. Awards are granted
based on available funding received primarily through fees collected by the State
courts and through federal funds. CICB makes awards in accordance with the
schedule of benefits and the degree of disability specified in State law. The
awards granted to claimants may be settled by lump sum or paid in periodic
installments that generally cannot exceed $45,000. In instances where the
claimant is determined to be permanently and totally disabled, the claimant is
eligible for an additional $25,000 award at the discretion of the Board. The Board
consists of five members whose primary responsibility is to make award
decisions.
According to CICB records, approximately 820 claims were approved in fiscal
year 2014. Additionally, during that period, deposits into the Fund totaled
approximately $6.2 million and disbursements (which included claim payments
and CICB operating expenditures) totaled approximately $6.6 million. According
to the State’s accounting records, as of June 30, 2014, the Fund had a special fund
balance of $242,456. CICB advised that it has taken several measures to ensure
that the Fund remains solvent. These measures include, for example, negotiating
medical claims with providers and enforcing its statutory position as payer of last
resort for medical claims.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 13, 2012. We determined that CICB
satisfactorily addressed these four findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Claims Processing
Finding 1
Award determinations were not always made timely.
Analysis
The Criminal Injury Compensation Board (CICB) did not always make award
determinations in a timely manner. Our review of the case files for 20 award
payments made during fiscal years 2012 through 2014, totaling $224,000,
disclosed that 6 awards totaling $76,000 had delays which ranged from 37 to 321
days beyond the 90-day statutory time limit.
Upon receipt of a claim application, a claims examiner is responsible for
reviewing the submission for required documentation in accordance with the
CICB procedures manual and the related State law. According to State law, once
a completed application is received, the CICB is required to make a determination
of an award within 90 days.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CICB make award determinations within 90 days, as
required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Criminal Injuries
Compensation Board (CICB) of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services (DPSCS) for the period beginning February 22, 2011 and ending April 1,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CICB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
4

--- Page 7 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included claims processing and revenue recovery. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of
documents and records, and observations of CICB’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to CICB by the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Office of the Secretary.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our fiscal
compliance audits of the Office of the Secretary.
CICB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
Our audit did not disclose any conditions that we consider to be significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect CICB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our
audit disclosed a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations. Another less significant finding was communicated to CICB
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of CICB, to our finding and
recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
5

--- Page 9 ---
2
Attachment
cc: Patricia M. Donovan, Deputy Secretary of Administration
Carroll A. Parrish, Deputy Secretary of Operations
Cynthia Pease, Chair, CICB
D. Scott Beard, Executive Director, CICB
Joseph M. Perry, Inspector General
C. Michele Langston, Management Services Supervisor

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Michael A. Klausmeier
Senior Auditor