Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Kent County
Date: 11/28/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d19cc9d72456067463e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:36:23.578139
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Kent County, Maryland
October 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of Register of Wills for Kent County, its
fiscal year 2014 gross receipts totaled $488,264, which consisted of inheritance
tax collections (net of commissions) of $316,717 and fees and commissions of
$171,547. The Office’s fiscal year 2014 operating expenses totaled $294,549.
Findings and Recommendations
Administration of Estates
Finding 1
The Office had not established adequate controls to ensure that inheritance
taxes were accurately calculated and paid.
Analysis
The Office had not established adequate controls to ensure that inheritance taxes
were accurately calculated and paid, and our testing disclosed errors in the
calculation of tax payments made on behalf of certain estates we reviewed. In
accordance with State law, the Office is responsible for determining and
collecting inheritance taxes that are due from an estate based on accounts of
property distributions filed with the Office by the decedent’s personal
3

--- Page 6 ---
representative. Although the Office advised us that calculations supporting tax
payments submitted for an estate are verified for propriety by Office personnel,
there was no documentation that this was occurring. During the period from July
1, 2011 to March 31, 2015, the Office collected approximately $1.4 million in
inheritance taxes.
Our review of 19 estates administered by the Office during our audit period
disclosed that the inheritance taxes collected for 4 of the estates were not accurate,
including 3 estates that underpaid inheritance taxes by approximately $46,000 and
1 estate that overpaid the taxes by approximately $9,000. Our review further
noted that the same private entity assisted in the filing of the required
documentation and the calculation and payment of taxes due for these 4 estates.
In total, this entity assisted with the estates for 10 of the 19 estates tested and,
according to the Office’s records, assisted with 80 of the 235 regular estates
opened during the period from August 18, 2011 through May 10, 2015.
We discussed these errors with Office personnel, including the Register, who
reviewed and agreed with our calculations. The Register advised us that,
consistent with the Register of Wills’ sole authority to assess and collect
inheritance taxes, the aforementioned underpaid taxes would be waived. This
decision was made because of the time that had passed, the assets in the estates
had been distributed, and collection of these taxes would be an undue burden for
the applicable taxpayers. Similarly, the Register stated that the Office would not
undertake a review of previously settled estates.
We were advised by legal counsel within the Office of the Attorney General that
the Register has sole authority to assess inheritance taxes and, accordingly, has
the authority to waive any further assessment of the aforementioned taxes. We
were also advised that the Register is not under obligation to initiate a refund for
the one tax overpayment noted.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office develop and implement adequate and
documented procedures for ensuring that all inheritance taxes due are
accurately calculated and paid in accordance with State law.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Kent County, Maryland for the period beginning August 18, 2011 and
ending May 10, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, bank accounts,
and administration of estates.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
5

--- Page 8 ---
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor