Title: State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Date: 08/04/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d72456067428a
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:40:01.794086
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
State Department of Assessments and Taxation
December 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410 946-5400 or 301
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Baltimore City Historic Tax Credits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Real Property Assessments
Finding 1 – Certain Aspects of DAT’s Quality Assurance Process 10
for Real Property Assessments and Related Documentation Requirements
Were Not Formalized
Finding 2 – Physical Exterior Inspections Were Not Performed for All 13
Properties in Accordance With State Law
Assessment Administration Valuation System (AAVS)
Finding 3 – AAVS Had Vulnerabilities That Placed Assessment Data at 14
Risk and Certain Historical Data Was Not Archived
Finding 4 – DAT Procedures Did Not Ensure Certain Data Recorded in 16
AAVS Were Complete and Accurate
Administration of Certain Tax and Credit Programs
* Finding 5 – DAT Had Not Performed Timely and Comprehensive 18
Verifications of Certain Returns and Tax Credit Applications
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Access and Monitoring Controls Over the AAVS System 20
Database Were Not Sufficient to Protect Critical Data
Finding 7 – DAT’s Network Was Not Adequately Secured 21
Finding 8 – Malware Protection on DAT Workstations and Servers 23
Needs Improvement
Finding 9 – An Up-to-Date and Comprehensive Disaster Recovery Plan Did 24
Not Exist
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Contractual Services
* Finding 10 – DAT Did Not Adequately Monitor Certain Contract Billings 25
Cash Receipts
* Finding 11 – Sufficient Controls Were Not Established Over Certain 26
Collections
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 29
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT)
December 2013
 Certain aspects of DAT’s quality assurance process for real property
assessments need to be improved. For example, DAT oversight of the
local assessment offices should be formalized to help ensure local
assessment offices and their assessors are complying with DAT
assessment policies. Furthermore, DAT policies lacked specificity
regarding the documentation to be maintained to support certain
assessment values and to evidence the review and approval of those
values by local office supervisors (Finding 1).
DAT should enhance its quality control process by formalizing policies
pertaining to the oversight of local assessment offices performed by area
supervisors, and the documentation to be maintained to support assessment
values and to evidence those values were reviewed and approved by the local
office supervisors.
 Physical exterior inspections were not performed for all properties in
accordance with State law and a record of inspections performed was not
maintained (Finding 2).
DAT should take appropriate actions to help ensure compliance with State law
regarding the physical inspection of properties and should maintain records of
inspections conducted.
 The Assessment Administration and Valuation System (AAVS) had
access vulnerabilities that placed critical assessment data at risk of
unauthorized modification. For example, all AAVS users, including those
with read-only access could modify critical data without a record
identifying the changes being prepared. Furthermore, DAT did not
establish procedures to ensure that certain data (such as property sales
and permit information) received from local jurisdictions were properly
recorded in AAVS (Findings 3 and 4).
DAT should perform a full evaluation of AAVS to identify system access
vulnerabilities and should ensure appropriate modifications are made. Also,
DAT should establish procedures to ensure the completeness and accuracy of
data input into AAVS.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Personal property returns submitted by businesses for calendar years
2008 through 2011 had not been reviewed to ensure the values reported to
DAT were proper, and appropriate actions were not taken to identify
businesses that failed to file or submitted returns late. DAT also had not
completed audits of applications received from individuals who qualified
for homeowners’ and renters’ tax credits during calendar years 2009
through 2011 (Finding 5).
DAT should review personal property returns timely and enhance procedures
to identify late or non-filers of returns. DAT should also perform timely
audits of approved homeowners’ and renters’ tax credit applications, and take
appropriate action to recover any tax credits that are determined to have been
improperly granted to homeowners and renters.
 Security and control weaknesses were noted with respect to DAT’s
information systems and network, and proper internal controls were not
established for certain payments to contractors and for the processing of
cash receipts (Findings 6 – 11).
DAT should take the recommended actions to improve information security
controls, to ensure the propriety of contractor payments and to verify all
collections received were deposited.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) is responsible for
administering the State’s real and personal property tax laws as well as for various
functions applicable to corporations (for example, issuing corporate charters and
collecting certain taxes, such as gross receipts taxes). DAT also administers
programs that provide property tax credits primarily to homeowners and renters
who meet the related eligibility requirements (such as gross income limitations).
DAT’s headquarters is located in Baltimore City and it operates assessment and
taxation offices in each of the State’s 24 local subdivisions. According to the
State’s and DAT’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2012, DAT’s
expenditures totaled approximately $131.5 million and revenue collected totaled
approximately $232 million. DAT’s 2011 annual report identified the total
assessable real property tax base subject to State tax rates to be valued at $690
billion consisting of 2,171,132 individual properties.
Baltimore City Historic Tax Credits
The Tax Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland provides a property
tax credit of up to 25 percent of properly documented expenses of a private owner
taxpayer for the restoration and preservation of a structure that the Mayor and
City Council of Baltimore City have determined to be of historic or architectural
value. According to published reports, errors in the calculation of such Historic
Tax Credits resulted in certain Baltimore City properties being granted excessive
property tax credits.
The Baltimore City Director of Finance and the DAT Director, in a jointly issued
letter to the Chairman of the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee dated
October 17, 2013, provided an overview of the tax credit calculation problem and
the related procedural solution. The directors indicated that the problem resulted
from a change in computation methodology by the City that used assessments that
had not been adjusted for certain situations, such as appeals. DAT and the City
have now developed a new process whereby DAT will certify assessment
amounts to the City for use in calculating the Historic Tax Credit. The directors
believe the new process will lead to a more consistent and uniform calculation of
the credit.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of eight of the nine findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 4, 2010. We determined
that DAT satisfactorily addressed four of the findings and four other findings
were not resolved and are repeated in this report. These four repeated findings
appear as three findings in this report. During this audit, we did not review the
status of the one remaining finding because it was addressed in our February 2013
performance audit entitled Department of Assessments and Taxation - Homestead
Property Tax Credits.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Real Property Assessments
Background
The Department of Assessment and Taxation’s (DAT) Real Property Valuation
Division is responsible for assessing property on a three-year cycle by reviewing
one-third of all property in Maryland every year and certifying the assessed value
to the 24 local governments for each property within their respective subdivision.
The valuation of property is conducted by assessors working in the 24 local
assessment offices (one per county including Baltimore City), under the
Division’s direction and oversight. DAT maintains an Assessment
Administration Valuation System (AAVS) as its primary database system. AAVS
includes a wide range of information and history about individual properties,
including assessed values. Under the provisions of the Tax-Property Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, DAT is responsible for promoting fairness in
taxation for Maryland property owners by uniformly assessing properties
throughout the State at market value.
DAT has adopted national standards for assessing real property as issued by the
International Association of Assessing Officers (IAAO). IAAO has issued
technical standards for various topics related to property tax administration,
property tax policy, and valuation of property including mass appraisal and
related disciplines. The objective of IAAO standards, which represent a
consensus in the assessing profession, is to provide a systematic means by which
assessing officers can improve and standardize the operation of their offices.
IAAO standards are advisory in nature and the use of, or compliance with, these
standards is voluntary.
Annually, DAT prepares an Assessment Ratio Report to measure the quality of
real property assessments as of January 1st by reviewing sales for the six-month
period before and after January 1st. The Report is used to compare its assessed
values with the sales values and evaluate the variation against standards
developed by IAAO for ratio studies. According to DAT’s 2012 Assessment
Ratio Report, measured variation was within the acceptable ranges set forth by the
IAAO for properties assessed at January 1, 2012.
According to DAT’s 2011 State Department of Assessments and Taxation Report,
the total assessable real property tax base subject to State and County tax rates
was valued at approximately $690 billion.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Per State law, DAT shall attempt to determine the most effective and equitable
method to assess property. DAT uses several assessment methods to determine
properties’ assessed values. Commercial properties are primarily assessed using
the Maryland value, income, and reconcile assessment methods. For residential
properties, the primary assessment method used is the Maryland value method.
The Maryland value method is based on market conditions and depreciation. The
method establishes a market value index (MVI) adjustment factor to adjust the
assessed value of the properties, primarily based on the analysis of sales data for
comparable properties within a designated geographic area.
Finding 1
Certain aspects of DAT’s quality assurance process for real property
assessments and related documentation requirements were not formalized.
Analysis
DAT needs to formalize certain quality assurance processes over real property
assessments and to clarify the related documentation requirements. IAAO
standards state that quality assurance is an important aspect of every valuation
system, and the lack of effective quality assurance can result in minor or major
gaps, ranging from loss of data to failure to recognize or correct inequities. IAAO
standards also state that valuation procedures and models should be documented.
DAT has instituted certain aspects of a comprehensive quality assurance program,
such as conducting ratio studies (for example, the Annual Assessment Ratio
report required by State law). DAT also employs residential and commercial
property area supervisors to oversee the local assessment offices. However,
written guidance was not established regarding certain oversight and supervision
performed by area supervisors and local office supervisors to help ensure
compliance with DAT assessment policies and IAAO standards. Furthermore,
our review of the assessment practices at three local assessment offices identified
variations in the documentation maintained to support property assessment values.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 DAT’s independent review processes involving area supervisors were not
formalized. While area supervisors are responsible for oversight of the local
assessment offices, the extent of area supervisor’s reviews, the method for
communicating the related findings and corrective actions, and the
documentation requirements related to such reviews, were not established in
DAT policy. Consequently, DAT had no formal mechanism for assessing the
effectiveness of the reviews or the level of compliance of local assessment
offices with assessment policies.
10

--- Page 13 ---
At one local office, we noted widespread reductions in assessed land values
(which is separate from the values for the dwellings) for residential properties.
Specifically, our extraction of data from AAVS indicated that 16,948 of
60,199 accounts for which valuations were performed for the 2012 – 2013 tax
year received land value reductions ranging from 20 percent to 43 percent.
These reductions decreased the assessable base of these properties by
approximately $285.5 million. While local assessment office personnel could
not provide the rationale or documentation to support the reductions (for
example, sales analysis), management personnel at DAT headquarters advised
us that the reductions were likely done to take into account declining sales in
the jurisdiction. Furthermore, DAT advised us that it believed large
adjustments such as these would have been discussed with an area supervisor.
However, no documentation was provided to substantiate the area supervisor
had reviewed and agreed with the reductions.
 DAT had not established written policies delineating the responsibilities of
local assessment office supervisory personnel regarding the documentation to
be maintained to evidence their review and approval of assessment values.
For example, the primary basis for residential assessments is the computation
of a market value index (MVI) by assessors that considers property sales in
certain geographic areas (such as a neighborhood) to compute a factor used to
adjust values for properties with similar characteristics. Although the factors
computed by assessors are entered into AAVS by supervisors, there was no
requirement that supervisors review the computations for reasonableness and
document their approvals before entry into AAVS.
We were advised by DAT management that local office supervisors
performed “spot checks” of work performed by assessors by reviewing sales
ratios analysis and percentage change reports generated from AAVS.
However, there was no formal policy requiring the performance of spot
checks, the nature or extent of the spot checks, or the documentation to be
maintained evidencing that the spot checks were performed. IAAO standards
state that every assessment jurisdiction should establish procedures for
internal review of work product, including supervisory review of appraisal
and assessment work.
 DAT’s policies lacked specificity regarding the documentation that should be
maintained to support individual property assessments under each assessment
method. In this regard, our review disclosed variations in the nature and level
of documentation maintained by the three local offices to support real
property assessments recorded in AAVS for certain commercial and
residential properties.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Specifically, our review of 39 commercial real property assessments (with
values totaling of approximately $700 million) disclosed that 12 properties
(with assessed values of $161 million) lacked certain information
substantiating the recorded values. For example, 8 of these properties, located
in two jurisdictions, were assessed under the income capitalization method
(which uses the property’s income stream as the basis for determining the
assessed value). For 4 of these properties with assessed values totaling $58
million, DAT lacked current information on which to base the assessments
(for example, income information obtained during a prior assessment period
was used in calculating the assessment). IAAO standards state that the income
approach is the preferred method in valuing commercial property if sufficient
income data are available. For the other 4 properties, the assessed values
recorded in AAVS ($91 million) did not agree with the supporting
documentation prepared by assessors ($106 million). Consequently, for these
properties, it is unclear which valuation amounts were the appropriate values
to use for assessment purposes.
Our review of six residential properties with a total assessable base of $1.5
million in one jurisdiction disclosed that the local office did not retain
documentation supporting the MVI used to adjust the assessed values for five
of those properties having an assessable basis of $1.3 million. We requested
support for the MVIs calculated for other properties in the applicable
geographic locations (wards); however, the local office could not provide us
any documentation to support the MVIs. There were approximately 9,400
properties assessed using the Maryland value method in those wards. We
noted that another local assessment office maintained documentation of the
sales that were considered in developing the MVIs for its neighborhoods and
explanations were on file to support the MVI used in performing the
assessment, including when the MVI was not based on comparable sales due
to the lack of sales activity in the area.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DAT formalize certain aspects of its quality assurance
process by
a. specifying the nature and extent of the reviews to be conducted by area
supervisors, including the method for communicating the findings and
corrective actions and the related documentation requirements;
b. establishing the responsibilities of local office supervisory personnel and
related documentation requirements regarding their review and approval
of assessors’ work and the resulting assessment values; and
c. specifying the documentation to be maintained to support assessment
values for commercial and residential properties under each assessment
method.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 2
Physical exterior inspections were not performed for all properties in
accordance with State law.
Analysis
DAT does not perform physical exterior inspections for all properties due for
reassessment during the three-year assessment cycle as required by State law.
Furthermore, DAT lacked policies governing how physical inspections should be
documented. DAT is responsible for valuing all real property in the State
triennially based on an exterior physical inspection of the property in accordance
with Title 8 of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
We were advised by DAT that the physical inspections of properties, as required
by State law, have not been conducted for many years primarily because of
staffing shortages. Per DAT records, as of fiscal year 2012, 152 field assessors
were responsible for assessing 2,171,132 statewide accounts over the three-year
cycle, which represents a reduction of 78 assessors since fiscal year 2002.
Consequently, DAT only required inspections when certain significant events
occurred such as when a property was sold during the assessment period, when a
new building was constructed or, at a minimum, every nine years. In addition,
DAT personnel advised us that they were able to rely on property sales and permit
data received from the local governments to obtain updated property information.
However, as noted in Finding 4, sufficient controls were not established over data
received from the local governments.
DAT management advised us that it has received 22 additional assessor positions
during fiscal years 2013 and 2014, but that those positions are not sufficient to
enable it to comply with the physical inspection law. DAT management further
advised us that a law change may be necessary. In this regard, IAAO standards
indicate that a physical review including an on-site verification of physical
characteristics should be conducted at least every four to six years. In addition,
other techniques that employ digital imaging technology may be available to
assist in identifying changes in property characteristics.
The number of physical inspections conducted by the local offices could not be
determined by DAT, since documentation requirements were not established and
a record of all inspections was not maintained. AAVS has the capability to record
inspection data, including storing photographs; however, the system generally
was not used for this purpose or required to be used by DAT.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DAT
a. take appropriate actions (such as requesting a law change, using
technology) to help ensure compliance with State law regarding the
physical inspection of properties;
b. establish documentation requirements for inspections conducted; and
c. maintain records of property inspections conducted and the results.
Assessment Administration and Valuation System
In October 2006, the Board of Public Works approved a multi-year contract
totaling approximately $7.6 million with a vendor to develop and implement an
Assessment Administration and Valuation System (AAVS). AAVS provides
DAT with a centralized database, which performs real property valuations and
other assessment administration functions such as appeal processing and the
generation of assessment notices. On December 31, 2008, the original vendor
was purchased by a new vendor, effectively assigning all interests and obligations
under the contract to the new vendor. As of October 2012, DAT had paid the
vendors a total of approximately $6.9 million for AAVS. AAVS was accepted in
April 2011 when it went operational in all 24 local assessment offices and at
DAT’s headquarters location.
Finding 3
AAVS had access vulnerabilities that placed critical assessment data at risk
of unauthorized modification and certain historical data was not archived.
Analysis
AAVS had critical access vulnerabilities and vendor software updates were not
installed. Additionally, DAT did not maintain a historical record of assessment
data changes for one assessment tax year nor maintain certain documentation
pertaining to system conversion. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Due to deficiencies in the AAVS program, system users could perform
unauthorized modifications to critical data via commonly used functions
without detection. We noted all users (including read-only users) could
modify critical server data, application data, and database data without
detection, because the modifications made in this manner would not be
recorded by the system. The system developer’s technical proposal for the
implementation of AAVS indicated users would not be able to modify certain
critical database files. Upon OLA bringing this matter to its attention DAT
notified the AAVS vendor and DAT advised us that the vendor was working
14

--- Page 17 ---
to resolve the issue. At the time of our audit, there were 424 active AAVS
user accounts, 50 of which were read-only.
 As of February 27, 2013, we noted DAT was running a version of AAVS that
was eight versions behind the currently available version. Although we could
not readily determine the nature of the changes in each version, we did note
that each version of AAVS had multiple software updates associated with it.
 DAT did not ensure a historical record of changes to AAVS data pertaining to
assessments for the 2012 - 2013 tax year was maintained. For each
assessment year, shortly after assessment notices are mailed, the production
database for the year is copied to a separate database for archiving; however, a
historical record of changes was not maintained for the assessments prepared
for the 2012 - 2013 tax year. DAT officials advised us that they mistakenly
did not copy this data when archiving the database. As a result, the trail of
assessment changes or other supporting data recorded in AAVS for that year
is no longer available.
 DAT did not maintain complete records of the automated real property system
conversion to ensure all property details were properly transferred. While
DAT did maintain some preliminary reports on the conversion process and
had control totals, no documentation was maintained to show control totals
after the conversion. We were advised by DAT management that it believes
the process of transferring records from the previous system to AAVS was
complete and accurate, as local jurisdictions and other parties (two years later)
have not noticed any issues with the data that had been received from AAVS.
Nevertheless, DAT should have retained documentation to substantiate the
conversion results in case problems subsequently arose.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DAT
a. perform a full evaluation of AAVS to identify access vulnerabilities and
ensure appropriate modifications are made;
b. ensure that the most current version of AAVS is being used and
implement all software updates in a timely manner;
c. maintain historical records of changes to AAVS data; and
d. in the future, maintain complete records of the results of any system
conversions.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 4
DAT procedures did not ensure that certain data recorded in AAVS were
complete and accurate.
Analysis
DAT procedures did not ensure that certain data recorded into AAVS were
complete and accurate. Specifically, procedures were not formalized to ensure all
relevant data from local county government offices were received and accurately
entered into AAVS at any of the three local assessment offices we reviewed.
Specifically, our review noted the following conditions:
 For two local offices, critical information (real property sales, transfers, and
permit improvement data) was entered into AAVS via a manual process based
on paper documents received from local government agencies. However, a
receiving log of such documents was not prepared to establish initial
accountability and control to ensure all information received was entered into
AAVS. This is significant because permits issued which result in $100,000 or
more in improvements require the completion of an assessment at that time.
Furthermore, there were no documented supervisory reviews to ensure all data
recorded in AAVS, such as sales activity and construction permit information,
was properly supported. DAT advised us that supervisors perform “spot
checks” of keyed data. Nevertheless, as previously mentioned, these spot
checks were not documented.
 In the third local assessment office, data were received electronically from the
local government and used to update AAVS. However, there was no
verification that data entered to AAVS were properly processed. We noted
that for this electronically received data, there were system-generated reports
of data processed, including processing errors. While DAT headquarters
personnel advised us that the local assessment office was responsible for
reviewing these reports, the local office’s supervisor advised us that they
lacked sufficient knowledge to review and interpret the reports.
Consequently, errors were not corrected. DAT headquarters’ personnel
further advised us that they were working to change this report so it would be
more reader friendly.
According to the IAAO standard on mass appraisal related to quality control over
data collection, a quality control program should review samples of finished work
for completeness and accuracy, and keep tabulations of items coded correctly or
incorrectly.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DAT enhance procedures by requiring each local
assessment office to
a. establish a log to provide initial accountability and control over all
property transaction documents received from local governments;
b. ensure that the pertinent information from documents or electronic data
received are properly recorded in AAVS and any data entry errors are
resolved; and
c. ensure that supervisors verify that critical data recorded in AAVS are
properly supported, and that this verification is documented.
Administration of Certain Tax and Credit Programs
Background
DAT is responsible for administering programs related to assessing the personal
property of certain entities, granting tax credits to eligible homeowners and
renters, and collecting franchise taxes from certain companies.
Annually, DAT assesses business-owned personal property (such as furniture,
certain equipment, and inventory) based on returns filed by specific entities (such
as corporations, limited liability companies, and partnerships) as prescribed by
State law. Personal property assessments are certified by DAT and are provided
to Maryland’s 24 local subdivisions. These jurisdictions (and municipal
governments, when applicable) use the assessed values to calculate the taxes and
then issue personal property tax bills to the applicable entities. According to its
records, as of May 31, 2013, DAT had processed 306,355 accounts related to the
filing of personal property returns for the calendar year ended 2011 providing the
local subdivisions with a personal property assessable taxable base of $11.6
billion.
Homeowners and renters are eligible for tax credits based on meeting certain
income eligibility requirements. In addition, eligible renters must be over the age
of 60, disabled, or under the age of 60 with dependent children. The
homeowners’ credit limits the property tax paid based on household income up to
$60,000 combined household income. The renters’ credit is calculated based on
income with the maximum credit being $750. DAT pays local jurisdictions for
homeowners’ credits and individual renters for renters’ credits. During fiscal year
2012, DAT approved homeowners’ tax credits totaling approximately $62.6
million to 52,594 taxpayers and renters’ tax credits totaling approximately $2.7
million to 8,316 taxpayers.
17

--- Page 20 ---
State law requires telephone, electricity, and natural gas providers to file a
franchise tax return by March 15th following the end of the calendar year and pay
DAT a franchise tax on gross receipts for the year. During fiscal year 2012,
DAT’s franchise tax collections totaled approximately $127.1 million.
Finding 5
DAT had not performed timely and comprehensive verification procedures
to help ensure the accuracy of information on certain returns and tax credit
applications.
Analysis
Certain verification procedures established by DAT were not performed timely or
were not comprehensive. These procedures were designed to help ensure the
accuracy of information submitted on personal property returns, franchise tax
returns, and applications for homeowner’s and rental tax credits. Specifically, our
review disclosed the following conditions:
 As of March 2013, DAT’s procedure to audit selected personal property
returns had not been performed for returns submitted for calendar years 2008
through 2011 (the latest tax year completed at the time of our audit). Such
audits verify the propriety of the reported personal property values and ensure
the return information was accurately recorded into DAT’s personal property
assessment system for certification purposes. Our test of 20 personal property
returns submitted for calendar years 2010 and 2011 disclosed that due to a
data entry error made for one return, the combined assessed value of personal
property in two jurisdictions should have been recorded as $36,500 but,
instead, no value was recorded. We were advised by DAT these audits of
personal property returns were not completed due to staffing issues and the
significant amount of time required to manually enter personal property data
into the assessment system. Although reviews of returns would still be
necessary, DAT should determine the feasibility of instituting electronic filing
of the returns to improve overall efficiency and accuracy.
Similarly, as of March 2013, DAT had not completed audits of the selected
applications received from homeowners and renters who were granted tax
credits for calendar years 2009 through 2011. At that time, DAT advised that
it was reviewing credits granted in 2009. For example, one type of audit
involves the random selection of five percent of approved applications to
ensure the taxpayer qualified for the credit, that proper supporting
documentation (such as a federal income tax return) was submitted, and that
the related data were recorded properly in DAT’s automated system. This
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. Our test of 15
homeowners’ credits processed during the period of February 2012 to March
18

--- Page 21 ---
2013 for a total of approximately $69,000, disclosed that supporting
documentation for 5 credits totaling approximately $16,600 was not on file.
In addition, one applicant received a credit of $529 more than they should
have due to a data entry error.
Additionally, as of January 2013, DAT could not substantiate the extent to
which franchise tax returns dating back to calendar year 2007 had been
reviewed. Although DAT indicated that some, but not all returns for each
year had been reviewed, a record of the specific returns reviewed and the
results was not maintained. DAT requires that every franchise tax return
(approximately 290 for calendar year 2010) be reviewed to verify
mathematical accuracy and to validate certain information reported on the tax
return (such as, the gross operating revenues earned by the companies).
Similar conditions regarding the backlog of franchise tax returns to be
reviewed were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Data matches to identify entities that failed to file personal property returns as
required were conducted on a very limited basis. As of January 2013, the
latest match between DAT’s records and the Comptroller of Maryland’s State
vendor payment records and active sales tax accounts records was conducted
for the calendar year 2009 filings. Furthermore, the match only included the
entities located in one county. That match identified 1,227 potential non-
filing entities. Based on DAT’s records, we noted that as of the 2011 filing
year, businesses operating in seven counties have not been subject to any
match processes dating back to 2005. State law requires DAT to place
businesses in forfeited status, which provides that the business should be
prohibited from conducting business in the State, when the business fails to
file at least one annual personal property return and remit the related filing fee
(generally $300 annually).
 DAT did not ensure all jurisdictions submitted electronic files of
homeowners’ tax credits redeemed on the paid property tax bills. During our
audit period, 11 jurisdictions had not submitted any of the required monthly
electronic redemption reports, which would enable DAT to determine if
excess credits were claimed and consequently funds were owed to the State.
Differences may occur due to a property being transferred, thus altering the
allowable tax credit. DAT approved homeowners’ credits totaling $18.9
million for these 11 jurisdictions in fiscal year 2012. For the 13 jurisdictions
that submitted the files, we noted there was no documentation that DAT
reviewed the results of the electronic matches for 5 jurisdictions.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DAT
a. perform timely verifications of personal property tax returns, approved
homeowners’ and renters’ tax credit applications, and franchise tax
returns (repeat);
b. expand its data matches to identify entities that did not file personal
property returns, and consider a risk-based approach for following up on
non-filing entities;
c. ensure that local jurisdictions submit monthly electronic redemption
reports and generate exception reports of redeemed credits versus
approved credits and perform documented reviews of the exceptions; and
d. determine the cost benefits of instituting electronic filing for personal
property tax returns.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
DAT operates several critical computer applications and databases on its internal
network and on the Comptroller of Maryland’s Annapolis Data Center (ADC)
mainframe. These include the server based AAVS, property tax credit databases,
and the mainframe based Maryland Business Entity System, which contains
registrations of business entities and related filings and assessments. DAT also
operates a statewide network that connects its local offices and the DAT
headquarters’ internal network. DAT’s statewide network provides users’ access
to various information technology services including the AAVS system, ADC
mainframe based applications, a database management system, network services,
email services, and Internet access.
Finding 6
Access and monitoring controls over the AAVS database were not sufficient
to protect critical data.
Analysis
Access and monitoring controls over the AAVS database were not sufficient to
protect critical data. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 A default administrative database account unnecessarily had full access to the
AAVS database. Since this account included local server administrators by
default, all local administrators on the database server had full administrative
access to this database. Also, anyone able to achieve local administrator
20

--- Page 23 ---
privileges would automatically have full administrative access to this database and
could perform unauthorized modifications to critical data.
 Numerous critical security related events for the AAVS database were not
logged. In addition, although the database was set to record failed login
attempts, we were advised that these failed login attempts were not reviewed.
Finally, for security events that were logged, documented reviews of logged
activity did not exist.
The State of Maryland Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Information Security Policy states that each agency must establish an
authorization process which specifically grants access to information ensuring
that access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of “least
possible privilege”. This Policy also requires that procedures be developed to
routinely (for example daily or weekly) review audit records for indications of
unusual activities, suspicious activities or suspected violations, and report
findings to appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DAT
a. limit access to all critical databases to personnel whose job duties require
such access; and
b. log critical security events for the AAVS database, regularly review these
logs, investigate unusual or questionable items and document and retain
these reviews and investigations.
Finding 7
The DAT network was not adequately secured.
Analysis
The DAT network was not adequately secured. DAT operated virtual private
network connections to its network, a firewall at its network interfaces, and a
network-based intrusion detection and prevention system (IDPS). Specifically,
we noted the following conditions:
 DAT improperly allowed two untrusted third parties with the capability to
access its entire internal network by use of virtual private network
connections. For example, one vendor could access the entire DAT internal
network over all ports via virtual private networks. Consequently, such access
could allow the vendors to conduct unauthorized and inappropriate activities
on DAT’s systems.
21

--- Page 24 ---
 DAT’s firewall was not properly configured to send all critical network traffic
to the network-based IDPS for analysis. Specifically, the firewall was not
configured to send any traffic from outside of the DAT network (for example,
Internet traffic) to the IDPS for analysis.
 Due to improper configuration, the IDPS did not analyze any network traffic
sent by the firewall. Therefore, the network-based IDPS device was not
providing any intrusion detection protection for the DAT network.
 DAT did not use Host-based Intrusion Protection Systems (HIPS) on critical
web servers that processed encrypted traffic. The absence of HIPS coverage
for such traffic created network security risk in that DAT’s network-based
IDPS cannot read encrypted traffic flowing into its network whereas HIPS can
read and analyze such traffic and protect critical web servers from malicious
traffic.
 Remote administrative access to the network-based IDPS module was not
adequately restricted to only those users who required such access. For
example, through connections with the Internet, individuals could make a
remote management connection to the IDPS module.
DoIT’s Information Security Policy requires that agency systems be configured to
monitor and control communications at external boundaries. Strong network
security uses a layered approach, relying on various resources, and is structured
according to assessed network security risk. Properly configured IDPS protection
can aid significantly in the detection/prevention of and response to potential
network security breaches and attacks. Furthermore, without proper monitoring,
critical network security breaches may occur that could otherwise possibly be
detected and prevented.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DAT
a. configure its firewall and virtual private networks to achieve a “least
privilege” security strategy giving individuals and devices only those
privileges needed to perform assigned tasks;
b. modify the network-based IDPS and firewall configurations to ensure
that all critical network traffic is sent to and reviewed by the IDPS
module;
c. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identify how IDPS and HIPS coverage should be best applied to its
network, and implement such coverage for all critical portions of its
network; and
22

--- Page 25 ---
d. restrict remote access to the network-based IDPS module to only
those users requiring such access.
Finding 8
Malware protection on DAT workstations and servers needs improvement.
Analysis
Malware protection on DAT workstations and servers needs improvement.
Specifically, our review disclosed the following conditions:
 DAT did not ensure that malware protection software was installed on all
DAT servers. Although DAT had procedures for configuring workstations
with malware protection software, similar procedures did not exist for servers.
 DAT was not using an enterprise-wide management tool to monitor and
manage the use of malware protection software on its workstations and
servers. Therefore, DAT could not effectively and efficiently monitor its
deployed malware protection software to ensure that such software was
always installed and operating properly on all DAT workstations and servers.
Furthermore, DAT did not verify that malware protection software and the
related definition files were kept up-to-date on all DAT workstations and
servers.
 Certain workstations were configured with users having administrator rights.
Administrator rights are the highest permission level that can be granted to
users and allow users to install software and change configuration settings.
Our testing of eight workstations disclosed that employees’ user accounts
were all defined with administrator rights rather than with user rights. As a
result, if these workstations were infected with malware, the malware would
run with administrative rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk
of compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only user
rights.
Industry best practices recommend that organizations should employ automated
tools to continuously monitor workstations, servers, and mobile devices for
active, up-to-date anti-malware protection. Furthermore, the DoIT Information
Security Policy, states that agencies should configure security settings of
information technology products to the most restrictive mode consistent with
operational requirements.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DAT develop and implement enterprise-wide automated
procedures to
a. ensure that all workstations and servers are configured with anti-
malware software that is operating properly,
b. regularly confirm that anti-malware software and the related definition
files are properly updated on its workstations and servers, and
c. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel
that require such access for their job duties.
Finding 9
An up-to-date and comprehensive disaster recovery plan did not exist.
Analysis
DAT did not have an up-to-date and comprehensive information technology
disaster recovery plan (DRP) for recovering from disaster scenarios (for example,
a fire). Specifically, the DRP did not address certain required provisions such as
an alternate site, complete listings of hardware and software components, and
restoration of network connectivity. At the time of our review, the plan had not
been updated for five years. Without an up-to-date and comprehensive DRP, a
disaster could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of time) in
restoring operations for information systems, such as AAVS, beyond the expected
delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario. The State of Maryland
Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines provide information
on the minimum required elements needed for a complete information system
DRP.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DAT maintain a comprehensive disaster recovery plan,
which is updated at least annually, in accordance with the aforementioned IT
Disaster Recovery Guidelines, with update efforts being documented.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Contract Monitoring
Finding 10
DAT did not adequately monitor certain contract billings.
Analysis
DAT did not monitor certain payments to contractors or otherwise verify that
contractor-submitted billings were proper prior to payment resulting in potential
overpayments. Our review of 19 billings totaling approximately $1.3 million
during fiscal years 2011 through 2013 made by four contractors disclosed the
following conditions related to two contractors:
 DAT was charged incorrect rates for three fiscal year 2012 billings totaling
approximately $228,300 from one contractor resulting in potential
overpayments of approximately $5,000. The contractor provided lock box
services, under a statewide contract procured by the State Treasurer’s Office
(STO). Although we were advised by STO personnel that the applicable
contract had expired in June 2011, STO was in the process of obtaining a new
contract and the rates from the previous contract were to remain in effect for
fiscal year 2012. However, the rates billed to DAT did not agree with the
previous contract rates, resulting in the aforementioned potential
overpayments. Payments to this contractor totaled approximately $302,000
for services received during fiscal year 2012. Similar conditions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 DAT did not verify the contractor-reported level of services for document
preparation and imaging services. The contract, which was effective October
2010, provided that the contractor would bill DAT a standard monthly fee
based on an estimated annual total of images it scanned. The contract
provided for an annual payment settlement based on an audit performed by the
contractor to determine the actual number of images scanned. The contractor
was paid approximately $498,000 during the period October 2010 through
May 2012.
DAT did not maintain its own record of images scanned per month to
independently verify the contractor’s monthly reported activity. Our tally of
scanned batch totals for one month (93,000 images) differed with the
contractor’s report of activity for that month (120,000 images) by
approximately 27,000, which under the contract rates would have a value of
approximately $6,900.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Furthermore, an annual settlement had not occurred even though the
contractor reported fewer scanned images than the number specified for the
monthly fee that was charged. The vendor reported to DAT that it scanned
approximately 553,000 fewer images than were billed, which represented
potential overpayments to the contractor of approximately $139,500 for the
period October 2010 through August 2012.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DAT establish procedures to ensure the propriety of
contractor billings. Specifically, we recommend that DAT
a. maintain records necessary to perform verifications of contractor
billings,
b. verify that billed costs agree with contractual terms and conditions
(repeat), and
c. seek recovery of any overpayments identified including those
mentioned above (repeat).
Cash Receipts
Finding 11
Sufficient controls were not established over certain collections.
Analysis
DAT had not established adequate accountability and control over cash and check
collections received at DAT’s headquarters office (such as, filing fees and
recoveries of excess tax credits from the counties). Cash collections are initially
recorded on a cash register and subsequently posted to an automated system or on
a manual check log. According to DAT’s records, during fiscal year 2012, cash
and check collections at the headquarters location totaled approximately $23.5
million (approximately $2.5 million in cash and $21 million in checks). Our
review disclosed the following control deficiencies:
 For certain collections, documentation was lacking to substantiate that
independent verifications were performed to ensure that cash and check
collections received were recorded in the automated system and were
deposited. Our test of collections from 24 days totaling approximately $4.7
million received during fiscal years 2011 and 2012 disclosed collections from
20 days totaling approximately $1.5 million for which there was no
documentation that DAT had performed the verifications.
26

--- Page 29 ---
 Recordation of “no fee” transactions was not adequately controlled. Since
State law prohibits DAT from charging a fee for services provided to certain
entities (such as, non-profit organizations), the automated system permits the
recording of a no fee transaction to account for such services. However, we
noted that 14 employees who had access to collections could also record a no
fee transaction in DAT’s automated system. Additionally, 8 employees with
access to collections had the ability to remove a payment transaction recorded
in the automated system and record a no fee transaction in its place. This
capability is needed, for example, in the case of cashier error. Yet, output
reports of no fee transactions recorded in the automated system were not
generated and reviewed by supervisory personnel. As a result, collections
could be misappropriated without detection. According to DAT records, a
total of 1,309 no fee transactions were recorded in DAT’s automated system
during fiscal year 2012, and 391 payments totaling approximately $86,700
were removed from the system during fiscal years 2011 and 2012.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
According to the Comptroller of Maryland—General Accounting Division’s
Accounting Procedures Manual, a verification of cash receipts from initial
recordation to deposit is to be performed by an employee independent of the cash
receipts function. The Manual also requires supervisors to review and approve
adjustments to cash receipts.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DAT
a. document the performance of independent verifications of recorded
collections to deposit (repeat); and
b. generate output reports of “no fee” transactions recorded in the
automated system, and ensure that supervisory personnel independent of
the cash receipts functions review these transactions for propriety
(repeat).
We advised DAT on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
27

--- Page 30 ---
28

--- Page 31 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (DAT) for
the period beginning August 21, 2009 and ending July 29, 2012. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DAT’s financial
transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included corporate fees and taxes, tax credits, real property
assessments, procurements and disbursements, information systems, cash receipts,
and payroll. Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel,
inspection of documents and records, and observations of DAT’s operations. We
also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for
background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not
independently verified.
DAT provides certain support services (such as payroll, invoice processing,
maintenance of accounting records and related fiscal functions) to the Property
Tax Assessment Appeals Board. These support services are included within the
scope of our audits of DAT.
DAT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DAT’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DAT that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DAT’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DAT regarding the results of our
review of its response.
30

--- Page 34 ---
RESPONSE OF THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF
ASSESSMENTS AND TAXATION (SDAT) TO LEGISLATIVE
AUDITOR’S REPORT OF NOVEMBER 2013
Finding 1 by the Auditor:
Certain aspects of DAT’s quality assurance process for real property assessments
and related documentation requirements were not formalized.
SDAT Response: The Department concurs with the Auditor’s Finding, and it has
already taken steps to implement Recommendations 1 a, b, and c to provide
greater transparency here. SDAT has developed a written, formalized policy for
the reports and audits to be conducted by the Area Supervisors whose duty it is to
oversee the performance of the County Supervisors of Assessment and the
assessors assigned to that office. Specific reports will be reviewed by the Area
Supervisors to ensure compliance of local assessment offices with assessment
procedures. For the reassessment of Group 2 properties for the January 1, 2014
assessment notices, a memorandum dated August 12, 2013 was sent out to all
local Supervisors of Assessment identifying specific reports and other items of
information to be produced for review by the Area Supervisors. This detailed
memorandum will be issued each year prior to that year’s reassessment work for
the next one-third Group of residential and commercial properties.
Regarding documentation to support assessment values as discussed in
Recommendation 1b, the annual memorandum described above included a
provision that an Area Supervisor must sign off whenever land values are
adjusted across the board for a particular community. Similarly, each local
Supervisor of Assessments will sign off and documents will be retained showing
that they have independently checked and verified the individual Market Value
Indexes (MVIs) being used in certain geographic areas. Incidentally, although
the Supervisors did perform the proper sales analysis for the MVIs in all three
subdivisions the Auditors visited, the retained documentation did exist in two of
the three subdivisions. When the local Supervisors also perform the regular spot
checks of the work performed each year, the central administration of Real
Property will require that the particular checkoffs will be noted in the AAVS
system.
Finally, the Auditor’s Recommendation 1c suggests that the Department
maintain documentation to support assessment value for commercial and
residential properties under EACH assessment method. For commercial
properties, there are three different assessment methods for valuing properties but
standard appraisal law and Maryland court decisions specify that the assessor
should use his or her professional judgment as to which assessment method
produces the best indication of market value. Therefore, the Department will
maintain specific documentation only for the assessment method used and only in
those instances where the data exists for a particular commercial account.

--- Page 35 ---
Finding 2 by the Auditor:
Physical exterior inspections were not performed for all properties in accordance
with State law.
SDAT Response: The Department agrees with the Auditor’s Finding here and is
already taking specific actions to address the Auditor’s second and third
Recommendations. The State Supervisor of Real Property Assessments is issuing
a new procedure on the requirements for documenting in the agency’s AAVS
system all of the inspections actually conducted by local assessors each year. The
AAVS system will produce a standardized report on that information for each
local jurisdiction.
The first Recommendation of the Auditor here is to take appropriate
actions (such as requesting a law change, using technology) to help ensure
compliance with State law regarding the physical inspection of properties. Under
Maryland’s triennial assessment law, the physical inspection requirement would
entail that the Department physically inspect one-third of the 2,171,132 total
residential and commercial accounts or approximately 723,000 properties each
year. The Auditor also notes that the Department has 78 fewer assessors in fiscal
year 2012 than in fiscal year 2002. In this same 10 year period, there was an
addition of 177,348 new properties to be assessed. Although the Department has
received 22 additional assessor positions in fiscal years 2013 and 2014, those
positions are not sufficient to comply with the physical inspection law. Based on
these facts, the Department is actively exploring the cost of a pilot project in one
major subdivision to obtain satellite imagery of real properties at a sufficient
resolution to replace physical inspection of properties. Once the Department
determines the feasibility of this project and once it collects a year’s worth of data
in 2014 on the number of physical inspections actually conducted with the
additional assessor positions noted above, the agency expects to propose
departmental legislation on the physical inspection law to the 2015 session of the
General Assembly.
Finding 3 by the Auditor:
AAVS has access vulnerabilities that placed critical assessment data at risk of
unauthorized modification and certain historical data was not archived.
SDAT Response: The Department concurs in the Auditor’s Finding and will
comply with the four Recommendations but needs to supply “context” to the
Auditor’s comments. While the Department’s IT managers want to acknowledge
major credit to the Auditor’s IT Unit for finding this particular vulnerability
where all users could modify critical server data, the Department submits there is
an extremely remote possibility that someone else would discover this
vulnerability. As the Auditor notes, the Department promptly notified the AAVS
vendor to prepare a permanent system fix to correct the problem. On December
10, 2013, the vendor provided an update that the problem will be remedied by
January 15, 2014.
2

--- Page 36 ---
Regarding the Auditor’s comment that as of February 27, 2013 that the
Department was running a much earlier version of AAVS, the agency advised the
Auditor that SDAT was awaiting funding on July 1, 2013 for the installation of
new servers before installing the latest version of AAVS. Those servers have now
been installed and so has the next version of AAVS.
Regarding the retention of the complete records for the data conversion
from the old Real Property CAMA system to the new AAVS system, it needs to
be noted that the Department did keep this information for five years prior to the
time it was discarded (six months before the Auditor began this audit of the
Department). If there are ever future conversions, the Department will keep such
records in perpetuity or until at least the next audit of the agency by the
Legislative Auditor.
Finding 4 by the Auditor:
DAT procedures did not ensure that certain data recorded in AAVS were
complete and accurate.
SDAT Response: The Department concurs in the Auditor’s three
Recommendations here. The August 2013 Memorandum from the State
Supervisor for Real Property discussed in the SDAT Response to Finding 1 also
required checking on AAVS inputs of the applicable data by the Supervisor of
Assessments or Commercial/Residential manager in the larger jurisdictions. The
report generated by one of the three subdivisions is being critically reviewed by
headquarters administration to rewrite its parameters; hopefully, with the
cooperation of the local jurisdiction for the automated input of its information.
The Auditor’s comments referring to permit information and sales reflects the fact
that the Department is implementing a new system for this information in AAVS.
Steps to track permit and sales are evolving and being implemented.
During calendar year 2013, more Assessment offices have been able to import
building permits which allows for better tracking. The import of this information
also required SDAT to contact local governments to revise the manner in which
they electronically presented the building permit data. After a property is
physically inspected for a building permit greater than $100,000 resulting in an
out of cycle reassessment, then specific fields in the AAVS system are utilized to
input and collect the information for supervisory review.
Finding 5 by the Auditor:
DAT had not performed timely and comprehensive verification procedures to help
ensure the accuracy of information on certain returns and tax credit applications.
SDAT’s Response: The Department concurs in the Auditor’s Finding and will
undertake different steps to implement the four Recommendations that affect
Personal Property Assessments, Homeowners’/Renters’ Tax Credits, and
Franchise Taxes collected from telephone, electric and natural gas providers.
3

--- Page 37 ---
The Auditor’s first comment in this Finding deals with a particular audit
not being performed by SDAT on certain personal property returns due to staffing
issues and the significant amount of time required to manually enter personal
property data into the assessment system. The Auditor recommends the
Department to determine the feasibility of instituting electronic filing of the
returns to improve overall efficiency and the accuracy of the information entered.
The Department has begun the process to obtain a system for the electronic filing
of personal property returns, and we project its implementation on January 1,
2015 with the start of the filing of returns that year. This electronic filing system
also should free up some resources to conduct a specialized audit noted by the
Auditor to determine which business entities should be required to continue filing
a personal property return in subsequent years. In the meantime, the Department
will again conduct the two audits each year for all seven counties noted in the
Auditor’s description of this Finding.
The Auditor offers two sets of comments on the different audits performed
by the Homeowners’/Renters’ Tax Credit Programs. The first comments note that
the Tax Credit Programs had not “completed” audits of selected applications for
certain years. The Auditor also notes that this condition was commented upon in
the Auditor’s preceding audit report. The Department is performing all of the
audits just not as “timely” as the Auditor would like. For the record, it should be
noted that there is an automatic 18 month delay in performing an audit in a new
year because of the time period by which the Department receives the electronic
transmission of the income tax information from the IRS. The primary reason
that these audits cannot be more timely is because the Tax Credit Programs had
four positions abolished in the last Cost Containment. The Tax Credit Programs
need additional positions if the Department is to complete the audits the agency
designed in a more timely manner. As a result, the Department has requested
additional positions for fiscal year 2015 for the Tax Credit Programs.
For the Tax Credit Programs, the Auditor also noted that some local
jurisdictions had not submitted monthly electronic redemption reports for all
months showing the amounts of recaptured tax credits upon a transfer of the
property. The Tax Credit administration will send out a written directive to the
affected County Finance Offices to ensure that they submit the electronic report
on a monthly basis even if there are no accounts to report in later months, and it
will follow up on any jurisdiction that does not respond with a monthly report.
The Auditor’s final comment in this Finding states that SDAT did not
substantiate the extent to which franchise tax returns had been reviewed. This
condition was also commented upon in the preceding audit report. For the 2008
returns, the Department had timely reviewed the returns of the top thirty filers
who pay the largest amounts of the franchise taxes. As of August 2013, the audit
completion rates were as follows: 2008 – 90%; 2009 – 82%; 20120 – 82%;
2011 – 76%; and 2012 – 28%. All returns could not be audited because the
Department’s Franchise Tax Unit has had two of its three positions vacant for two
4

--- Page 38 ---
years because of retirements and recruitment problems for this highly specialized
work unit. Now that all three positions have been filled, the Department
committed to the Auditor during the Discussion Note period for this audit that the
agency would perform a specified number of audits each year, by a certain date,
and appropriate documentation of the audits would be permanently noted in the
records. The new audit schedule requires that audits will be completed on 70% of
the returns within one year of receipt, and 100% of the returns will be audited
within 20 months of receipt. Accounts with more $1 million in annual Franchise
Tax payments will be completed within 8 months of receipt. During the
Discussion Note period for this audit, the Department specified in the “exit”
conference that the Auditor would have to raise at that time any objections it had
to the specific audit parameters the Department proposed here. No objections
were raised, and the Department has already implemented the specific audit
schedule provided to the Auditor.
Finding 6 by the Auditor:
Access and monitoring controls over the AAVS database were not sufficient to
protect critical data.
SDAT Response: SDAT concurs in the Finding and Recommendations. It must
be emphasized that this Finding and Recommendation “b” to document reviews
of logs of security events will result in a massive amount of work for the IT Unit
that will require the agency to obtain a new full-time employee in the FY’15
Budget Request to function as a dedicated Security Officer employee performing
these tasks exclusively. It also should be noted that the Agency’s total number of
IT employees in this Unit has declined from 20 to 13 employees from 2008 to
2013. The necessary security reports have been written and produced but cannot
be thoroughly audited until that new employee is hired in the FY’15 budget.
Finally, it should be noted regarding Recommendation “a” on critical
database access that only three senior level managerial employees have system
administrator access to the AAVS database.
Finding 7 by the Auditor:
The DAT network was not adequately secured.
SDAT Response: The Department concurs in the Auditor’s Finding/
Recommendations and has taken the following actions.
Recommendation “a” to configure its firewall and virtual private networks to a
“least privilege” strategy.
1. The Internet. SDAT has disconnected the line for the Image 1 server, and
it is no longer used. This action was taken while the Auditor was here.
2. AAVS Vendor. SDAT’s CIO has limited the access by this vendor to just
a preview test server and not on the main database. The ports were limited
to just this server.
5

--- Page 39 ---
3. Virtual Private Networks (VPN). SDAT’s CIO has removed one VPN.
The partner VPN is limited to use by the AAVS vendor to access the
preview server.
Recommendation “b” to modify network-based IDPS and firewall to send critical
network to office to review by the IDPS module. We are in the process of
ordering new equipment to allow review of all network traffic. The new
equipment will be installed in July/August 2014, and it will be configured to
address any of the concerns raised here by the Auditor.
Recommendation “c” to review network security risks is addressed in finding 6
and involves the hiring of a dedicated Security Officer employee performing these
tasks exclusively.
Recommendation “d” is to restrict remote access to the IDPS module only to
those needing such access. Currently, the network based device only allow access
by the CIO and Deputy Director. The new Security Officer will be granted
access.
Finding 8 by the Auditor:
Malware protection on DAT workstations and servers need improvement.
SDAT Response: The Department concurs in the Finding and provides the
following information regarding the agency’s implementation of the Auditor’s
Recommendations.
Recommendation “a” to ensure all workstations/servers are configured with anti-
malware software that is operating properly. SDAT’s response is that it did not
have a new computer to use as a server for this Malware. With the new 2015
budget, the Department will obtain a computer to use as a server for Malware, and
then explore the capabilities and option for using the software to serve all of its
computer workstations.
Recommendation “b” to regularly confirm that anti-malware software and related
definition files are properly updated. The new server will have software installed
to regularly confirm updates on workstations and servers.
Recommendation “c” to limit local administrative rights on user workstations to
only necessary personnel. The Department is in the process of removing all
administrator rights from all workstations. Currently, we have completed this
project in five of the twenty-four Assessment offices.
Finding 9 by the Auditor:
An up-to-date and comprehensive disaster recovery plan did not exist.
6

--- Page 40 ---
SDAT Response: The Department concurs in the Auditor’s Finding and
Recommendation. Though we do have a disaster recovery plan in place, the
agency’s IT Unit is in the process of updating our documentation, which will be
annually maintained.
Finding 10 by the Auditor:
DAT did not adequately monitor certain contract billings.
SDAT Response: The Department concurs in the Auditor’s Finding and will
implement the three Recommendations. However, the Department must provide a
fuller explanation as to what occurred regarding the two contract billings that are
the subject of this Finding.
The first contract billing involved a “lock box” service provided under a
contract procured by the State Treasurer’s Office (STO). The Auditor notes that
this condition was commented upon in the preceding audit period. The
Department presented documentation to the Auditor in the Discussion Note period
of earlier instances where the efforts by the agency’s accounting chief to get
applicable rate information from the STO resulted in being ignored or being
rebuffed by STO personnel administering the statewide lockbox contract. At the
exit interview, the Department requested the Audit Manager to intercede on the
Department’s behalf by providing directly to the STO the specific rate
information for the period in question indicating an overcharge occurred and a
refund was due for the year in question. Once that information is provided, the
Department will complete the review of this billing.
The second contract billing involves a contract for document imaging
services. The Auditor is correct in noting that the Department did not maintain a
monthly record of images scanned per month. The Department does perform a
review of the annual reconciliation report on the total number of images scanned
in the reporting period. The Auditor is incorrect in stating that the annual
settlement had not occurred for the specific reporting period. The Department
had instead directed the vendor to perform a new major imaging initiative to scan
personal property tax returns and apply the end of year reconciliation amount as
partial payment towards the cost of the new major imaging project. In the prior
reporting period, the Department had received an $80,000 check payment from
the vendor for the fewer scanned images provided under the contract.
The Department has already required and the vendor has responded in
revising the monthly invoice document so the agency can better monitor the
number of documents imaged monthly for each of the separate departmental
programs (Charter, Homestead, and Personal Property) using the imaging
services.
Finding 11 by the Auditor:
Sufficient controls were not established over certain collections.
7

--- Page 41 ---
SDAT Response: The Department concurs in the Auditor’s Finding and has
already taken steps to implement the two Recommendations. The first
Recommendation deals with a particular subset of cash/check collections. A
major independent audit (including computer report verification) was performed
by the Department on all collections in the cash receipts process for a period of
time to verify the cash receipts entered into the MBES system with the daily
deposit record. No discrepancies were found. Going forward, our lead
accountant will perform a daily verification of all of the cash receipts entered into
the MBES system and the daily deposit. Also, the cash register will be closed
later so that all cash receipts will be entered into the system by Charter staff by
the close of business for that day’s receipts and so that an exact reconciliation
amount can be certified since cash receipts are no longer being received or
processed after the cash register was closed.
The Department is producing a new automated report on “no fee”
transactions for copies of documents provided primarily to State and local
government agencies. An independent supervisor will review on a test basis the
appropriateness of the “no fee” status on the sampled transactions to determine if
further review for more accounts is appropriate. That review will entail a
matching of the “no fee” document and the request on the letterhead stationary of
the office making the request. The review of the sampled accounts will be
documented with the supervisor’s initials, the date it occurred, and an attachment
of the letter request.
8

--- Page 42 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
John F. Nogel, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Michael D. Cheese
Marissa L. Eby
Evan E. Naugle
LaTeasa R. Robertson
Staff Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditor