Title: Board of Public Works - Interagency Committee on School Construction
Date: 06/15/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1acc9d72456067469c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:43:17.849040
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Board of Public Works
Interagency Committee on School Construction
June 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Public School Construction Program
Finding 1 – Proper controls were not established to ensure the validity 5
and accuracy of data recorded in the public school construction
project accounting system.
Public School Maintenance Inspections
* Finding 2 – As of December 2015, IAC had not finalized or formally 6
issued reports for approximately 72 percent of school maintenance
inspections conducted during fiscal years 2013 through 2015.
Recovery of State Funds
* Finding 3 – IAC had not resolved a matter involving an $890,277 debt 8
that was to be assumed by a local jurisdiction in 2008 for a closed
school.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 5-301 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, the State established a program to provide financial
aid to the counties and Baltimore City with respect to certain public school
construction projects and capital improvements, subject to the approval of the
Board of Public Works (BPW). BPW has adopted regulations for the
administration of the school construction program which provide for the
establishment of an Interagency Committee on School Construction (IAC). IAC
consists of the Secretary of the Department of Planning, the Secretary of the
Department of General Services, the State Superintendent of Schools (or their
respective designees), and two public members appointed by the President of the
Senate and the Speaker of the House.
According to its records, during fiscal year 2015, IAC disbursed approximately
$289.2 million in capital funds for public school construction projects, and its
operating expenditures totaled approximately $1.9 million, including
approximately $1.8 million for salaries, wages, and fringe benefits.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 22, 2013. We determined that IAC
satisfactorily addressed two of the findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Public School Construction Program
Finding 1
Proper controls were not established to ensure the validity and accuracy of
financial data recorded in the accounting system for public school
construction projects.
Analysis
Proper controls were not established to ensure the validity and accuracy of
financial data recorded in the Board of Public Works – Interagency Committee on
School Construction’s (IAC) automated construction project accounting system.
The project accounting system is IAC’s official record of the State’s public school
construction project activity, including project requirements, project costs, and
vendor information. The system serves as a critical source during the invoice
approval process for ensuring that disbursements for construction projects are
proper and for controlling project budget allocations.
Four employees could record critical project information in the construction
project accounting system, including new contracts, change orders, and contract
expenditures, without independent supervisory review and approval. Two of
these employees were responsible for recording this information and the other two
employees were given this access in a back-up capacity. Although monthly
output reports of all financial information recorded by these employees were
generated and subject to review, the review was not independent since it was
performed by one of these four employees. Furthermore, the reviews included
only an examination for unusual transactions and did not include an examination
of source documentation to determine whether the transactions were accurate and
proper. Finally, the two employees responsible for recording information in the
accounting system also completed the monthly reconciliations of expenditures
recorded in the system with the State’s financial records. As of September 2015,
these reconciliations had not been reviewed and approved by supervisory
personnel since December 2013.
As of the time of our review, no automated controls, such as on-line approvals of
transactions, had been established in the construction project accounting system.
However, IAC advised us that the system is capable of supporting an on-line
approval function and additional system programming is planned to implement an
on-line approval requirement.
5

--- Page 8 ---
According to its records, during fiscal year 2015, IAC disbursed approximately
$289.2 million in capital funds for public school construction projects. Also,
during fiscal year 2015, the Board of Public Works approved 183 projects totaling
approximately $325.3 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that IAC
a. ensure that an employee without the capability to process transactions in
the construction project accounting system verifies the propriety of
transactions recorded on system output reports to source documentation,
at least on a test basis;
b. ensure that reconciliations between the construction project accounting
system and the State’s records are reviewed and approved by
independent supervisory personnel as they are completed; and
c. pursue implementing an on-line approval function for critical
transactions processed on the accounting system.
We advised IAC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Public School Maintenance Inspections
Finding 2
As of December 2015, IAC had not finalized and formally issued inspection
reports for approximately 72 percent of school maintenance inspections
conducted during fiscal years 2013 through 2015.
Analysis
IAC had a significant backlog of school maintenance inspection results that had
not been finalized and formally issued to Local Education Agencies (LEA).
IAC’s intended practice was to report to each LEA the inspection results for the
entire year at one time, generally at the end of the fiscal year. However, as of
December 31, 2015, IAC had not issued inspection reports to the applicable LEAs
for 489 of the 679 maintenance inspections (approximately 72 percent) performed
during fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015, as noted in the following table.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Summary of Unissued Inspection Results for Fiscal Years 2013 – 2015
as of December 31, 2015
Number of LEAs Unissued
Total Inspections
Fiscal Year With Unissued Inspection
Performed
Inspection Results Results
2013 5 123 232
2014 17 170 224
2015 18 196 223
Totals 489 679
Source: IAC records
Of the remaining 190 inspection results that were issued, the reports for 114 were
issued 12 to 30 months past the end of the fiscal years in which the inspections
were performed.
We were advised by IAC management that findings and observations, especially
those that are serious in nature, are verbally conveyed to LEA representatives
during and immediately after each inspection; however, until the formal
maintenance inspection results are issued to LEAs, the deficiencies identified
during the inspections may not be conveyed to school officials to help ensure
timely correction. According to IAC records, as of January 5, 2016, there were
1,392 public schools in Maryland.
During the aforementioned three-year period, IAC inspections concluded that the
overall conditions at 25 schools in three LEAs were “not adequate,” including 8
inspections performed during the period between May 2013 and November 2014,
for which the results had not been issued at the time of our review. The results of
inspections of the other 17 schools, which were performed during the period
between November 2012 and June 2014, were issued on December 28, 2015,
representing a delay of between 18 and 30 months past the end of the applicable
fiscal year. Deficiencies that could affect the health and safety of students and
staff at these schools, such as unsanitary conditions and fire safety issues, were
identified. For the remaining schools which had better overall performance
results, the inspections frequently identified conditions that required attention and
therefore should be promptly reported.
We were advised by IAC management that there were a number of factors
contributing to the backlog in issuing inspection reports including a lack of
personnel resources, staff training, and delays in developing and reviewing the
reports prior to issuance.
7

--- Page 10 ---
State regulations require IAC to annually rate the maintenance conditions at
selected public schools in each LEA. IAC has a target to perform maintenance
inspections at all schools during a six-year cycle. The regulations also require
that any LEA that operates a school that receives a “not adequate” rating in any
inspection category must submit a corrective action plan to IAC within 30 days of
receiving the inspection results. The corrective action plan must state how and
when the deficiencies will be resolved. Similar conditions were commented upon
in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that IAC
a. address the noted backlog of inspection results, ensure that inspection
results are finalized and issued in a timely manner, and take appropriate
follow-up action to obtain corrective action plans from all applicable
LEAs as required (repeat); and
b. evaluate the processes and resources it currently uses to finalize
inspection results, and determine what enhancements could be made so
that inspection reports can be issued to the respective LEAs sooner.
Recovery of State Funds
Finding 3
IAC had not resolved a matter involving an $890,277 debt that was to be
assumed by a local jurisdiction in 2008 for a closed school.
Analysis
IAC had not resolved a matter involving an $890,277 debt that was to be assumed
by a local jurisdiction in 2008 for a school building that was no longer being used
for school purposes. We were advised that the State continued the debt payments
and fully satisfied the debt in 2011. Under State law, the State shall require
reimbursement of outstanding debt service for a school under these
circumstances.
As disclosed in our preceding audit report, a local jurisdiction closed a school in
February 2007 and declared the building as surplus. On February 13, 2008, the
Board of Public Works (BPW) approved the school closure and the transfer of the
building to the local jurisdiction, to be used as a training facility for police and
firefighters, under the condition that the local jurisdiction assume the school’s
outstanding debt of $837,820. The outstanding debt was later revised to $890,277
but this revised amount was not presented to the BPW for its approval. In
8

--- Page 11 ---
December 2008, a representative of the local jurisdiction requested that the State
waive this debt but no formal action was taken.
In response to our preceding audit report, BPW sought legal advice from the
Office of Attorney General (OAG) who advised in June 2014 that BPW does not
have the discretion to waive the jurisdiction’s debt. We were informed by IAC
management that IAC has been in discussions with the OAG and the State
Treasurer’s Office to determine the best method of resolving this issue, and that
IAC plans to reissue a BPW agenda item later this year in an effort to recover the
State funds.
State law requires that the State shall require reimbursement of outstanding debt
service for a school that is no longer being used for school purposes. In this
particular case, IAC funded the rewiring of the school for voice, video, and data
communications through the State’s Master Lease Purchase Financing Program.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that IAC take the necessary actions to resolve this matter
(repeat).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Board of Public Works –
Interagency Committee on School Construction (IAC) for the period beginning
February 6, 2012 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine IAC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included capital funds used to finance the cost of public
school construction and renovation projects, public school maintenance
inspections, construction project closeout procedures, cash receipts, and payroll.
We also determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit
report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
IAC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from IAC’s construction project accounting system and
10

--- Page 13 ---
maintenance inspection system for the purpose of testing certain areas, including
capital project transactions, maintenance inspections, and IAC’s monitoring
efforts. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
IAC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect IAC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to IAC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
IAC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise IAC regarding the results of our
review of its response.
11

--- Page 15 ---
Public School Construction Program
Finding 1
Proper controls were not established to ensure the validity and accuracy of
financial data recorded in the accounting system for public school
construction projects.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that IAC
a. ensure that an employee without the capability to process transactions in
the construction project accounting system verifies the propriety of
transactions recorded on system output reports to source documentation,
at least on a test basis;
b. ensure that reconciliations between the construction project accounting
system and the State’s records are reviewed and approved by
independent supervisory personnel as they are completed; and
c. pursue implementing an on-line approval function for critical
transactions processed on the accounting system.
We advised IAC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
IAC RESPONSE:
a. Effective March, 2016, a reviewer without the capability to process
transactions in the construction project accounting system has begun to
trace transactions from the monthly transaction report to the source
documentation on a test basis to ensure validity and accuracy.
b. Effective March, 2016, reconciliations between the internal accounting
system and the State’s financial system will be performed timely using
independent personnel for supervisory review and approval.
c. The IAC acknowledges the importance of an on-line approval function for
critical transactions. The corrective programming will be prioritized to
ensure implementation within three years from the date of the completion
of this audit, i.e. June 30, 2018.

--- Page 16 ---
Public School Maintenance Inspections
Finding 2
As of December 2015, IAC had not finalized and formally issued inspection
reports for approximately 72 percent of school maintenance inspections
conducted during fiscal years 2013 through 2015.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that IAC
a. address the noted backlog of inspection results, ensure that inspection
results are finalized and issued in a timely manner, and take appropriate
follow-up action to obtain corrective action plans from all applicable
LEAs as required (repeat); and
b. evaluate the processes and resources it currently uses to finalize
inspection results, and determine what enhancements could be made so
that inspection reports can be issued to the respective LEAs sooner.
IAC RESPONSE:
We are in general agreement with the analysis and recommendations as written
above and have the following comments.
Recommendation 2:
a. “address the noted backlog of inspection results, ensure that inspection
results are finalized and issued in a timely manner:”
It is our understanding that the Analysis was written using data as of
December 31, 2015. Since then, the remaining FY 2013 and FY 2014
inspection results have been delivered to the LEAs, and both the FY
2013 Annual Report, dated January 7, 2016, and the FY 2014 Annual
Report, dated January 15, 2016, were completed and delivered to the
Maryland General Assembly, the Governor, and the Board of Public
Works. We are currently working on the FY 2015 inspection reports as
well as the FY 2016 reports. Please note that the comment in the 4th
paragraph of the analysis, “During the aforementioned three-year
period, IAC inspections concluded that the overall conditions at 25
schools in three LEAs were ‘not adequate,” is based on preliminary
scores for the FY 2015 reports.

--- Page 17 ---
Implementation Target:
• FY 2015 Annual Report: Completed by mid-September 2016
• FY 2016 Annual Report: Because of current staffing shortfalls,
it is likely that an extension will be requested to January 2017
While we recognize that neither State law nor IAC internal policies or
procedures specify a timeframe for issuing the maintenance survey
results to LEAs, after all inspections for an LEA have been concluded
each inspector is expected to finalize reports within 5 to 15 working
days depending on the size of the LEA, and within another 20 working
days the Program Manager is to finalize surveys and compose survey
results letters with personalized language if appropriate for final
review and distribution. The Maintenance Program Manager and the
Lead Inspector positions are currently unfilled and the ability to
realize these expectations is dependent on the hiring and training of
capable individuals to fill these positions.
a-1. “take appropriate follow-up action to obtain corrective action plans from
all applicable LEAs as required (repeat)”:
This action is completed. We have evaluated submitted responses to
both the FY 2013 and FY 2014 reports, and have taken action to
obtain all outstanding responses. Of the 24 LEAs, we have not yet
received responses from two large LEAs that requested extensions of
time due to the large amount of investigation and production time
needed. We are actively seeking additional material or clarification of
responses from four LEAs for their FY 2014 reports.
b. As discussed with the Legislative Auditor during the audit process, we are in
agreement that formal written procedures would be a considerable asset to
the agency. In December 2015, the Lead Inspector was assigned the task of
writing the standard operating procedures for conducting a maintenance
inspection. While this first task has been completed, collaborative
discussion, review and finalization is needed before they can become the
first element of comprehensive written procedures for the maintenance
program, which will cover the responsibilities and timeframes for issuing
reports to the LEAs in a timely manner as well as to the Maryland General
Assembly, the Governor, and the Board of Public Works.

--- Page 18 ---
However, achieving this goal is predicated on having sufficient and
highly qualified staff. Due to a variety of reasons, we have not had a
complete and healthy staff with all of the necessary capabilities to
serve this program since its inception at this agency in 2006. While
physical surveys have proceeded in each fiscal year according to
schedule, the processes of writing, reviewing and fact-checking
reports, preparing them for distribution to LEAs, and preparing the
comprehensive annual report have been impacted by the lack of a
multi-skilled and dedicated management level employee. PSCP
received a new position in the FY 2015 operating budget for a
Maintenance Program Manager and filled the position in March 2015.
This position is again vacant; it has been advertised, candidates are
under review, and we anticipate that it will be filled by mid-summer
2016. In addition, the Lead Inspector has now retired, and the agency
has begun the process of filling the position. Further, the retirement
of the Executive Director as of August 31, 2016 will reduce the
capacity of the Maintenance Inspection Program.
Pending the hiring and training of individuals to fill these positions, the
Deputy Director and the Maintenance Inspection Program Administrator
will bear the responsibility for writing the FY 2015 and FY 2016 reports.
The full development of the written procedures will necessarily be
delayed until the new Program Manager is engaged and becomes familiar
with the Maintenance Inspection Program.
Implementation:
Until the two positions noted above are filled, we cannot initiate the
process of comprehensively examining the Maintenance Inspection
program to determine how it can be improved. Our first priorities on
filling the two positions will be training of the selected individuals,
and ensuring that the FY 2017 inspections are carried out and the
associated reports are produced and distributed to the LEAs. Long-
term goals of establishing written procedures and identifying
additional needed resources must be deferred until these immediate
tasks are completed.

--- Page 19 ---
Recovery of State Funds
Finding 3
IAC had not resolved a matter involving an $890,277 debt that was to be
assumed by a local jurisdiction in 2008 for a closed school.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that IAC take the necessary actions to resolve this matter
(repeat).
IAC RESPONSE:
The IAC, in discussion with the Office of Attorney General (OAG) and the State
Treasurer’s Office (STO) has determined that the first BPW approval of February,
2008 to collect $837,820 from the City shall stand as is. At an upcoming BPW
meeting in 2016, a second agenda item will be submitted reflecting the
difference between the prior approved amount of $837,820 and the correct
amount of $890,277 or $52,457. After this action is approved, IAC staff will
prepare the documentation required to collect the funds from the City in full, no
later than June 30, 2017.
Implementation:
IAC action: June 15, 2016
BPW Action: July 2016

--- Page 20 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Adam M. Auerback
Senior Auditor