Title: Department of Transportation - Office of Transportation Technology Services
Date: 03/24/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d7245606746f8
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:52:17.073300
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Transportation
Office of Transportation Technology Services
March 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 7
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – Logging and Monitoring of Security-Related Events for 7
Critical Databases Were Not Sufficient
Finding 2 – Monitoring and Access Controls Over Critical Firewalls 8
Were Not Sufficient to Ensure the Network Was Properly Secured
Finding 3 – The Intrusion Detection and Prevention System Was Not 9
Properly Used or Protected
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Department of Transportation - Office of Transportation
Technology Services (OTTS) provides computing and network resources to the
transportation business units (TBU) of the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT) and operates as a computer service bureau for these
units.
OTTS operates a mainframe computer for applications, which include the Motor
Vehicle Administration’s (MVA) Titling and Registration Information System,
the MVA Driver’s Licensing Processing System, the Maryland Port
Administration’s marine terminal system, MDOT’s Financial Management
Information System, and MDOT’s payroll system. In addition, OTTS operates
certain server-based applications, such as the Maryland International Registration
Plan, which processes the registration of interstate commercial vehicles and
associated fees. OTTS, in conjunction with an MDOT contractor, operates a wide
area network (WAN) connecting computer users from the TBUs and
headquarters, as well as providing connections to a few State networks and to
multiple external vendor networks associated with the TBUs’ activities. The
WAN performs data transmission using a large number of routers.
OTTS provides numerous network services to the above-described parties
including Internet access, email service, and remote access to various servers
within the internal network via a virtual private network and web-based
connections. We were advised by agency personnel that approximately 13,000
individuals use the MDOT network. According to OTTS records, the WAN
connects to more than 200 remote locations.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 24, 2009. We have determined that
OTTS had satisfactorily addressed all five of these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Logging and monitoring of security-related events for critical databases were
not sufficient.
Analysis
Logging and monitoring of security-related events were not sufficient to readily
identify potential unauthorized database modifications. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 For an important database, the use of numerous critical privileges (for
example, grant any privilege and update any table) was not logged. In
addition, the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) - Office of
Transportation Technology Services (OTTS) did not investigate insert, update,
and delete activity for nine tables used by this database. Finally, even when
security logs were reviewed for this database, documentation supporting the
events identified on these logs was not obtained or reviewed.
 Changes made by five accounts that were authorized to directly modify
critical production tables for numerous transportation business units’ (TBU)
databases were not reviewed.
The Maryland Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Information
Security Policy, requires that information systems must generate audit records for
all security-relevant events and that procedures must be developed to routinely
(for example daily or weekly) review audit records for indications of unusual
activities, suspicious activities or suspected violations, and report findings to
appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OTTS
a. log the use of all critical system privileges and investigate the use of
insert, update, and delete activity for the aforementioned database;
b. properly investigate any unusual security events associated with this
database, document these investigations, and retain the resultant
documentation for future reference; and
c. review all direct modifications to the aforementioned TBU critical
production database tables.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 2
Monitoring and access controls over critical firewalls were not sufficient to
ensure OTTS’ network was properly secured.
Analysis
Monitoring and access controls over critical firewalls were not sufficient to ensure
OTTS’ network was properly secured. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
 Our review of 12 firewalls with Internet interfaces disclosed that firewall
configuration changes were not monitored for 4 of these 12 firewalls and that
changes to existing firewall rules were not monitored for 5 additional
firewalls. We also noted that failed firewall login attempts were not
monitored for 9 of these 12 firewalls. As a result of these conditions, OTTS
lacked assurance that all firewalls were properly configured to protect the
MDOT network.
 Remote administrative access to the OTTS data center’s two redundant
firewalls was not adequately restricted to network administrators and network
management servers. Firewall rules improperly allowed the entire MDOT
internal network to establish remote connections to these two firewalls.
DoIT’s Information Security Policy requires that only authorized individuals have
access to confidential information and that such access is strictly controlled,
audited and that it supports the concepts of “least possible privilege” and “need to
know.”
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OTTS
a. review all configuration changes (including changes to firewall rules) for
its critical firewalls,
b. monitor failed firewall login attempts for its critical firewalls, and
c. limit remote administrative connections to the data center’s redundant
firewalls to network administrators and network management servers.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 3
The intrusion detection and prevention system was not properly used or
protected.
Analysis
OTTS operated a network-based intrusion detection and prevention system
(IDPS) to help secure the MDOT network. However, the IDPS was not properly
used or protected. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 IDPS coverage did not exist for numerous untrusted third-party network
connections into the MDOT wide area network. Although IDPS protection
existed for many untrusted third-party connections, we identified numerous
untrusted third-party connections (for example Internet and vendor
connections) that were not subject to IDPS coverage.
 Remote administrative access to the network-based IDPS module was not
adequately restricted to only those users who required such access. Any
address on the MDOT wide area network could make a connection to the
IDPS module and attempt a login.
 Password controls over access to the network-based IDPS module were not in
accordance with DoIT Information Security Policy requirements.
Specifically, password aging, complexity and history requirements were not
adequately enforced.
DoIT’s Information Security Policy requires that agency systems be configured to
monitor and control communications at external boundaries. Strong network
security uses a layered approach, relying on various resources, and is structured
according to assessed network security risk. Properly configured IDPS protection
can aid significantly in the detection/prevention of and response to potential
network security breaches and attacks. Furthermore, without proper monitoring,
critical network security breaches may occur that could otherwise possibly be
detected and prevented.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OTTS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identify how IDPS coverage should be best applied to the MDOT
network, and implement such coverage for all critical portions of the
MDOT network;
b. restrict remote access to the network-based IDPS module to only those
users requiring such access; and
9

--- Page 12 ---
c. implement password controls over the IDPS module that comply with the
aforementioned DoIT’s Information Security Policy requirements.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) – Office
of Transportation Technology Services (OTTS). Fieldwork associated with our
audit of the data center was conducted during the period from June 2012 to June
2013. Additionally, fieldwork associated with our audit of the network was
conducted during the period from March 2013 to August 2013. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine OTTS’s internal
control over its data center and network and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for computer systems that support
MDOT and the transportation business units (TBU). Specifically, given OTTS’s
widespread responsibility for the MDOT network, our audit included an
evaluation of the security control environment for all portions of the MDOT
network controlled by OTTS. OTTS’ fiscal operations are audited separately as
part of our audit of the MDOT – Secretary’s Office. The latest report that covered
OTTS’ fiscal operations was issued on November 2, 2012. We also determined
the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included procedures and controls over the mainframe operating system, security
software, and critical databases. Our audit also included an assessment of the
security controls for critical routers, firewalls, switches and virtual private
network appliances, as well as an assessment of security controls over internal
MDOT network traffic between TBUs. Our audit procedures included inquiries
of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations
of OTTS’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
OTTS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
11

--- Page 14 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect OTTS’ ability to
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to OTTS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MDOT’s response, on behalf of OTTS, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
MDOT regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Office of Transportation Technology Services
Draft Audit Report Responses
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Logging and monitoring of security-related events for critical databases were not
sufficient.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that OTTS
a. log the use of all critical system privileges and investigate the use of insert,
update, and delete activity for the aforementioned database;
b. properly investigate any unusual security events associated with this
database, document these investigations, and retain the resultant
documentation for future reference; and
c. review all direct modifications to the aforementioned TBU critical
production database tables.
Response 1:
MDOT concurs with the findings and will implement the recommendations. Recommendations
a and c have already been implemented. Work is in progress on recommendation b and will be
implemented by June 30, 2014.
Finding 2
Monitoring and access controls over critical firewalls were not sufficient to ensure
OTTS’ network was properly secured.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OTTS
a. review all configuration changes (including changes to firewall rules) for its
critical firewalls,
b. monitor failed firewall login attempts for its critical firewalls, and
c. limit remote administrative connections to the data center’s redundant
firewalls to network administrators and network management servers.

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Office of Transportation Technology Services
Draft Audit Report Responses
Response 2:
MDOT concurs with the findings. All of the recommendations have been implemented.
Finding 3
The intrusion detection and prevention system was not properly used or protected.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OTTS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks,
identify how IDPS coverage should be best applied to the MDOT network,
and implement such coverage for all critical portions of the MDOT network;
b. restrict remote access to the network-based IDPS module to only those users
requiring such access; and
c. implement password controls over the IDPS module that comply with the
aforementioned DoIT’s Information Security Policy requirements.
Response 3:
MDOT concurs with the findings and recommendations. Recommendations b and c have
been implemented. Concerning recommendation a, the documented review will be
initiated by June 30, 2014 and implemented thereafter, the time line will be subject to the
outcome of the analysis.

--- Page 18 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditors