Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Prince George's County
Date: 04/08/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ccc9d72456067434a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:16:55.502944
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Prince George’s County, Maryland
August 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Prince George’s County and its incorporated municipalities, and
subsequently distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2016
revenues totaled $45,732,939. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $1,993,558 was distributed to Prince George’s County and its incorporated
municipalities, and
 $43,739,381 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the
State for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The Office’s fiscal year 2016 operating expenses, which were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation, totaled $12,308,818.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust and special purpose funds that,
according to its records, had balances totaling $13,379,906 as of February 28,
2017.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated February 27, 2014. We determined that the Office
did not satisfactorily address this finding; therefore, it is repeated in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office lacked adequate controls over its mail receipts related to land
record transactions.
Analysis
The Office lacked adequate controls over certain cash receipts received by its land
records department. Specifically, checks received in the mail were not always
restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon receipt. Rather, checks
were endorsed and recorded when they were processed through the cash register
which, based on our observations, occurred sometimes weeks later. In addition,
the collections were not deposited timely. For example, 1,484 checks, totaling
$78,570, which were received during the period from March 2, 2017 to March 14,
2017, had not been recorded, endorsed, or deposited as of March 30, 2017.
Furthermore, rather than being secured in a safe or other locked location, the
checks were retained in a storage cabinet accessible by all Office employees until
deposit. According to State’s accounting records, collections received by the land
records department during fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately $36.9 million
and included recording fees and transfer taxes; the portion received by mail was
not readily determinable.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires cash
receipts be restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon receipt,
deposited no later than the first working day after receipt, and adequately
safeguarded until deposit.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. restrictively endorse and record all checks immediately upon receipt,
b. ensure that receipts are adequately safeguarded prior to deposit, and
c. ensure that all cash receipts are deposited timely.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Motor Vehicle Cases
Finding 2
The Office did not always refer the dispositions of motor vehicle cases to the
State’s Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) as required by State law.
Cases that were referred were often not submitted timely.
Analysis
The Office did not always refer the dispositions of motor vehicle cases to the
MVA as required by State law, and cases that had been referred were often not
done so in a timely manner. Our test of 20 motor vehicle cases that were
dispositioned by the court during the period from July 2015 to November 2016,
which resulted in guilty verdicts, disclosed 8 cases where the Office did not
inform the MVA of the guilty dispositions. As of April 11, 2017, these
dispositions had been outstanding for periods from 4 to 21 months. After our
inquiries, the Office referred these 8 cases to the MVA. For the remaining 12
cases tested, the Office did not inform the MVA of the cases’ guilty dispositions
for periods ranging from 2 weeks to 12 months. All of the 20 cases tested
involved significant motor vehicle violations (for example, driving under the
influence and reckless driving) including some that may lead to immediate license
suspensions or revocations according to State law. Similar conditions regarding
the submission of motor vehicle cases to the MVA were commented upon in our
three preceding audit reports.
The Circuit Court adjudicates motor vehicle cases involving appeals from the
District Court and cases in which the defendant requested a jury trial. The law
requires the clerks of the court to send a record of case dispositions, for each case
involving a motor vehicle violation, to the MVA. While the law does not specify
a time frame for submitting the dispositions, the timely submission of this
information by the Office is critical because the MVA is responsible for
processing the dispositions of motor vehicle cases (for example, license
revocation for driving while intoxicated), but cannot do so until the Office
transmits the case records. According to the Office’s records, 3,040 motor
vehicle cases were dispositioned by the court during fiscal year 2016.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. review its records of motor vehicle cases and ensure that all past cases
have been transmitted to the MVA (repeat), and
b. refer the dispositions of motor vehicle cases to the MVA in a timely
manner.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Prince George’s County, Maryland for the period beginning October 8,
2013 and ending March 6, 2017. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions), bank accounts, and the submission of motor vehicle
case records to the State’s Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA). We also
determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as payroll and invoice processing, and maintenance of budgetary accounting
records) are included within the scope of our audits of the Judiciary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also extracted data from the Office’s automated records of adjudicated court
cases for the purpose of testing the submission of motor vehicle records to the
MVA. We performed tests of the relevant data and determined the data was
sufficiently reliable for the purpose the data was used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
6

--- Page 9 ---
our audit objectives. The reliability of the data used in this report for background
or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Judiciary’s response, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review and its response.
7

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Zain Khalid
Staff Auditor