Title: Workers' Compensation Commission
Date: 03/26/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ecc9d72456067476c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:01:07.970439
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Workers’ Compensation Commission
June 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) administers Title 9 of the
Labor and Employment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, also known
as the Workers’ Compensation Law. WCC receives reports of workplace
accidents, adjudicates claims for compensation arising under the law, conducts
hearings of contested workers’ compensation cases, and assesses penalties against
employers for failing to provide workers’ compensation insurance coverage.
Adjudicated claim awards involving permanent disability or death include
provisions to fund Maryland’s Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF) and Uninsured
Employer’s Fund (UEF) through assessments and penalties against employers or
insurers. Finally, WCC is responsible for approving employers who wish to be
self-insured in the State and for monitoring their activities and financial solvency.
According to WCC’s records, it received 24,113 workers’ compensation claims
and approved 16,664 awards totaling approximately $365 million during fiscal
year 2014.
In accordance with State law, all of WCC’s expenditures and the expenditures of
certain programs within the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation
(DLLR) are funded by assessments billed to insurance companies that issue
workers’ compensation insurance policies and companies that self-insure for
workers’ compensation coverage. According to the State’s records, the fiscal year
2014 assessments totaled approximately $25.7 million, including $13.5 million to
fund WCC expenditures, and $12.2 million to fund DLLR programs.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 2, 2012. We determined that WCC
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) did not ensure all
collections were deposited.
Analysis
WCC did not have an adequate procedure to ensure all collections were deposited.
Specifically, WCC did not use the initial record of receipts to perform the deposit
verification. Rather, the deposited collections were only compared to the amounts
recorded in the State’s accounting records. As a result, there is a lack of
assurance that all collections were deposited. According to State records, WCC
collections, which primarily consisted of assessments, totaled $26.1 million
during fiscal year 2014.
The Comptroller of the Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires a
reconciliation of collections recorded upon receipt to the bank deposit.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCC perform deposit verifications of collections from
the initial record of receipt to deposit in the bank.
Assessments
Finding 2
WCC paid invoices to reimburse the Department of Labor, Licensing, and
Regulation (DLLR) for the costs of certain programs without verifying the
costs to supporting documentation.
Analysis
WCC paid invoices to reimburse DLLR for the costs of its Occupational Safety
and Health and Workforce Fraud programs without verifying the program costs to
supporting documentation. Our review of DLLR’s fiscal year 2014 invoice,
which totaled $12.2 million, disclosed costs of approximately $471,700 that may
have been overbilled by DLLR. We determined this potential overbilling based
on available information in the State’s budget and information WCC obtained
from DLLR upon our request. For example, $365,000 of the potential overbilling
related to DLLR not fully reducing its fiscal year 2014 invoiced costs by excess
4

--- Page 7 ---
revenue it had received from WCC from the previous year’s reimbursement.
Specifically, each year’s invoice includes an adjustment for the preceding year to
reflect the difference between actual costs and costs reimbursed by WCC. We
noted a similar potential overbilling with DLLR’s fiscal year 2015 invoice.
Upon bringing these potential overbillings to WCC’s attention, WCC contacted
DLLR to obtain an explanation and supporting documentation for the related
billings. However, WCC was unable to obtain a reasonable explanation for the
potential overbillings. As of April 2015, WCC management advised us that it
was working with DLLR to obtain documentation and clarification on the 2014
invoice, and it had not paid DLLR for its fiscal year 2015 invoice, which totaled
$11.3 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WCC
a. work with DLLR to establish a process for verifying the invoiced
program costs to supporting documentation; and
b. determine the propriety of the DLLR invoiced costs for fiscal years 2014
and 2015 and take corrective actions for costs that cannot be supported,
including adjusting future assessments to insurers, as provided by law,
and payments to DLLR.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Workers’ Compensation
Commission (WCC) for the period beginning May 9, 2011 and ending November
4, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine WCC’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included assessments, cash receipts, disbursements, and
5

--- Page 8 ---
payroll. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding
audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
WCC’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. We also extracted data from
WCC’s assessment database for the purpose of testing assessment transactions.
We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
WCC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect WCC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
6

--- Page 9 ---
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to WCC that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
WCC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise WCC regarding the results of
our review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 1
The Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) did not ensure all collections were
deposited.
Agency Response
The initial record of receipt is an Excel spreadsheet prepared by the individual who opens the
mail that contains the checks. The individual prepares a spreadsheet of all checks received for
each day. The agency acknowledges that when the deposit is made, the individual reviewing the
deposit did not reconcile the total of checks deposited to the Excel spreadsheet. Instead, a
reconciliation of the deposit ticket to FMIS was performed. The agency selected a sample of
deposits for every month in the audit period and reconciled the Excel spreadsheet to the checks
that were deposited for the days selected. There were no discrepancies discovered and as a result
of our testing, we conclude that the deposit collections for the audit period were accurately
recorded.
Recommendation 1
WCC will ensure the individual reviewing the deposit reconciles the initial recording of the
checks (Excel spreadsheet) to what was actually deposited.
Workers’ Compensation Commission Page 1 of 3
May 2015 Audit Report Responses

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
WCC paid invoices to reimburse the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation
(DLLR) for the costs of certain programs without verifying the costs to supporting
documentation.
Agency Response
In accordance with its statutory mandate1 to pay for the costs of the occupational safety and
health program and the workforce fraud program administered by the Commissioner of the
Division of Labor and Industry, WCC paid invoices to reimburse DLLR for the costs of the two
programs based upon DLLR’s certification that the information it provided to WCC was, to the
best of DLLR’s knowledge and belief, accurate, fairly presented and that DLLR was consistent
in its treatment of similar costs. Despite this certification, potential overbilling may have
occurred. For instance, each year’s invoice also included an adjustment for the preceding year to
reflect the difference between actual costs and costs reimbursed by WCC. The invoices
categorize the costs of each program according to “direct” and “indirect” costs. “Indirect costs”
are derived from a mathematical allocation of personnel costs to each program and to shared
administration. DLLR provides no further explanation to support its invoices, either on the
invoices themselves or by supporting documents.
Fundamentally, WCC lacks the statutory mandate to oversee DLLR’s administration of the two
programs or its billing practices. By statute, DLLR is responsible for the administration of the
two programs. Further, DLLR does not administer the programs on behalf of WCC and WCC
does not pay DLLR for a service DLLR renders for WCC. By statute, WCC is the conduit by
which the State pays for DLLR’s programs.
WCC agrees as a policy matter that OLA should be able to exercise appropriate audit review of
the two programs administered by DLLR. WCC disagrees that it is the means to that end. With
this background, the WCC respectfully responds to Recommendation 2 as follows:
1 The statutory mandate to pay for the costs of the occupational safety and health program and the workforce fraud
program administered by the Commissioner of the Division of Labor and Industry is found in Md. Labor &
Employment (“LE”) Code Ann. § 9-315, § 9-315.1 and § 9-316. LE § 9-316 provides that out of money
appropriated for the maintenance of WCC, the State shall pay the costs of the administration of the Occupational
Safety and Health Program and the costs of the administration of the workforce fraud program:
Occupational Safety and Health Program
The costs of the administration of the Occupational Safety and Health Program administered by DLLR under LE §
9-316(b)(1) are required to paid by WCC in LE § 9-315. DLLR budgets the costs and WCC pays DLLR’s costs as
required by LE § 5-204.
Workforce Fraud Program
The costs of the administration of the workforce fraud program administered by DLLR under LE § 9-316(b)(1) are
required to paid by WCC in LE § 9-315.1. The costs of the administration of the workforce fraud program
administered by DLLR are budgeted by DLLR and paid by WCC as required by LE § 3-919.
Workers’ Compensation Commission Page 2 of 3
May 2015 Audit Report Responses

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 2
a. WCC agrees that it will continue its past efforts to request that DLLR verify its
program costs as invoiced. Nevertheless, WCC lacks the statutory mandate to step
outside its limited role as a conduit for funding DLLR’s programs to require DLLR
to provide supporting documentation for its invoiced program costs.
b. WCC agrees that, within the limits of its statutory authority as explained above, WCC
will continue to request support for DLLR’s invoiced costs for fiscal years 2014 and
2015, understanding that WCC lacks OLA’s statutory audit authority or procedures to
make inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records,
observations of DLLR’s operations, or tests of transactions.
Auditor’s Comment: As previously conveyed to WCC management, at the conclusion of our audit we discussed
this matter with Department of Budget and Management (DBM) officials who generally agreed with our position,
indicating that it is not unreasonable to expect WCC to verify the invoice from DLLR. Also, WCC can accomplish
the necessary verification without a statutory mandate. If WCC is unable to obtain the needed supporting
documentation from DLLR, WCC should seek the assistance of DBM to resolve the issue.
Workers’ Compensation Commission Page 3 of 3
May 2015 Audit Report Responses

--- Page 14 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Julian N. Greene
Staff Auditor