Title: Historic St. Mary's City Commission
Date: 07/11/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746be
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:45:55.629990
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Historic St. Mary’s City Commission
April 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Historic St. Mary’s City Commission consists of 17 members and is
responsible for preserving and protecting archaeological and historical records of
Maryland’s first colonial capital and for appropriately developing and using this
historic and scenic site for the education, enjoyment, and general benefit of the
public. The Commission is located in St. Mary’s City and operates an outdoor
museum and archeological park and an on-site bed and breakfast. According to
the State’s records, the Commission’s fiscal year 2015 expenses totaled
approximately $2.9 million, the vast majority of which represented payroll costs
for its 45 regular and contractual employees.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 11, 2013. We determined that the
Commission satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining
finding is repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Verifications that all collections were forwarded for deposit were performed
by an employee who also processed the related collections.
Analysis
Independent verifications were not performed to help ensure that all collections
were deposited. The Commission’s collections, which totaled approximately
$474,000 during fiscal year 2015, were forwarded to St. Mary’s College of
Maryland for deposit. Our review disclosed that the individual who performed
the verifications to ensure recorded collections were forwarded to the College also
processed the related collections. Furthermore, the individual did not document
the verifications. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all collections
were forwarded to the College and ultimately deposited.
3

--- Page 6 ---
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that receipts
recorded on initial source documents be traced to deposit by an employee
independent of the cash receipts process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Commission ensure that an employee, independent
of the collection function, verifies that all recorded collections were
submitted for deposit with St. Mary’s College of Maryland and that such
verifications are documented (repeat). We advised the Commission on
accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Historic St. Mary’s City
Commission for the period beginning July 1, 2012 and ending August 23, 2015.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Commission’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, and payroll
adjustments. We also determined the status of the findings included in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Commission by
St. Mary's College of Maryland. These support services (such as payment
processing, payroll processing, maintenance of personnel and accounting records,
and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the
College.
4

--- Page 7 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Commission’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Commission’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Commission’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
5

--- Page 8 ---
regulations. This condition is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The Commission’s response to our finding and recommendation is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Commission regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor