Title: University System of Maryland - Salisbury University
Date: 05/06/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1acc9d724560674696
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:42:50.585582
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Salisbury University
May 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – Employee Access to Critical System Functions Was Not 5
Adequately Restricted
Finding 2 – SU Stored Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information 6
Within a Database In Clear Text
Finding 3 – SU’s Workstations, Laptops, and Servers Were Not 6
Sufficiently Protected Against Malware
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 4 – SU Lacked Sufficient Controls to Ensure the Propriety of 7
Certain Non-Cash Credit Adjustments Made to Student Accounts
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Salisbury University (SU) is a comprehensive public institution of the University
System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of the System’s
Board of Regents. SU provides a broad range of baccalaureate programs as well
as selected professionally oriented master’s programs and doctoral programs.
Student enrollment for the Fall 2014 semester totaled 8,770, including 7,997
undergraduate students and 773 graduate students. SU's budget is funded by
unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a State general fund
appropriation, as well as restricted revenues, such as federal grants and contracts.
According to the State's accounting records, SU’s revenues for fiscal year 2014
totaled approximately $172 million, which included a State general fund
appropriation of approximately $42 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 10, 2012. We determined that SU
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The Salisbury University (SU) Information Technology Department (ITD)
manages the development, maintenance, and support of SU’s information
technology infrastructure including networking, telecommunications, and
business information systems. ITD maintains SU’s campus-wide network,
supporting both administrative and academic operations. The network includes
Internet connectivity, various administrative servers, and firewalls. ITD also
maintains critical application systems supporting student administration, human
resources, and financial management.
Finding 1
Employee access to critical functions on SU’s financial management systems
was not adequately restricted.
Analysis
SU did not adequately restrict employee access capabilities for critical functions
on its financial management systems. Our review of system capabilities assigned
to 149 active users disclosed that numerous users were assigned unnecessary or
inappropriate access capabilities.
• Sixty users had the capability to add or update student residency information
used to determine tuition rates even though these users did not require such
access to perform their assigned job duties.
• Eight users had unnecessary access to add or adjust personnel and payroll
data, such as pay rates and leave balances, and one of these employees could
also approve certain of these adjustments.
• Two users had unnecessary access to adjust federal financial aid application
data, and one of these employees had access to change the status of an
application so that it would not be subject to subsequent verification.
The University System of Maryland (USM) IT Security Standards specify that
institutions are responsible for ensuring that access rights reflect employee status,
including changes in employee status. In addition, institutions must segregate
functions to ensure the appropriate separation of duties for system users.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SU restrict user access capabilities for critical functions
to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their assigned
job duties and in a manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties.
Finding 2
SU stored sensitive personally identifiable information within a database in
clear text.
Analysis
SU stored sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) within a database in
clear text. Specifically, we determined that SU stored PII including social
security numbers, full names, and dates of birth in clear text in one of its
databases.
As of October 29, 2014, based on our inquiry, SU personnel identified
approximately 294,000 unique social security numbers along with related full
names and dates of birth which were not encrypted. This sensitive PII, which is
commonly sought by criminals for use in identity theft, should be protected by
appropriate information system security controls. The USM IT Security
Standards state that USM institutions must utilize encryption for confidential
data.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SU encrypt all database tables containing sensitive PII
in accordance with the USM IT Security Standards.
Finding 3
SU’s workstations, laptops, and servers were not sufficiently protected
against malware.
Analysis
SU’s workstations, laptops, and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
• SU did not restrict the use of administrator rights on its workstations to
network administrators. Rather, we determined that 711 unique users had
local administrator rights on 983 of SU’s 3,400 workstations. Administrator
rights are the highest permission level that can be granted to users and it
allows users to install software and change configuration settings. As a result,
6

--- Page 9 ---
if these workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run with
administrator rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of
compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only user
rights. In addition, users with administrative rights can disable the anti-
malware software on their workstations.
• We were advised by SU personnel that a host-based firewall was not enabled
on any SU laptops. Therefore, when these laptops were used outside of the
SU network they were susceptible to attack from untrusted traffic. According
to SU records, as of February 4, 2015 there were 422 SU-owned laptops in
use.
• Anti-malware software was not installed on any of SU’s 216 servers. As a
result, these servers were more susceptible to malware exploits.
The USM IT Security Standards state that institutions must implement and
document processes that minimize provisioning of local administrative rights so
that only those employees who require it are given those rights. Additionally,
these Standards state that institutions must protect against malicious code by
implementing solutions that, to the extent possible, include a capability for
automatic updates.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SU
a. restrict administrative rights on workstations to network administrators,
b. ensure that all laptop computers are protected by a properly configured
and enabled host-based firewall, and
c. ensure that anti-malware software is installed on all SU servers.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 4
SU lacked sufficient controls to ensure the propriety of certain non-cash
credit adjustments made to student accounts.
Analysis
SU had not established adequate controls over the processing of non-cash credit
adjustments related to student housing. These adjustments may be required when,
for example, a student withdraws from SU or requests a change in housing.
Although an output report of all non-cash credit adjustments recorded in student
accounts was periodically generated and reviewed on a test basis by an
7

--- Page 10 ---
independent employee, any housing-related adjustments selected for review
during this procedure were not verified to appropriate source documentation, such
as an approved housing cancellation form. As a result, there was a lack of
assurance that only valid adjustments were processed. According to SU’s
records, non-cash credit adjustments processed in fiscal year 2014 relating to
housing totaled approximately $1 million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SU ensure that non-cash credit adjustments posted to
student accounts related to housing charges are verified to appropriate
source documents.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Salisbury University (SU) for the period beginning July 1,
2011 and ending September 8, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, financial aid, cash receipts, payroll, and information technology
systems. We also determined the status of the findings included in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to SU by the USM
Office. These support services (such as bond financing) are included within the
scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of SU’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including the components of the USM.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SU’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
9

--- Page 12 ---
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from SU’s financial systems for the purpose of testing certain
areas, such as student accounts receivable and financial aid. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
SU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of SU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 14 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
SALISBURY UNIVERSITY
JULY 1, 2011 TO SEPTEMBER 8, 2014
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Employee access to critical functions on SU’s financial management systems
was not adequately restricted.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SU restrict user access capabilities for critical functions
to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their assigned
job duties and in a manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties.
University response
The University agrees with this recommendation.
The financial aid access was changed to “display only” on December 5, 2014.
The human resources access for the two employees no longer in HR was removed
on December 15, 2014. The remaining human resources access was removed on
February 12, 2015. On February 18, 2015, the residency access was removed.
We are currently working on improved security queries and reports which will
focus on access to critical functions. We appreciate the help that the OLA and
USM Internal Audit have provided regarding such.
Finding 2
SU stored sensitive personally identifiable information within a database in
clear text.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SU encrypt all database tables containing sensitive PII
in accordance with the USM IT Security Standards.
University response
The University agrees with this recommendation.
On February 23, 2015, we implemented approved database encryption technology
to encrypt all database objects containing sensitive personally identifiable
information.

--- Page 15 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
SALISBURY UNIVERSITY
JULY 1, 2011 TO SEPTEMBER 8, 2014
Finding 3
SU’s workstations, laptops, and servers were not sufficiently protected
against malware.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SU
a. restrict administrative rights on workstations to network
administrators,
b. ensure that all laptop computers are protected by a properly
configured and enabled host-based firewall, and
c. ensure that anti-malware software is installed on all SU servers.
University response
We agree with the finding and will proceed as follows:
a. We will complete the removal of administrative rights for all computer
users by August 31, 2016. In circumstances where granting administrative
rights to a computer user is warranted, an exception will be made. There
will be an annual review to ensure that the reason administrative rights
were initially granted still exists. Dependent upon the outcome of that
review, the administrative rights will either continue or be removed.
b. We will implement host-based firewalls on all SU maintained laptops by
December 31, 2015.
c. We will review malware and anti-virus protection solutions for traffic
destined to workstations and servers. The anti-malware software will be
installed by March 31, 2016.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 4
SU lacked sufficient controls to ensure the propriety of certain non-cash
credit adjustments made to student accounts.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SU ensure that non-cash credit adjustments posted to
student accounts related to housing charges are verified to appropriate
source documents.

--- Page 16 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
SALISBURY UNIVERSITY
JULY 1, 2011 TO SEPTEMBER 8, 2014
University response
The University agrees with this recommendation.
Beginning on February 9, 2015, we began independently verifying non-cash
credits for housing charges to source documents (e.g., Residence Hall Contract
Cancellation form).

--- Page 17 ---
AUDIT TEAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Christopher D. Jackson, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Richard Tran
Staff Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Staff Auditor