Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Health Regulatory Commissions
Date: 01/07/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d724560674438
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:50:34.163516
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Health Regulatory Commissions
February 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Health Regulatory Commissions is a budgetary unit of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene that comprises three independent commissions
established by law: the Maryland Health Care Commission, the Health Services
Cost Review Commission, and the Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission.
The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) is responsible for directing and
administering the State’s health planning functions, developing health care cost-
containment strategies, and maintaining a database of all non-hospital health care
services. The Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) is responsible
for establishing, reviewing, and approving hospital billing rates; monitoring
hospital compliance with approved billing rates; collecting data on hospital
utilization and quality; and administering the Hospital Uncompensated Care Fund,
which compensates hospitals for services provided to individuals unable to pay.
The MHCC and HSCRC are jointly responsible for administering the Maryland
Trauma Physician Services Fund, which reimburses trauma physicians who
provided uncompensated care and is funded by a $5 surcharge on all Maryland
vehicle registrations. The Maryland Community Health Resources Commission
(MCHRC) is responsible for increasing health care access for low-income,
uninsured, and underinsured Marylanders by providing grants to community
health resources.
According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2014 operating expenditures for the
Commissions totaled approximately $46.8 million. Additionally, approximately
$134.6 million was paid to hospitals from the Hospital Uncompensated Care Fund
during fiscal year 2014. The operating expenditures and Fund expenditures are
primarily funded by user fees assessed to hospitals and other entities.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 7, 2013. We determined that the
Commissions satisfactorily addressed these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund
Finding 1
One individual had excessive control over the Maryland Trauma Physician
Services Fund.
Analysis
The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) had not established sufficient
controls over the Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund. MHCC administers
a program that provides reimbursements from the Fund to trauma physicians who
submit claims for services rendered to uncompensated care patients treated at
Maryland trauma centers.
 One individual had excessive control over the Fund’s recordkeeping,
collections, and payments. This individual maintained certain Fund records,
processed claim payments, and received checks from trauma physicians to
reimburse the Fund for claim overpayments. Claim overpayments occur when
a trauma physician, who had previously been reimbursed by the Fund through
an approved claim, receives payments from other sources.
 Checks from trauma physicians were not restrictively endorsed for deposit
immediately upon receipt. Instead, the aforementioned individual recorded
receipt of the checks on a log, updated the Fund records, and then forwarded
the checks to another individual for restrictive endorsement and transfer to the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for subsequent bank deposit.
Under these conditions, funds could be misappropriated without detection.
According to MHCC’s records, during fiscal years 2011 to 2013, reimbursement
claim payments totaled approximately $14.2 million and checks received to
reimburse the Fund totaled approximately $1.6 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHCC
a. separate the duties for Fund recordkeeping, collection, and payment; and
b. restrictively endorsed checks immediately upon receipt.
We advised MHCC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Grant Monitoring
Finding 2
Grant agreements were not always executed prior to disbursing funds and
certain healthcare grants were not adequately monitored.
Analysis
The Maryland Community Health Resources Commission (MCHRC) did not
always execute grant agreements prior to disbursing funds and did not adequately
monitor certain healthcare grants. According to MCHRC records, during the
period from July 1, 2011 to June 30, 2014, there were 205 grant awards totaling
approximately $25.4 million, of which approximately $13.8 million had been
spent during this period.
MCHRC primarily awards grants to community organizations and nonprofits for
Health Enterprise Zones (HEZ) and Local Health Improvement Coalitions
(LHIC). HEZ grants distribute funds to five designated zones of need for various
purposes including increased primary care, patient outreach, and provider
training. LHIC grants are primarily used to hire healthcare personnel and to
purchase equipment to improve the quality of Maryland healthcare.
We tested 15 HEZ or LHIC grant awards totaling $8.8 million, with related
expenditures totaling $3.7 million. Our test of these grants disclosed the
following conditions:
 MCHRC did not always properly execute grant agreements prior to disbursing
funds to the grantees. Specifically, 23 grant agreements totaling
approximately $1.5 million were not signed by MCHRC prior to approving
grant payments. Although 21 of these grant agreements were subsequently
signed by MCHRC, the remaining 2 grant agreements totaling $25,000,
covering the period from June 27, 2012 to September 30, 2012, were not
signed as of August 2014. Without a properly executed grant agreement,
MCHRC’s remedies in the case of grantee nonperformance could be limited.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 MCHRC did not document its review of self-reported grantee performance
results (such as milestones and deliverables related to hiring and training) and
grant expenditure reports for HEZ and LHIC grants. In addition, MCHRC did
not always obtain supporting documentation to substantiate the reported
performance data and expenditures. Grantee performance data and
expenditure reports are critical to MCHRC in evaluating the effectiveness of
grantees and in determining if grant expenditures were proper.
For example, MCHRC did not obtain supporting documentation for the
reported performance data for any of the 15 grants tested and for reported
grant expenditures totaling $853,600 related to 7 of the grants. For 3 other
grants, the supporting documentation for certain reported grant expenditures
(such as expense reimbursements, travel costs, and gift cards) totaling $19,300
was not sufficient to provide assurance the expenditures were consistent with
the purpose of the grants. The HEZ and LHIC grant agreements require
grantees to submit periodic reports detailing performance data and grant
expenditures. Detailed supporting documentation must be provided by
grantees upon request. According to MCHRC’s grant monitoring policy, it
reviews this information to determine the grantee’s effectiveness in achieving
grant objectives and goals.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCHRC
a. ensure all grant agreements are properly executed prior to making
payments to the grantees;
b. perform a documented review of self-reported grantee performance
results and expenditure reports; and
c. obtain supporting documentation, at least on a test basis, to ensure the
grantee is meeting grant milestones and deliverables and to ensure grant
funds are spent in accordance with the grant agreements.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Health Regulatory
Commissions of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the
period beginning May 16, 2011 and ending June 30, 2014. The Commissions
consists of the Maryland Health Care Commission, the Health Services Cost
Review Commission, and the Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Commissions’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included hospital rate monitoring, the Maryland Trauma
Physician Services Fund, grant programs, and hospital uncompensated care. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Commissions’ operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various
data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Commissions by
DHMH – Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of DHMH’s Office of the Secretary and
Other Units.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The Commissions’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the
Commissions’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
DHMH’s response, on behalf of the Commissions, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund
Finding 1
One individual had excessive control over the Maryland Trauma Physician
Services Fund.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHCC
a. separate the duties for Fund recordkeeping, collection, and payment; and
b. restrictively endorsed checks immediately upon receipt.
We advised MHCC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
MHCC’s Response
a. The Commission concurs with the recommendation to separate the duties for
Fund recordkeeping, collection, and payment functions. In the past, the duties
were informally segregated as the request for payments were reviewed by the
Director of Administration before sending through to General Accounting, but
the request for payment was not signed. These payments were then reconciled
to the monthly FMIS ledgers and the ledgers were signed by the Maryland
Health Care Commission’s Fiscal Administrator and the Director of
Administration.
Effective December 1, 2014, staff implemented a formal process for the
separation of duties by having the Program Manager, complete the initial
request, the Director of Administration review and sign the request, and the
Fiscal Administrator and Director of Administration dually completing the
reconciliation and signing ledgers. This process will also apply to collection
of refunds.
b. The Commission concurs with the recommendation to endorse checks
immediately upon receipt.

--- Page 13 ---
Grant Monitoring
Finding 2
Grant agreements were not always executed prior to disbursing funds and
certain healthcare grants were not adequately monitored.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCHRC
a. ensure all grant agreements are properly executed prior to making
payments to the grantees;
b. perform a documented reviewof self-reported grantee performance
results and expenditure reports;and
c. obtain supporting documentation, at least on a test basis, to ensure the
grantee is meeting grant milestones and deliverables and to ensure grant
funds are spent in accordance with the grant agreements.
MCHRC’s Response
a. We concur. The MCHRC has developed policies and implemented procedures
to resolve this finding and address this recommendation. Effective
immediately, all new grant agreements will be properly executed prior to
making payments to grantees.
b. We concur. Effective immediately, the MCHRC is performing documented
reviews of self-reported grantee performance results and expenditure reports.
This review is approved by a supervisor and documents retained for audit
purposes.
c. We concur. Beginning May 1, 2015, the MCHRC will obtain supporting
documentation, on a test basis, for at least 25% of all current/active grants on
an annual basis, to ensure the grantee is meeting grant milestones and
deliverables, and to ensure that grant funds are spent in accordance with the
grant agreements. These grantees will be randomly selected and the reviews
will be documented and approved.

--- Page 14 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Evan E. Naugle
Senior Auditor
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA, CFE
Ryan A. Myles
Staff Auditors