Title: University System of Maryland - Bowie State University
Date: 10/31/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742aa
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:42:32.113927
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Bowie State University
October 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1 – Bowie State University (BSU) lacked an independent 5
verification of certain financial aid awards, resulting in improper
awards of $54,000 going undetected.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 2 – BSU paid its building system maintenance and housekeeping 6
services vendors without ensuring that the required level of services
were received.
Student Residency
Finding 3 – BSU did not verify the propriety of changes to student 7
residency status and did not generate a comprehensive report of such
changes to facilitate these verifications.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by 8
BSU was stored without adequate safeguards.
Finding 5 – Malware protection for BSU computers was not sufficient 9
to provide BSU with adequate assurance that these computers were
properly protected.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Bowie State University (BSU) is a comprehensive public institution of the
University System of Maryland and operates under the jurisdiction of the
System’s Board of Regents. BSU is a regional university that provides a broad
range of undergraduate and selected professionally oriented graduate programs,
including doctoral level programs in educational leadership and computer science.
BSU’s undergraduate and graduate student enrollment during fiscal year 2016
totaled 4,369 full-time equivalent students.
BSU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and fees and a
State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, BSU’s revenues for
fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately $124 million, including a State general
fund appropriation of approximately $41.7 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 5, 2014. We determined that BSU
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1
Bowie State University (BSU) lacked an independent verification of the
propriety of certain financial aid awards and adjustments, resulting in
improper awards totaling $54,000 going undetected.
Analysis
BSU lacked an independent verification of the propriety of certain financial aid
awards and adjustments, allowing improper awards to occur and to remain
undetected. According to BSU’s records, financial aid awarded to students
totaled approximately $60 million during fiscal year 2016, including $37.6
million for loans and $22.4 million for grants and scholarships.
 Grant awards (such as honor and merit scholarships) were not subject to an
independent verification, and our tests disclosed certain improper awards that
were not detected. Specifically, scholarship decisions forwarded by various
BSU departments to the Financial Aid Office for entry into the financial aid
system were not subject to any independent review. Prior to July 1, 2013,
independent reviews were conducted of 10 percent of all awards made during
an academic year.
Our test of 26 awards totaling approximately $381,000 disbursed in academic
years 2012 through 2016, disclosed that 9 awards totaling $54,000 were
improper. For example, BSU disbursed 4 annual scholarships to a student that
included $43,600 for room and board for the four academic years even though
the student was eligible for and signed an award letter accepting financial aid
only for tuition and fees. BSU was not aware of these improper awards until
we brought them to its attention and could not readily explain the reasons for
these errors.
 Manual adjustments made by BSU employees to system-generated financial
aid awards posted to student accounts were not subject to independent
supervisory review and approval. Although legitimate reasons exist for
making award adjustments (such as, when a student drops classes and is no
longer eligible for an award), the adjustments should be subject to
independent supervisory review and approval to ensure their propriety. We
could not determine the value of these adjustments since BSU did not generate
5

--- Page 8 ---
system output reports of manual adjustments, which could be used by
supervisory personnel to review and verify their propriety.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BSU
a. independently verify the propriety of grant awards and manual
adjustments to financial aid awards; and
b. take appropriate corrective action for any errors identified, including
those noted above.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 2
BSU paid its building system maintenance and housekeeping services
vendors without ensuring that the required level of services were received.
Analysis
BSU paid for building system maintenance and housekeeping services for the 23
buildings located on its campus but did not verify the required level of services
were received. The current building system maintenance contract was valued at
$3.2 million for the period from August 2016 through July 2021 and the
housekeeping services contract was valued at $12.9 million for the period from
July 2016 through June 2021. Payments to these vendors under the current
contracts totaled approximately $977,000 as of October 31, 2016. Both vendors
provided these services during the audit period under previous contracts.
BSU paid both vendors’ invoices but took no steps to verify that contractually
required work was performed. Specifically, BSU did not require either vendor to
submit monthly reports of the specific maintenance and housekeeping services
performed, as required by both contracts, as a means to verify vendor invoices.
For example, the building system maintenance contractor was to perform
maintenance services (such as filter changes) in accordance with an approved
schedule. In addition, the housekeeping contractor was to perform periodic
cleaning services (such as window washing and carpet cleaning) in accordance
with an approved schedule.
While BSU relied on an external consultant to conduct triannual reviews of the
overall condition of BSU buildings maintained by the housekeeping contractor,
this should not take the place of ongoing monthly monitoring. Furthermore, the
most recent October 2016 consultant report identified certain housekeeping
6

--- Page 9 ---
deficiencies relating to services that were required to be performed by the
contractor.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BSU obtain the monthly reports of services performed
as required by the respective contracts and compare to vendor invoices prior
to payment.
Student Residency
Finding 3
BSU did not verify the propriety of changes to student residency status and
did not generate a comprehensive report of such changes to facilitate these
verifications.
Analysis
BSU did not verify the propriety of changes to student residency status and did
not generate a comprehensive report of such changes to facilitate their review.
Student residency changes were made by admissions personnel based on
supporting documentation submitted by students. BSU management advised us
that no reviews of student residency changes have been conducted since August
2015 and that reviews conducted prior to this date were not documented. In
addition, BSU did not generate an output report of changes to enable a
comprehensive review, nor could the extent of such changes be determined.
The University System of Maryland’s (USM) Board of Regents’ Policy on
Student Classification for Admission and Tuition Purposes requires that changes
to a student’s residency status be requested by submitting a USM Petition for
Change in Classification for Tuition along with supporting evidence. Changes to
student residency status are subject to the review and approval of BSU officials.
Accurate student residency determinations are critical because of the significant
differences between in-state and out-of-state student tuition rates. For example,
the in-state undergraduate tuition was $5,321 for the Fall 2016 semester, whereas
the out-of-state undergraduate tuition rate was $15,857.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BSU generate comprehensive output reports of
residency changes, review the changes for propriety, and document the
review, at least on a test basis.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
BSU’s Division of Information Technology provides information technology
support to BSU through the operation and maintenance of campus-wide
applications, such as the student administration and human resources systems and
the financial system. BSU also operates an integrated administrative and
academic computer network, which provides connections to multiple servers used
for administrative and academic purposes. The network also includes separate
email and file servers, intrusion detection systems, and firewalls. BSU also
connects to the Maryland Research and Education Network to send and receive
data to and from other USM institutions and for Internet connectivity. Students
are provided limited access to BSU’s network from dormitories and computer
labs.
Finding 4
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by BSU was
stored without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
Sensitive PII maintained by BSU was stored in clear text. Specifically, we noted
that a critical database associated with the student information system contained
152,806 unique social security numbers stored in clear text along with names,
addresses, and dates of birth as of February 16, 2017. In addition, we were
advised that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls. Furthermore, although BSU obtained software capable of scanning its
servers to identify PII, BSU had not used this software and had not performed an
inventory of its systems to identify all sensitive PII, determined if it was necessary
to retain the PII, and deleted PII identified as unnecessary.
This sensitive PII is commonly associated with identity theft. Accordingly,
appropriate information system security controls need to exist to ensure that this
information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed.
The USM IT Security Standards state that USM institutions must utilize
encryption for confidential data while the data are in transit or at rest on any
media or apply compensating controls that are equally secure.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BSU
a. use the aforementioned software on its systems and identify all sensitive
PII,
8

--- Page 11 ---
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. encrypt all sensitive PII not otherwise properly protected or implement
other substantial mitigating controls to protect this PII.
Finding 5
Malware protection for BSU computers was not sufficient to provide BSU
with adequate assurance that these computers were properly protected.
Analysis
Malware protection for BSU computers was not sufficient to provide BSU with
adequate assurance that these computers were properly protected.
 BSU did not properly utilize its centralized management console’s reports and
dashboard to monitor and maintain the malware protection software and the
malware protection signature files on its 2,208 computers. In this regard,
BSU personnel advised that they reviewed various console reports and the
related dashboard in an ongoing effort to ensure that all supported computers
had the proper malware protection software installed, operational, and up-to-
date including current malware protection signature files. However, these
reviews were not documented and there was no evidence of any follow-up
activities resulting from these reviews.
 The central management console’s logged data (used to create the console
reports) did not reflect that numerous local computers had operational and up-
to-date malware protection software, as well as signature files, which are
typically updated daily by software vendors. Consequently, these computers
could be susceptible to malware attacks. As of February 27, 2017, the
console’s logged data:
 did not reflect whether 507 computers had the necessary malware
protection software installed, operational, and up-to-date;
 did not reflect the version of the malware protection signature files for 495
of these computers;
 identified 33 computers with an outdated malware protection version (with
the oldest dated October 2011); and
9

--- Page 12 ---
 identified 49 computers with outdated malware protection signature files
(with the oldest dated April 2014).
 Certain BSU workstations had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products frequently
provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, BSU had not
updated these workstations for these patches. For example, we identified 67
workstations with an outdated commonly vulnerable application with some of
the installed software dating back to July 2015.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BSU
a. continually review the malware protection console reports and dashboard
to ensure that all listed active computers have current signature files and
operational and up-to-date malware protection software installed and if
necessary create custom reports that provide this information,
b. document these reviews and any follow-up efforts and retain the
documentation for future reference, and
c. ensure that all workstations are kept up-to-date for critical security
related updates for commonly vulnerable applications.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Bowie State University (BSU) for the period beginning July
1, 2013 and ending August 28, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine BSU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, cash receipts, information systems security and control, payroll,
student financial aid, and corporate purchasing cards. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to BSU by the USM
Office, such as bond financing, or by the University of Maryland, College Park
(UMCP), which provided capital project management. These support services are
included within the scope of our audits of the USM Office and UMCP,
respectively. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal
controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of BSU’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
the components of the USM.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
BSU’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
11

--- Page 14 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. We also extracted data from BSU’s financial systems for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
BSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect BSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to BSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of BSU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
12

--- Page 15 ---
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY
JULY 1, 2013 TO AUGUST 28, 2016
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1
Bowie State University (BSU) lacked an independent verification of the
propriety of certain financial aid awards and adjustments, resulting in
improper awards totaling $54,000 going undetected.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BSU
a. independently verify the propriety of grant awards and manual
adjustments to financial aid awards; and
b. take appropriate corrective action for any errors identified, including
those noted above.
University response
BSU agrees with the recommendations.
Effective November 2017, all grants awards and manual adjustments will be
reviewed by the Program Supervisor and/or the Financial Aid Specialist for
accuracy to ensure no improper awards have occurred. Also on a bi-weekly basis,
the Assistant Director of Financial Aid will generate a report of transactions
posted by item type to verify no improprieties have occurred. The Financial Aid
Coordinator will promptly correct any errors identified. We will investigate the
errors noted in the audit to determine the appropriate action.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 2
BSU paid its building system maintenance and housekeeping services
vendors without ensuring that the required level of services were received.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BSU obtain the monthly reports of services performed
as required by the respective contracts and compare to vendor invoices prior
to payment.
University response
BSU agrees with this recommendation.
Effective immediately, the Facilities Coordinator will obtain monthly reports of
services as required by the respective contracts and compare them to the vendor

--- Page 18 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY
JULY 1, 2013 TO AUGUST 28, 2016
invoices prior to payment. In addition, the Facilities Coordinator will provide
documented evidence of the reviews to the Vice President for Administration and
Finance, the Director of Facilities and the Director of Procurement.
Student Residency
Finding 3
BSU did not verify the propriety of changes to student residency status and
did not generate a comprehensive report of such changes to facilitate these
verifications.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BSU generate comprehensive output reports of
residency changes, review the changes for propriety, and document the
review, at least on a test basis.
University response
BSU agrees with this recommendation.
A residency review report has been created to capture all residency changes
occurring after acceptance but prior to enrolling. The report includes the name of
the staff member who made the change in residency status, date and time of the
change, and residency status before and after the change. The report is submitted
to the Assistant Vice President of Enrollment Management for review on a
monthly basis. As a part of the review process, a random selection of 10% of the
students in the report are selected for further review. Any questions are submitted
to the staff member who made the change, and documentation is presented to the
AVP of Enrollment Management as justification. Once the review is completed,
the AVP of Enrollment Management will sign and date the report.
For residency petitions occurring after enrolling, a residency status committee
will convene (regularly or as needed) to review supporting documents and make
status change recommendations. The recommendations will be reviewed and
approved by the AVP of Enrollment Management. Representatives from the
following offices are included on the committee: Admissions, Financial Aid,
Student Accounts, Registrar, and Student Affairs.

--- Page 19 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY
JULY 1, 2013 TO AUGUST 28, 2016
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by BSU was
stored without adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BSU
a. use the aforementioned software on its systems and identify all sensitive
PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls, and
d. encrypt all sensitive PII not otherwise properly protected or implement
other substantial mitigating controls to protect this PII.
University response
BSU agrees with the recommendations.
a. BSU will implement procedures to use our software to identify all sensitive
PII, on a monthly basis by March 30, 2018.
b. BSU will determine if it is necessary to retain identified PII and delete all
unnecessary PII by March 30, 2018.
c. BSU will determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls by August 31, 2018.
d. BSU will encrypt all sensitive PII not otherwise properly protected or
implement other substantial mitigating controls to protect this PII by August
31, 2018.
Finding 5
Malware protection for BSU computers was not sufficient to provide BSU
with adequate assurance that these computers were properly protected.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BSU

--- Page 20 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY
JULY 1, 2013 TO AUGUST 28, 2016
a. continually review the malware protection console reports and dashboard
to ensure that all listed active computers have current signature files and
operational and up-to-date malware protection software installed and if
necessary create custom reports that provide this information,
b. document these reviews and any follow-up efforts and retain the
documentation for future reference, and
c. ensure that all workstations are kept up-to-date for critical security
related updates for commonly vulnerable applications.
University response
BSU agrees with the recommendations.
a. BSU will create and deliver monthly reports to ensure all listed computers
have current signature files by December 15, 2017.
b. Reports will be generated by the University’s software patching system and
will be reviewed by DIT Information Security team and follow-up efforts
required will be logged in the University’s trouble ticketing system, by
February 15, 2018.
c. Any issues found in these reports of all listed computers will be documented
and the appropriate group will take corrective action, by February 15, 2018.

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Thomas L. Allen, III
Shauneil M. Snell
Tu N. Vuong
Staff Auditors