Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Allegany County
Date: 09/18/2007
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745e4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:34:25.014318
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Allegany County, Maryland
October 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less the commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of the Register of Wills for Allegany
County, its fiscal year 2015 gross receipts totaled $1,460,886, which consisted of
inheritance tax collections (net of commissions) of $1,006,383 and fees and
commissions of $454,503. The Office’s fiscal year 2015 operating expenses
totaled $530,086.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office did not always deposit its collections in a timely manner.
Analysis
The Office did not always deposit collections, which totaled approximately $1.5
million during fiscal year 2015, in a timely manner. Our test of collections
totaling approximately $428,000 disclosed collections received on four days,
which ranged between $11,389 and $44,232, were deposited three to eight
business days after receipt. For example, collections for one day totaling $41,722
were not deposited until seven business days after receipt. The collections for
3

--- Page 6 ---
these four days totaled approximately $112,000. Untimely deposits increase the
possibility of loss.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires State
agencies to deposit receipts no later than the first working day after the day of
receipt. Agencies that collect nominal amounts of receipts and due to their
location and/or lack of personnel cannot make daily deposits are required to make
deposits at least weekly or whenever receipts accumulate to $5,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office deposit all collections in a timely manner.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Allegany County, Maryland for the period beginning April 1, 2013 and
ending June 30, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, bank accounts,
and administration of estates.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
4

--- Page 7 ---
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Office’s response to our finding and recommendation is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
5

--- Page 9 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker
Staff Auditor