Title: Maryland Department of Health - Medical Care Programs Administration


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2014, the Mental Hygiene Administration and the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration were merged to create the Behavioral Health Administration within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). Effective January 1, 2015, MDH implemented a new integrated Public Behavioral Health System. Certain functions previously performed by MHA are now performed by the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA). Specifically, MCPA now monitors and accounts for activities of the Administrative Service Organization (ASO) responsible for the authorization of behavioral health services, data collection, claims submission, and the payment of claims. Activities of the ASO since January 1, 2015 were excluded from this audit and are included in our audits of MCPA.
Date: 08/18/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744c9
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:16:33.795125
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Medical Care Programs Administration
August 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities 8
Public Behavioral Health System 10
Medicaid Enterprise Restructuring Project Termination 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 12
Findings and Recommendations 13
Recipient Enrollment
Finding 1 – The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) did 14
not assign a temporary enrollment status to 11,153 new enrollees,
resulting in delays in placing individuals in Managed Care
Organizations (MCOs). Such delays, which were allegedly
caused by a computer compatibility issue, resulted in certain
associated claims being paid on a fee-for-service basis that would
have been paid by an MCO.
* Finding 2 – The current memoranda of understanding with the Department 16
of Human Services and the Maryland Health Benefits Exchange
are not sufficient to ensure that eligibility determinations are
timely and proper.
Finding 3 – MCPA did not take timely follow-up action on questionable 18
enrollee eligibility information it identified and did not ensure that
critical eligibility information was properly recorded on the
Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II).
* Finding 4 – MCPA did not take timely action to ensure recipients age 65 21
or older had applied for Medicare as required by State regulations.
* Finding 5 – MCPA did not ensure that all reports of potential third-party 23
health insurance for Medicaid recipients were received and properly
investigated in a timely manner.
* Finding 6 – MCPA did not always assess damages against its MCO 24
enrollment broker which continuously failed to meet minimum
enrollment levels required by the contract.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Program Oversight – Hospitals and Long-Term Care Providers
* Finding 7 – MCPA has not conducted required audits of hospital claims 26
processed since calendar year 2007.
Finding 8 – MCPA did not adequately monitor the vendors responsible 27
for conducting credit balance audits and utilization reviews of
long-term care facilities and/or hospitals.
Program Oversight – Behavioral Health
Finding 9 – MCPA did not monitor the ASO to ensure that deficiencies 30
noted during provider audits conducted by the ASO were
corrected and related overpayments were recovered.
Finding 10 – MCPA did not ensure the ASO resolved rejected behavioral 30
health claims timely, resulting in the payment of potentially
improper claims and lost federal fund reimbursements.
* Finding 11 – Access controls over the ASO’s servers hosting the portal 31
and the web-server software were inadequate, intrusion detection
prevention system coverage did not exist for encrypted traffic, and
sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was stored without
adequate safeguards.
Program Oversight – Dental Benefits
Finding 12 – MCPA did not ensure that the former dental benefits 33
administrator was properly administering the dental benefits program
and was conducting required provider audits, and did not ensure
bank accounts were reconciled, and sensitive data were secured.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 13 – Sensitive PII within the Electronic Data Interchange 36
Transaction Processing System (EDITPS) database was stored
and transmitted without adequate safeguards and MCPA did not
remediate 20 of the 21 security vulnerabilities identified in a
consultant’s report on EDITPS.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Interagency Agreement
Finding 14 – MCPA did not obtain documentation to support labor and 38
overhead charges invoiced by the University of Maryland
Baltimore County (UMBC), representing 72 percent of amounts
billed under the agreement for MCO capitation rate-setting
services.
Finding 15 – MCPA did not authorize UMBC to transmit sensitive 39
Medicaid protected health information to a third-party vendor for
data storage and did not ensure UMBC executed a data sharing
agreement with this vendor, as required by federal regulation.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 41
Agency Response Appendix
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 214, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective July 1, 2017 renamed the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to be the Maryland Department of
Health.
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) of the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH) operates under both Title XIX of the Federal Social
Security Act (Medicaid) and State law. Medicaid is a joint federal and state
entitlement program for low-income individuals. The program is administered by
the states, which are required to provide healthcare coverage to all applicants who
meet the program’s eligibility criteria. In its capacity as Maryland’s
administering agency, MCPA is responsible for enrolling the healthcare providers
(such as physicians), establishing program regulations, setting provider payment
rates, reviewing and paying provider claims, and obtaining federal reimbursement
for eligible costs. MDH has agreements with the Department of Human Services
(DHS) and the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) delegating its
responsibility for recipient eligibility determinations.
According to MCPA records as of June 30, 2015, the Medical Assistance Program
served approximately 1.2 million individuals through approximately 124,000
healthcare providers. During fiscal year 2015, Medicaid expenditures totaled
approximately $9.7 billion, including $5.8 billion in federal fund expenditures.
As noted in the charts above, the number of Medicaid recipients and the related
expenditures have increased significantly in recent years. These increases were,
8

--- Page 11 ---
in part, due to the passage of the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (ACA) and the Maryland Health Progress Act of 2013. The ACA established
a new methodology to calculate individual and family income, making it easier
for people to gain health coverage through one application and enroll in the
appropriate healthcare program. Simultaneously, the Maryland Health Progress
Act expanded Medicaid eligibility to children ages 6 through 18 and adults
younger than age 65 (including those with no dependents) with family or
household income up to 138 percent of federal poverty guidelines (previously 116
percent), and former foster care adolescents up to age 26 (previously age 21). The
costs associated with the Medicaid expansion were 100 percent federally funded
through calendar year 2016.
Individuals qualifying for cash assistance through the Temporary Cash Assistance
program or the federal Supplemental Security Income program automatically
qualify for Medicaid benefits. Those eligible for Medicaid through these
programs make up most of the Medicaid population and are referred to as
“categorically needy” although there are other individuals that are considered
categorically needy due to other circumstances (such as children residing in foster
care). The remaining individuals are referred to as “medically needy,” meaning
they cannot meet the cost of needed medical
care, but are generally self-supporting in
other respects. Individuals may apply for
Medicaid in person, through the mail, or
online.
MCPA uses a federally certified
computerized system, the Medicaid
Management Information System (MMIS II)
implemented in 1995, to pay provider claims
and to process paid claims for federal
reimbursement. According to MCPA
records, during fiscal year 2015 MMIS II
was used to process transactions totaling
approximately $8.7 billion. Some MCPA
expenditures are not processed through
MMIS II, such as Medicare premiums for
Medicaid-eligible recipients, certain
pharmacy claims, and transportation costs, and certain State-funded grants.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Public Behavioral Health System
Chapter 460, Laws of Maryland 2014, effective July 1, 2014, merged the Mental
Hygiene Administration (MHA) and the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration
to create the Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) within MDH. Effective
January 1, 2015, MDH implemented a new integrated Public Behavioral Health
System (PBHS). The PBHS realigned program responsibilities under the Deputy
Secretary for Health Care Financing and the Deputy Secretary for Behavioral
Health. As a result, certain functions previously performed by MHA are now
performed by MCPA. Specifically, MCPA now monitors and accounts for
activities of the Administrative Service Organization (ASO) responsible for
authorization of behavioral health services, data collection, claims submission,
and the payment of claims.
The newly established BHA manages and processes claims funded solely with
State funds. BHA also manages evidence-based practices and promising clinical
interventions for behavioral health services; establishes, refines, and monitors
clinical standards for Medicaid-financed services to ensure that payment policies
support clinical care; and ensures clinical criteria for grant-based services.
The scope of our audit included MCPA’s role in monitoring and accounting for
activities of the ASO since the transfer of these operations to MCPA in January
2015. The ASO activity prior to this period and the remaining functions of the
former MHA will be included in our first audit of BHA.
Medicaid Enterprise Restructuring Project Termination
Background
In January 2012, MDH began the process of replacing its existing MMIS (MMIS
II) with a modernized MMIS called the Medicaid Enterprise Restructuring Project
(MERP). At the time, MDH awarded a five-year contract totaling approximately
$171 million, to design, develop, implement, and operate MERP and to provide
fiscal agent services. The MERP project encountered certain development
problems, including disagreements with the contractor over the scope of work and
the inability of the contractor to submit certain acceptable deliverables.
MERP did not progress beyond the design phase, and MDH continues to use
MMIS II to process its Medicaid claims. The fiscal year 2017 budget included
funds to conduct a self-assessment, which would identify the gap between the
current capabilities of MMIS II as compared to the current needs of the State.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Contract Termination
Due to the lack of completed deliverables, MDH issued a directive letter, or cure
notice, on January 31, 2014 and again on March 14, 2014, detailing certain
specific actions that needed to be corrected for MERP to move forward. The
notices required the contractor to cure its failure to submit an acceptable project
schedule as obligated under the contract or show cause why the contract should
not be terminated for default.
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) reported to the General
Assembly that, as of August 15, 2014, the contractor had failed to submit a
satisfactory response to either cure notice, and MDH had been working with the
contractor to find a suitable path forward without success. According to DoIT,
the project remained high-risk and, on August 22, 2014, with the support of DoIT,
MDH suspended development work on the project for a period of 90 days to
resolve outstanding issues and to develop an acceptable path forward to continue
MERP. Numerous stop work orders were issued by MDH through September
2015 and, in October 2015, after negotiations regarding the future of the project
collapsed, MDH notified the contractor that it was terminating the contract for
default. MDH had paid the contractor approximately $30.5 million prior to the
termination.
Pending Litigation
In September 2013, the contractor submitted a contract claim for approximately
$62 million for alleged delays on the part of MDH and work the contractor
claimed fell outside the original scope of the contract. The contractor
subsequently reduced its contract claim to approximately $34 million. MDH
rejected the claim in April 2014, and the contractor filed an appeal with the Board
of Contract Appeals (BCA) on May 28, 2014.
In November 2015, the contractor filed additional claims against MDH, resulting
in total claims in excess of $70 million. On December 22, 2015, the Office of the
Attorney General (OAG) filed a motion with BCA to dismiss the contractor’s first
claim. The contractor filed a response to that motion in January 2016 and the
OAG replied in March 2016. Oral arguments were heard by the BCA on April
21, 2016 but as of July 12, 2017, the BCA had not ruled on the motion.
In March 2016, the OAG finalized terms with outside counsel to represent MDH
in litigation related to the MERP project. On July 14, 2016, MDH filed its own
claim with the BCA, asserting breach of contract resulting in damages in an
amount yet to be determined, but substantially in excess of $30 million. On
August 15, 2016, the contractor responded denying breach of contract. The claim
is still pending.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the nine findings contained
in our preceding MCPA audit report dated April 25, 2014. We determined that
MCPA satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The remaining five
findings are repeated in this report.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of four of the five
findings included in our audit report of the former MHA, dated September 18,
2014. These four findings related to the administration of the ASO contract. The
status of the remaining finding will be addressed during our audit of BHA. We
determined that MCPA satisfactorily addressed two of these findings. The
remaining two findings are repeated in this report and appear as one finding.
Finally, based on our assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives,
we did not determine the status of one finding previously included in the audit
report of the Maryland Department of Aging dated July 1, 2014. This finding
pertained to the Maryland Home and Community-Based Services Waiver for
Older Adults Program. This Program activity (renamed the Medicaid Home and
Community-Based Options Waiver Program) is now performed by MCPA.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Recipient Enrollment
Background
In its capacity as Maryland’s administering agency, the Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA) of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) is
responsible for establishing regulations, guidelines, and procedures for Medical
Assistance applicant eligibility. The responsibility for recipient eligibility
determinations is shared by the local departments of social services within the
Department of Human Services (DHS), the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
(MHBE), and the local health departments within MDH, which serve as MHBE
connector entities. MDH has agreements with DHS and MHBE delegating its
responsibility for recipient eligibility determinations. Recipient eligibility for
Medicaid benefits is generally required to be redetermined annually.
Department of Human Services
MDH and DHS maintain a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), last updated
in July 2011, which assigns responsibility to DHS for determining applicants’
eligibility for Medicaid. Applicant eligibility is primarily determined by the local
departments of social services, which are under the supervision of DHS.
Applicants can be categorically eligible or medically needy. A medically needy
person generally receives only Medicaid benefits while some categorically
eligible persons receive benefits from both MDH (Medical Assistance) and DHS
(such as Temporary Cash Assistance). Applicant information is recorded on
DHS’s Client Automated Resource Eligibility System (CARES) and, for those
applicants deemed eligible for Medicaid, that information is subsequently
interfaced with the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II).
Maryland Health Benefits Exchange
In September 2013, MDH and MHBE entered into an MOU under which MHBE,
through the Maryland Health Connection, processes eligibility determinations and
redeterminations for income-based coverage groups (that is, certain categorically
eligible or medically needy applicants with household income up to 138 percent
of federal poverty guidelines). Applicant information is recorded on the Health
Benefit Exchange system (referred to as either HBX or MHC) and for those
applicants deemed eligible for Medicaid, information is ultimately interfaced into
MMIS II. Individuals may apply online through the Maryland Health Connection
or may enroll through the MDH local health departments, which are MHBE
connector entities.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Most Maryland Medicaid recipients are required to enroll in HealthChoice, the
statewide managed care program that began in 1997. Under HealthChoice,
MCPA makes specified capitation payments to private Managed Care
Organizations (MCOs) that provide services to these Medicaid recipients in
Maryland. While the MCOs provide a wide variety of services to enrolled
recipients, certain services (such as behavioral health services) are paid for on a
fee-for-service basis even for recipients enrolled in an MCO as described below.
These services are termed “carve outs.” According to MCPA records, payments
to MCOs totaled approximately $4.5 billion during fiscal year 2015.
Populations excluded from the HealthChoice program include the institutionalized
and individuals who are dually eligible for Medicaid and Medicare. Populations
not covered by an MCO are covered on a fee-for-service basis. Under the fee-for-
service system, health providers (such as physicians, hospitals, and medical
equipment suppliers) are paid a fee for each service or supply provided. Fees are
generally billed at rates established by MCPA or, in the case of hospital stays, at
rates established by the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission.
According to MCPA records, fee-for-service claim payments totaled
approximately $688 million during fiscal year 2015.
Finding 1
MCPA did not assign a temporary enrollment status to 11,153 new enrollees,
resulting in delays in placing individuals in MCOs. Such delays, which were
allegedly caused by a computer compatibility issue, resulted in certain
associated claims being paid on a fee-for-service basis that would have been
paid by an MCO.
Analysis
MCPA identified 11,153 new recipients whose enrollment in an MCO was
delayed when these enrollees were not assigned a temporary enrollment status.
According MDH, this occurred due to a computer compatibility issue with the
HBX. New recipients are supposed to be assigned a temporary enrollment status
that provides a 28-day eligibility period during which they may select an MCO
via MCPA’s enrollment broker. During this period, claims are paid on a fee-for-
service basis. At the conclusion of the 28-day period, any HealthChoice enrollee
who did not select an MCO is automatically assigned and enrolled in an MCO by
MCPA’s claims payment and processing system, MMIS II. The delays in
enrolling new recipients into an MCO resulted in MCPA paying certain of the
recipients’ claims on a fee-for-service basis rather than the claims being paid by
an MCO.
14

--- Page 17 ---
MCPA became aware that certain enrollees were not assigned the temporary
enrollment status and remained as fee-for-service beyond the 28-day period after
several enrollees contacted MCPA in July 2014 inquiring as to why they had not
been enrolled in an MCO. MCPA management advised us that it investigated the
issue and noted that these individuals had never been assigned the temporary
eligibility status in MMIS II when initially enrolled. Therefore, the enrollees
were not referred to the enrollment broker and the automatic enrollment was not
triggered after the 28-day period elapsed.
MCPA management believed the error was likely due to software compatibility
issues between MMIS II and the HBX. MCPA subsequently designed an MMIS
II query to identify additional enrollees who remained in fee-for-service status
due to the error and ran the query in October 2014. We were advised that MCPA
researched the identified recipients and made needed corrections to ensure the
recipients were properly enrolled in an MCO. Although MCPA believed the
compatibility issues had been corrected, a second query was run in November
2015 which showed the problem continued to exist. In total, the two queries
identified 11,153 recipients who were not assigned the temporary enrollment
status and, therefore, were not timely enrolled in an MCO as appropriate. MCPA
advised us that it investigated the status of each of these 11,153 individuals and
placed them in an MCO if warranted.
Capitation rates paid to MCOs are generally lower than payments on a fee-for-
service basis. MCPA could not readily determine the fiscal impact of these delays
because of the complexities in the Medicaid reimbursement process. Specifically,
the existence of numerous carve-out services that are paid on a fee-for-service
basis even for recipients enrolled in an MCO makes it difficult to determine the
amount that was erroneously paid as fee-for-service.
Nevertheless, after excluding claims related to readily identifiable carve outs (that
is, claims that were properly paid on a fee-for-service basis), we identified fee-
for-service claims totaling approximately $13.3 million that were paid for 1,571
of the 11,153 recipients during fiscal year 2015. The amount erroneously paid as
fee-for-service would be less than $13.3 million due to other carve outs and
circumstances which can only be determined on a case-by-case investigation of
the recipients.
We tested the 10 highest fee-for-service claims paid during fiscal year 2015 that
related to 8 of the 1,571 recipients. These 10 claims totaled approximately $2.2
million. We found that, for 4 claims totaling approximately $826,000, the claims
were paid as fee-for-service for recipients who should have been enrolled in an
MCO prior to the dates services were provided. If these recipients had been
15

--- Page 18 ---
enrolled timely, these claims would have been covered by MCOs. The remaining
6 claims were properly paid as fee-for-service claims (for example, the services
were rendered within the temporary enrollment period).
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCPA
a. take the appropriate action to ensure the compatibility of the MMIS II
and HBX software; and
b. implement monitoring procedures to ensure all eligible HealthChoice
enrollees are placed in an MCO within 28 days. For example, MCPA
should run periodic queries of recipients not enrolled in MCOs after 28
days, investigate the status of each recipient, and place each in an MCO if
warranted.
Finding 2
The current memoranda of understanding (MOUs) with DHS and MHBE
are not sufficient to ensure that eligibility determinations are timely and
proper.
Analysis
The current MOUs with DHS and MHBE are not sufficient to ensure that
eligibility determinations are timely and proper. Deficiencies with the DHS
eligibility process and related monitoring have been commented upon in our
MCPA and various DHS audit reports dating back to 1992. It was previously
noted that these deficiencies occurred, at least in part, because the MOU between
MDH and DHS did not provide for adequate MCPA oversight, did not include
comprehensive procedures to ensure problems were corrected, and was generally
outdated.
In response to one of our preceding audit reports (dated December 6, 2010),
MCPA updated its MOU with DHS in July 2011, and started to develop a more
comprehensive method to monitor the eligibility process. However, our review
disclosed that the current MOU with DHS and the MOU established with MHBE
in September 2013 still were not sufficient. Specifically, our review of the MOUs
disclosed the following conditions:
 The current MOUs do not require DHS and MHBE to have quality control
procedures in place to help ensure the integrity of the eligibility process.
While not required in the MOU, DHS had established certain quality control
16

--- Page 19 ---
procedures; however, as cited in our April 2015 audit of DHS’s Family
Investment Administration (FIA), these procedures were not comprehensive
or were not always carried out. For example, FIA lacked documentation that
it had performed certain computer matches required by its policies that were
designed to help ensure recipients were eligible for public assistance and
medical assistance benefits and to help detect potential fraud.
 The MOUs do not address certain longstanding deficiencies that were
disclosed in MCPA’s audit reports dating back to 2010. For example,
although DHS has had issues conducting timely eligibility redeterminations,
its MOU does not require that accurate eligibility end dates be recorded in
MMIS II. Eligibility coverage end dates, which are based on information
collected and coded by DHS and MHBE, continued to be recorded in MMIS
II as “9999” for more than 1.1 million recipients as of August 2015,
preventing MCPA from monitoring the timeliness of redeterminations. (As
noted in Finding 3, MCPA records eligibility end dates in this manner to
prevent benefits from being cancelled should the redeterminations not be
performed timely.) In addition, while MCPA has identified that DHS
improperly issued multiple medical assistance numbers to the same recipient
in the past, the MOUs do not require that procedures be established to detect
and correct these situations, such as by establishing an edit, or supervisory
review of output reports. We found that the medical assistance numbers for 3
of 10 recipients selected for testing, who were enrolled with multiple medical
assistance numbers, were not linked in MMIS II. This condition could result
in duplicate payments being made for the same recipient, although we did not
identify duplicate payments for these individuals.
 The MOUs do not specifically require actions to be taken when fraud or abuse
is identified during the eligibility determinations and redeterminations
processes, or how this information should be communicated to MCPA. As a
result, there is a lack of assurance that all instances of fraud and abuse were
being properly investigated and communicated to MDH. State regulations
require all local departments of social services and other agencies to report
cases of suspected fraud to MDH.
 The MOUs do not provide clear expectations of the need for DHS and MHBE
to take corrective action in the event MCPA identifies deficiencies with their
eligibility efforts. For example, as noted in the next Finding, 3,424 of the
19,131 recipients enrolled in newborn coverage groups (for recipients less
than one year old) were more than one year old. Specifically, the MOU with
MHBE does not require that corrective action be taken to address any
significant deficiencies identified regarding its recipient eligibility
17

--- Page 20 ---
responsibilities. While the MOU with DHS provides that the Secretary shall
be informed of such issues, it does not provide any consequences, should
deficiencies not be addressed.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA modify the MOUs with DHS and MHBE to
require
a. quality control procedures be established,
b. the aforementioned longstanding deficiencies be addressed (repeat),
c. specific steps be taken when fraud or abuse is identified, and
d. corrective action be taken when deficiencies with eligibility
determinations are identified.
Finding 3
MCPA did not take timely follow-up action on questionable enrollee
eligibility information it identified and did not ensure that critical eligibility
information was properly recorded on MMIS II. Our test disclosed certain
overpayments.
Analysis
MCPA did not take timely follow-up action on questionable enrollee information
it identified, including enrollees with missing social security numbers, and did not
ensure that critical eligibility information was properly recorded on MMIS II. As
a result, MCPA improperly paid certain fee-for-service claims on behalf of
individuals who were enrolled in MCOs.
Inadequate Follow-up on Questionable Enrollee Eligibility
 MCPA did not conduct timely follow-up of potentially ineligible recipients it
identified. MCPA periodically generated reports which identified possible
issues with eligibility determinations and redeterminations (known as alerts)
and referred these alerts (such as recipients enrolled in other states) to the
appropriate local department of social services (LDSS) for resolution.
However, our review disclosed that MCPA did not take timely follow-up
action to ensure these alerts were resolved. For example, as of June 2015,
these reports identified three large LDSSs that had 2,721 alerts that had been
outstanding for 79, 125, and 194 days on average, and 266 alerts statewide
related to long-term care (LTC) recipients that had been outstanding for an
average of 201 days.
MCPA also did not have comprehensive records of its follow-up efforts on
enrollees required to provide social security numbers for which no social
18

--- Page 21 ---
security numbers were recorded on MMIS II. According to MCPA records as
of August 2015, there were 12,027 recipients without a social security number
recorded in MMIS II, of which 2,547 had been missing since 2011. These
12,027 recipients did not meet any of the allowable exceptions (such as
undocumented aliens) and, therefore, were required to have a social security
number within 90 days in order to be eligible for coverage. MCPA
management advised us that they took certain actions related to missing social
security numbers but those efforts were not fully documented.
 MCPA did not adequately document its investigation of discrepancies it
identified between recipient data recorded in MMIS II and related data in
CARES or HBX. MCPA generated monthly reports that identified
discrepancies between MMIS II and CARES regarding whether recipients
were active and/or deceased, but did not document efforts to follow up on
these reports. For example, the March 2016 report identified 195 recipients
recorded as deceased in CARES who were active in MMIS II, but MCPA
could not document that it followed up on these recipients. Our test of 5 of
these recipients disclosed that they were still not identified as deceased in
MMIS II as of June 23, 2016. We noted a small amount of claims processed
for these 5 deceased recipients after their dates of death. Similar reports were
not generated for differences between recipient data recorded in MMIS II and
HBX.
In addition, MCPA generated daily reports identifying discrepancies between
recipient profiles in MMIS II and in CARES or HBX, such as differences in
social security numbers and identification numbers. While we were advised
MCPA reviewed these reports and made needed corrections, MCPA did not
document that any follow-up actions were taken to address these
discrepancies.
Inadequate Procedures to Ensure Integrity of Critical Eligibility Information
 Changes made to critical recipient eligibility information (such as eligibility
periods) in MMIS II were not subject to supervisory review and approval.
Additionally, MCPA did not have a mechanism to ensure that changes to
eligibility information made by DHS staff (such as dates enrolled or
disenrolled) were processed in a timely manner. Our tests disclosed that
errors and delays in data entry resulted in overpayments. We judgmentally
selected for testing 22 fee-for-service claims paid totaling $6 million, for
services rendered during the period from May 2013 to December 2014, for
recipients who were enrolled in an MCO as of the dates of service. (The 22
claims had certain characteristics that raised questions regarding their
propriety.) Our test disclosed that 7 claims totaling $2.4 million were
19

--- Page 22 ---
improperly paid by MCPA as fee-for-service claims rather than by the MCOs
because of errors or delays in the data entry of the MCO enrollment
information.
 MCPA did not document its efforts to monitor the timeliness of eligibility
redeterminations and the related follow-up efforts. MCPA routinely recorded
the eligibility end dates for recipients in MMIS II as ‘9999’ rather than the
actual eligibility end date. Based on our query, more than 1.1 million
Medicaid recipients had a ‘9999’ end date as of August 2015. As a result,
these individuals would remain eligible for services indefinitely unless
terminated by MCPA, DHS, or MHBE due to an eligibility redetermination or
the death of the individual. MCPA management advised us that accurate
coverage end dates were not recorded to avoid mistakenly terminating benefits
for a recipient who does not receive a timely redetermination. MCPA advised
that, instead, it monitored the timeliness of eligibility redeterminations using
information from CARES and HBX and followed up with MHBE and DHS
for any untimely redeterminations. However, these efforts were not
documented.
 MCPA did not monitor individuals enrolled in age-specific coverage groups to
ensure that they were removed in a timely manner when they no longer met
the age requirements. We reviewed the propriety of the coverage groups
assigned to approximately 260,000 of the aforementioned 1.1 million
recipients who were enrolled in coverage groups that are limited to a specific
age range. Our review disclosed 93,425 recipients who were over the age
range for their respective coverage group. For example, 3,424 of the 19,131
recipients enrolled in newborn coverage groups (for recipients less than one
year old) were more than one year old, including one recipient who was 28
years old when determined eligible to receive coverage in December 2009 and
was mistakenly placed into the newborn coverage group at that time.
Although these individuals may remain eligible for coverage under a different
coverage group, the eligibility criteria vary by group and, therefore, need to be
reassessed.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA
a. conduct timely and documented follow-up of potentially ineligible
recipients and recipients with missing social security numbers, and
ensure their prompt resolution;
b. generate monthly reports of discrepancies between MMIS II and HBX
regarding whether recipients were active or deceased;
20

--- Page 23 ---
c. promptly resolve all discrepancies identified in recipient data recorded in
MMIS II and CARES or HBX and document follow-up actions taken;
d. establish procedures to ensure changes to critical recipient eligibility
information recorded in MMIS II are subject to supervisory review and
approval, at least on a test basis;
e. develop a mechanism to monitor the timeliness of eligibility changes made
by DHS staff;
f. review the aforementioned improper claim payments, and take
appropriate corrective action, including recovery of overpayments;
g. document its efforts to monitor the timeliness of eligibility
redeterminations and the related follow-up efforts; and
h. monitor individuals enrolled in age-specific coverage groups and
document the related corrective actions.
Finding 4
MCPA did not take timely action to ensure recipients age 65 or older had
applied for Medicare as required by State regulations.
Analysis
MCPA did not take timely action to ensure Medicaid recipients age 65 or older
had applied for Medicare. According to MCPA records, during fiscal year 2015
MCPA paid claims totaling $85.4 million for 4,133 recipients who were at least
65 years old and were not enrolled in Medicare, despite being potentially eligible
based on their coverage group and age. The failure to ensure recipients are
enrolled in Medicare when eligible is
significant because Medicare is
entirely federally funded.
Furthermore, the amounts paid on fee-
for-service claims by Medicaid for
recipients who are dually eligible for
Medicare and Medicaid are generally
less than the amounts paid for
recipients who only have Medicaid.
Providers must submit claims for
Medicare reimbursement before
submitting the claims for Medicaid reimbursement, which generally covers the
Medicare coinsurance (normally 20 percent) and deductibles.
We stated in our preceding audit report, that MCPA did not have a process to
ensure all recipients age 65 or older had applied for Medicare. In August 2012,
MCPA began a Medicare outreach program which included mailing notices to
21

--- Page 24 ---
recipients age 65 or older advising them of the need to apply for Medicare to
retain their Medicaid benefits. Approximately 22,300 notices had been mailed as
of August 2, 2016, resulting in approximately 10,000 recipients enrolling in
Medicare (see table). However, MCPA did not mail the notices in a timely
manner nor take adequate follow-up action.
MCPA sent each recipient up to three notices before the recipient was referred to
DHS to terminate the benefits.1 The notices were sent on a quarterly basis so it
took up to one year to terminate the eligibility of recipients who did not respond
and, during this period, recipient claims continued to be paid by Medicaid on a
fee-for-service basis. In addition, MCPA did not have any monitoring process in
place to ensure DHS terminated the eligibility of recipients who did not respond
to the notices. Our test of 14 recipients included in the outreach program who
were 65 or older as of January 2016 disclosed that 11 recipients had not applied
for Medicare and their eligibility had not been terminated as of the date of our test
in January 2016, even though they had turned 65 between 1995 and 2014.
Medicaid claims payments totaling $103,000 were processed for 10 of the 11
recipients during fiscal year 2015.
State regulations require Medicaid applicants, age 65 years or older, to furnish
proof that they have applied for or are receiving Medicare. DHS2 employees are
to ensure that Medicaid applicants applied for Medicare during the initial
application process and during the annual redeterminations.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA
a. establish a process to ensure recipients age 65 or older have applied for
Medicare on a timely basis, as required by State regulations (repeat); and
b. ensure that DHS terminates the eligibility of recipients who do not reply
to Medicare outreach efforts, as appropriate.
1 MCPA cannot terminate recipients who receive Supplemental Security Income benefits but
should still be pursuing them to enroll in Medicare.
2 Recipients over 65 cannot apply via MHBE and are referred to DHS.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 5
MCPA did not ensure that all reports of potential third-party health
insurance for Medicaid recipients were received and properly investigated in
a timely manner.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure that all potential third-party health insurance information
for Medicaid recipients was received and properly investigated in a timely
manner. In addition to information collected by DHS and MHBE about potential
third-party insurance during the Medicaid enrollment process, MCPA received
referrals of possible third-party insurance from numerous sources, including from
other units of DHS (such as from the Child Support Enforcement Administration)
and from an MCPA contractor that was responsible for identifying possible
unreported third-party insurance. According to its records, MCPA received
approximately 134,000 referrals from DHS and 10,000 referrals from its
contractor during calendar year 2015. Federal regulations require MCPA to
follow up on the potential third-party insurance information obtained within 60
days.
 Although MCPA received monthly reports from DHS of possible third-party
insurance for Medicaid recipients, MHBE was not required by the related
MOU to provide these reports. In this regard, during our audit period MCPA
received only one report from MHBE (in March 2015) that included
approximately 24,300 recipients with potential insurance. According to
MHBE records, during the audit period more than 730,000 recipients enrolled
in Medicaid programs through MHBE.
 MCPA did not have a process to ensure third-party insurance information
received was investigated properly and timely. Initial accountability was not
established over certain referrals (that is, referrals received from the MCOs),
and MCPA did not have adequate documentation to support that
investigations were completed, appropriate conclusions were reached, and
insurance status was properly recorded in MMIS II in a timely manner. While
MCPA advised us that monthly supervisory reviews were completed, on a test
basis, to ensure that appropriate conclusions were made for referrals,
documentation of each monthly review was only retained for a three-month
period. However, our examination of documentation of recent reviews did not
disclose any evidence of supervisory review. Similar conditions were noted in
our preceding audit report.
As a result, there was a lack of assurance that MCPA properly investigated
reports of potential third-party insurance. In this regard, we tested 15
23

--- Page 26 ---
recipients for which potential insurance information was referred by DHS and
the MCPA contractor in May and June 2015. Our tests disclosed that, a year
later, MCPA did not have any documentation that the referrals for 6 recipients
had been investigated.
Federal regulations provide that Medicaid shall be the payer of last resort.
Specifically, Medicaid shall only be used to pay costs not covered by others, such
as third-party insurers. Recoveries from third-party insurers totaled $33 million
for the period between July 1, 2014 and April 30, 2015.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPA
a. require MHBE to submit reports of possible third-party insurance on a
monthly basis;
b. establish initial accountability over all insurance referrals received and
ensure all are properly investigated in a timely manner, in accordance
with federal regulations (repeat); and
c. conduct documented monthly supervisory reviews of investigative efforts
to ensure appropriate conclusions were reached (repeat) and the
insurance status was properly recorded in MMIS II.
Finding 6
MCPA did not always assess damages against its MCO enrollment broker
which continuously failed to meet minimum enrollment levels required by
the contract.
Analysis
MCPA did not always assess damages against its MCO enrollment broker which
consistently failed to meet minimum enrollment levels required by the contract
(referred to as Voluntary Enrollment Rate or VER). MCPA has used the same
vendor since August 2005 to function as an enrollment broker assisting and
enrolling individuals in MCOs. During this period, MCPA processed multiple
contract modifications for expanded enrollments and renewed the contract
multiple times for a total cost of $84.5 million. MCPA paid the broker $7.3
million during fiscal year 2015. Based on our calculations for the fiscal year 2015
VER shortfalls, MCPA could have assessed damages totaling $227,000 on the
broker.
The contract provided that the broker maintain a VER of at least 80 percent of the
new applicants each month, which is the percentage of individuals the vendor
directly enrolled in HealthChoice MCOs. Individuals not enrolled by the broker
24

--- Page 27 ---
were automatically enrolled by MMIS II in an MCO which may not best meet the
clients’ needs. The contract provided that MCPA may assess damages if the
enrollment broker does not meet the minimum enrollments.
However, as noted in the table, the
broker consistently failed to meet
the minimum VER. For example,
the broker met the VER for only
one month during fiscal year 2015.
For the remaining 11 months, the
broker enrolled only 67 percent (or
159,860) of the 237,379 new
applicants.
MCPA management advised us
that it was aware that the broker
did not meet the required VER but has only assessed damages of approximately
$900,000 for VER shortfalls during fiscal years 2009 through 2012. These
assessments were made in response to a similar finding in our preceding audit
report. MCPA management advised us that it did not assess damages for
shortfalls in subsequent periods for various reasons, including because the broker
had to process increased enrollments due to the Affordable Care Act and had
complications related to the HBX. In this regard, we noted that a contract
modification approved by the Board of Public Works (BPW) on February 19,
2014 increased the contract value by $2 million to address the increased
enrollment and waived the VER damages for the period from December 31, 2013
through April 2014. However, although the period of increased enrollment had
passed, MCPA continued to waive the VER damages subsequent to April 2014
without sufficient justification and without notifying BPW.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MCPA assess damages when the enrollment broker
does not achieve the contractually required level of performance (repeat).
Program Oversight - Hospitals and Long-Term Care (LTC)
Providers
Background
MCPA uses numerous vendors to assist in its administration of the Medicaid
program and in verifying billings by providers, including hospitals and LTC
providers. MCPA has also used vendors in the past to conduct audits of hospital
claims to identify overpayments (such as from duplicate bills and unauthorized
25

--- Page 28 ---
charges) and to conduct patient credit balance audits to identify amounts due to
the State for claims paid to hospitals and LTC facilities by both the State and third
parties (such as insurance companies). In addition, MCPA uses vendors to review
LTC cost settlements to identify underpayments or overpayments, and to conduct
utilization reviews (including continued stay and medical eligibility reviews) of
Medicaid recipients and LTC facilities.
Finding 7
MCPA has not conducted required audits of hospital claims processed since
calendar year 2007.
Analysis
MCPA has not conducted audits of hospital claims payments, which according to
MCPA records, totaled approximately $900 million during fiscal year 2015, as
required by federal regulations. MCPA has historically contracted with a
recovery audit contractor to perform post-payment audits of hospital claims to
identify and pursue potential overpayments. As noted in our preceding audit
report, MCPA terminated its contract for these post-payment audits in February
2012 because the vendor failed to conduct the required number of audits. Prior to
the vendor’s termination, the most recent claims audited by the vendor covered
services paid during calendar years 2004 through 2007. The vendor identified
overpayments totaling approximately $10.7 million for claims paid during
calendar years 2005 and 2006. The failure to audit hospital claims timely was
commented upon in our preceding audit report and could result in MCPA paying
for hospital services that were never provided or that were not medically
necessary or MCPA paying excessive costs due to unbundling of services.
MCPA did not issue a request for proposals (RFP) for a new contractor until May
2013 and did not receive any qualified proposals in response to this or to a
subsequent RFP issued in October 2013. As a result, MCPA requested and
received a temporary exemption from conducting the recovery audits from the
federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in February 2014.
According to the terms of the exemption, MCPA was to procure a new recovery
audit contractor contract by November 1, 2014, and we were advised, that the
MDH Office of the Inspector General (OIG) was to perform recovery audits
during the period between contracts.
However, the OIG audited only 4 of the approximately 80 hospitals in the State
during the period between contracts. These 4 audits identified overpayments of
approximately $234,000. A new vendor was procured in August 2015 but was
terminated approximately one year later due to performance issues. This vendor
conducted only one audit prior to termination and OIG management advised us
26

--- Page 29 ---
that, as of June 2017, the OIG had completed only one hospital audit subsequent
to the termination of this vendor.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), enacted on March 23,
2010, required states to implement the programs by April 1, 2011 in which they
would contract with one or more recovery audit contractor. Prior to the ACA,
these audits were considered to be a best practice. In addition, certain claim data
may no longer be available for review because State regulations only require
hospitals to retain documentation of the claims for six years. MCPA management
advised us that in May 2013 it notified the hospitals to retain the documentation
beyond the six-year period required by State regulations. However, no
subsequent notifications were sent to hospitals to ensure they continue to retain
the documentation.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MCPA
a. ensure that hospital claims are audited in a timely manner (repeat), and
b. notify hospitals to retain claims data until audited.
Finding 8
MCPA did not adequately monitor the vendors responsible for conducting
credit balance audits and utilization reviews of long-term care facilities
and/or hospitals.
Analysis
MCPA did not adequately monitor the vendors responsible for conducting credit
balance audits and utilization reviews of hospitals and/or LTC facilities to ensure
the audits and reviews were comprehensive and were performed in a timely
manner. According to MCPA records, claims processed in fiscal year 2015 by
hospitals and LTC facilities totaled $900 million and $1.2 billion, respectively.
Inadequate Monitoring of Vendor Conducting Credit Balance Audits
MCPA did not monitor the vendor responsible for conducting credit balance
audits of hospitals and LTC facilities to ensure the audits were conducted properly
and in a timely manner. Credit balance audits identify funds due to the State from
provider billing errors, duplicate billings, and/or third-party collections. For
example, if MCPA paid for a service for which the facility also collected from an
insurance company or the patient, this would result in a credit balance on the
patient’s account, representing funds due to the State since Medicaid is the payer
of last resort. According to its records, MCPA paid the vendor conducting credit
balance audits $1.6 million during fiscal year 2015. Audits of LTC facilities
27

--- Page 30 ---
completed from July 2013 through November 2015 resulted in recoveries totaling
$1.6 million and audits of hospitals initiated from September 2010 through
November 2014 resulted in recoveries totaling $4.2 million.
MCPA did not have a comprehensive list of hospitals and LTC facilities to allow
it to monitor the audits conducted, and our review disclosed the audits were not
conducted in a timely manner. Specifically, based on our review and compilation
of available records, we determined that, as of November 2015, 40 of the 83
hospitals had not been audited during fiscal year 2014, including 28 which also
had not been audited in fiscal year 2013. In addition, 65 of the State’s 224 LTC
facilities had not been audited for periods ranging from two to four years, and 132
of the 159 LTC facilities that were audited had gaps in the periods covered,
ranging from 31 to 516 days. For example, the most recent audits of one facility
covered credit balances for claims paid in fiscal years 2011, 2012, 2014, and
2015, but none for fiscal year 2013. The January 2010 contract with the vendor
provided for annual audits of hospitals but did not specify the frequency of the
LTC audits; however, according to MCPA management, it expected the vendor to
conduct LTC audits at least biennially.
MCPA also did not review the vendor’s procedures for conducting these credit
balance audits to ensure that the procedures were sufficient to identify
overpayments. Although the vendor provided a methodology for identifying
overpayments in its proposal for the current contract, MCPA did not ensure that
the vendor’s current methodology was consistent with the accepted proposal.
Inadequate Monitoring of Utilization Reviews
MCPA did not ensure that the utilization control agent (UCA) conducted proper
continued stay and medical eligibility reviews of LTC facilities. Continued stay
reviews ensure the recipient’s medical condition warranted remaining in a nursing
facility, and the medical eligibility reviews determine whether the level of care
provided was justified. Both of these reviews are critical to ensure that
subsequent charges were proper. According to its records, during fiscal year
2015, MCPA paid the UCA $2.3 million for the reviews performed.
We were advised by MCPA management that, prior to September 2012, MCPA
verified the accuracy of the UCA reviews, on a test basis, by ensuring
documentation maintained by the facility adequately supported the UCA’s
conclusions; however, due to staffing shortages, these verifications were
discontinued. As a result, there is a lack of assurance that the UCA was properly
conducting the reviews for which MCPA was billed.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. credit balance audits are performed for all facilities, are sufficiently
comprehensive, and cover claims processed in all fiscal years; and
b. the utilization control agent conducts proper continued stay and medical
eligibility reviews of LTC facilities, at least on a test basis.
Program Oversight – Behavioral Health
Background
Consistent with State law, effective January 2015, MCPA assumed responsibility
for the Administrative Service Organization (ASO) providing benefit
management services for the Public Behavioral Health System. The ASO is
responsible for ensuring recipient eligibility, authorizing recipient services,
paying provider claims, and performing oversight of providers to ensure the
propriety and accuracy of claims and related services. The current contract was
awarded to the incumbent contractor that previously served as ASO under the
Mental Hygiene Administration; the contract spans three years beginning on
January 1, 2015, with two additional one-year options, and has a cumulative
contract value (including option years) totaling approximately $77 million. The
contract value includes a monthly administrative fee for each recipient who is
eligible to receive behavioral health services.
During fiscal year 2015, behavioral health claims disbursements made from a
State-funded bank account by the ASO totaled $900 million, $491 million of
which occurred after MCPA assumed responsibility for monitoring the ASO. The
vast majority of these claims were eligible for federal fund participation
(reimbursement) which is normally 50 percent of the amount paid.
The ASO’s system processed various information related to the provision of
mental health services. This system captured and stored sensitive personally
identifiable information (PII) including typical demographic information for
individuals including name, social security number, address, and date of birth.
The system also captured and stored sensitive protected health information,
including but not limited to medical diagnosis codes, prescribed medications, and
physician assessments of patient risks, impairments, and substance abuse. In
addition, the ASO operated a portal which allowed web-based access to certain
systems by providers and recipients (which are referred to as “members” in the
ASO’s information system).
29

--- Page 32 ---
Finding 9
MCPA did not monitor the ASO to ensure that deficiencies noted during
provider audits conducted by the ASO were corrected and related
overpayments were recovered.
Analysis
MCPA did not monitor the ASO to ensure that deficiencies noted during provider
audits conducted by the ASO were corrected and related overpayments were
recovered. The ASO was required to conduct 300 provider audits each year,
which are a critical source for validating the behavioral health claims and
routinely identify deficiencies in the claims submitted and overpayments to the
providers. MCPA did not maintain a record of deficiencies and overpayments
noted during the ASO’s provider audits to ensure that deficiencies were corrected
and overpayments were recovered by the ASO.
Our test of 10 provider audits conducted by the ASO disclosed that, for 2 audits,
MCPA did not conduct any follow-up to ensure the ASO recovered
approximately $21,000 in improper claims identified in the audits. These claims
were recovered after our inquiries, which were 10 to 12 months after the related
provider audits were completed.
Recommendation 9
We recommend the MCPA maintain a record of deficiencies and
overpayments noted during the provider audits and ensure corrective action
is taken and documented, including recovery of any overpayments.
Finding 10
MCPA did not ensure the ASO resolved rejected behavioral health claims
timely, resulting in the payment of potentially improper claims and the loss
of federal fund reimbursements.
Analysis
MCPA did not ensure the ASO resolved rejected behavioral health claims timely,
resulting in the payment of potentially improper claims and the loss of federal
fund reimbursements totaling $768,000, a portion of which occurred after MCPA
assumed responsibility for ASO oversight. The ASO pays providers using a
State-funded bank account, after which the claims are recorded in MMIS II for
recovery of the federal share of the cost. MMIS II rejects claims for various
reasons, such as when the client or provider were not eligible on the date of
service or when the claim is a duplicate claim. The ASO is responsible for
investigating the cause of the rejections and either resubmitting a corrected claim
30

--- Page 33 ---
or recovering the payment from the provider. Although MCPA held regular
meetings with the ASO to identify, investigate, and resolve rejected claims, these
efforts were not sufficient to ensure that all rejected claims were resolved.
In March 2016, the ASO provided a summary report to MCPA detailing claims
totaling approximately $1.5 million paid during the period from September 24,
2009 to March 11, 2014, that were rejected for federal reimbursement by MMIS
II. These claims exceeded the two-year period available to recover the 50 percent
federal financial participation and, as a result, the State has lost federal
reimbursements of $768,000 even if the claims are determined to be proper. At
least $237,000 of this lost federal reimbursement occurred after January 1, 2015
(that is, the related claims became two years old after January 1, 2015), the date
MCPA assumed responsibility for the ASO. Although the contract with the ASO
provides some recourse if the ASO does not resolve denied claims timely, no
attempts had been made by MCPA to recover the lost funds.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MCPA
a. enhance processes to ensure that all rejected claims are investigated,
resolved, and resubmitted in a timely manner;
b. ensure that the ASO recovers any amounts due from providers for
rejected claims; and
c. determine the feasibility of recovering any lost funds from the ASO.
Finding 11
Access controls over the ASO’s servers hosting the portal and the web-server
software were inadequate, intrusion detection prevention system coverage
did not exist for encrypted traffic, and sensitive PII was stored without
adequate safeguards.
Analysis
Access controls over the ASO’s servers hosting the portal and the web-server
software were inadequate, intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage
did not exist for encrypted traffic, and sensitive PII was stored without adequate
safeguards.
 The portal’s default user account had unnecessary modification access to
133,135 files within the website’s Document Root. As a result of this
condition, the web applications associated with this portal were unnecessarily
exposed to security risks and attacks which could disrupt website functionality
and expose member data. The ASO’s Provider and Member web applications
31

--- Page 34 ---
operated on a web server which used web-server software. These applications
were accessible via the ASO’s portal website. Information presented by the
portal website is stored in files within what is known as the Document Root.
 IDPS coverage did not exist for virtually all untrusted encrypted traffic
entering the ASO’s network. Specifically, we determined that IDPS coverage
did not exist for 78 of 79 internal locations receiving encrypted traffic from
untrusted sources such as providers. Strong network security uses a layered
approach, relying on various resources structured according to assessed
network security risks. Complete IDPS coverage includes, when there is
encrypted traffic, the use of a network-based IDPS that is supplemented
(where necessary) with host-based intrusion prevention to aid significantly in
the detection/prevention of, and response to, potential network security
breaches and attacks. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report dated September 18, 2014 for MHA.
 The ASO stored sensitive PII, relating to Maryland members, in clear text.
The ASO stored Maryland member PII (including full names, social security
numbers, and dates of birth) for over 2,300,000 unique individuals in clear
text within a master file and 24 separate database tables. We further noted
that the sensitive information stored in the master file was not masked or
truncated when system users accessed this data. This sensitive PII, which is
commonly associated with identity theft, should be protected by appropriate
information system security controls.
Best practice guidelines from the State of Maryland Information Security
Policy require each State agency to protect confidential data using encryption
technologies and/or other substantial mitigating controls. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report for MHA.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MCPA
a. request that the ASO identify and restrict all unnecessary default user
account file modification access within the web server for the ASO portal;
b. request that the ASO implement necessary IDPS coverage for encrypted
traffic entering its network (repeat); and
c. require that the ASO encrypt all files and database objects containing
Maryland members’ PII, and mask or truncate social security numbers
applicable to Maryland members from online users that do not need to
see the full number (repeat).
32

--- Page 35 ---
Program Oversight – Dental Benefits
Background
MCPA contracts with a dental benefits administrator (DBA) to administer, under
one fee-for-service program, dental services for children enrolled in Medicaid and
the Children’s Health Insurance Program, pregnant women enrolled in Medicaid,
and adults enrolled in the Rare and Expensive Case Management program. The
DBA is responsible for maintaining a network of providers to provide dental
benefits to eligible recipients and is responsible for ensuring that claims submitted
by these providers are proper, including conducting periodic audits.
As of June 30, 2015, there were approximately 616,000 recipients enrolled in the
dental benefits programs. During fiscal year 2015, the DBA paid the providers
for services totaling approximately $162.5 million using a State-funded bank
account, and MCPA paid the DBA $3.4 million in administrative fees. The
contract with the former DBA ended December 31, 2015, and MCPA entered into
a contract with a new DBA effective January 1, 2016.
Finding 12
MCPA did not ensure that the former DBA was properly administering the
dental benefits program and was conducting required provider audits, and
did not ensure bank accounts were reconciled, and sensitive data were
secured.
Analysis
MCPA did not properly monitor the former DBA to ensure it was properly
administering the dental benefits program. MCPA’s contract with the current
DBA has similar requirements and risks as the former contract, and MCPA needs
to maintain proper oversight of the current DBA.
MCPA Did Not Conduct Audits of the DBA
Although the contract required the DBA to submit to a yearly audit by an
independent review agent contracted by MCPA, no such audits were conducted
during the contract period (July 1, 2009 through December 31, 2015). The
contract requires the audit to encompass all major aspects of the administration of
the dental program, including claims payments to providers, to determine if the
DBA is meeting its contractual requirements.
MCPA Did Not Monitor DBA Provider Audits
MCPA did not adequately monitor the quantity or quality of provider audits
performed by the DBA. Specifically, MCPA could not readily determine the
number of audits conducted by the DBA and did not review the auditing
33

--- Page 36 ---
procedures to ensure they were comprehensive. While the contract did not
specify a required number of audits be performed, in response to our request,
MCPA determined that, during fiscal year 2015, the DBA conducted audits of
only 32 of the 1,354 providers participating in the dental program as of August
2014.
MCPA Did Not Ensure the DBA Investigated Rejected Claims
MCPA did not ensure the DBA resolved claims submitted by the DBA and
rejected by MMIS II edits. According to MCPA records as of June 30, 2015,
there were approximately $800,000 in denied claims awaiting DBA resolution,
including $393,000 in claims that were more than two years old that were no
longer eligible for the 50 percent (or $196,500) federal reimbursement. To the
extent that these State-funded claims could not be recovered from the providers or
recovered from the former DBA, the State would fully absorb the costs of the
improper claims. In this regard, in consultation with its legal counsel, MCPA
withheld the final administrative payments due to the former DBA for November
2015 and December 2015 totaling approximately $530,000 for unresolved
rejected claims. Subsequently we were advised that, after MCPA took additional
actions to pay some of these claims, the DBA ultimately reimbursed MCPA
approximately $183,000 to settle the remaining rejected claims. After receiving
this reimbursement, MCPA released the previously withheld administrative
payments to the former DBA.
The DBA pays the providers for services from a State-funded bank account and
periodically submits an automated file of these paid claims to MCPA for
recording in MMIS II for recovery of the federal share of the cost. MMIS II
rejects claims for various reasons, such as when the client or provider were not
eligible on the date of service or when the claim is a duplicate claim. The DBA is
responsible for investigating the cause of the rejections and either resubmitting a
corrected claim or recovering the payment from the provider. MCPA
management advised us that MCPA personnel met regularly with the DBA to
attempt to resolve these outstanding rejected claims, but these efforts were not
sufficient to ensure rejected claims were resolved.
MCPA Did Not Monitor the State Bank Account Used by the DBA
MCPA did not ensure that the DBA appropriately accounted for funds in the State
bank account. MCPA received a $10 million advance to maintain a State bank
account that was used by the DBA to pay dental claims. Our review disclosed
that MCPA did not pursue significant unaccounted for funds noted on the monthly
fund compositions. For example, the composition for the month ending June 30,
2015 identified unaccounted funds totaling approximately $570,000. After
further refinement of its process, by August 2016 MCPA was ultimately able to
account for all funds in the State bank account. Furthermore, bank reconciliations
34

--- Page 37 ---
prepared by the DBA were not signed or dated and did not include sufficient
support to enable MCPA to verify the results.
MCPA Did Not Ensure the DBA Safeguarded Sensitive Data
MCPA did not require or obtain comprehensive, independent reviews of the
DBA’s system to ensure sensitive data, including personally identifiable
information such as social security numbers, were properly safeguarded. The
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance for
various reviews of service organizations such as a SOC 2 Type 2 review. A SOC
2 Type 2 review includes a review of controls placed in operation and tests of
operating effectiveness for the period under review, and would provide MCPA
with assurance as to the propriety of the design and operation of critical controls,
including those related to the safeguarding of sensitive data. Because of the
nature and sensitivity of the information contained in the DBA system, we believe
a SOC 2 Type 2 report would be appropriate.
In response to our request, the DBA provided MCPA with a SOC 1, Type 2 report
that covered the period from October 1, 2013 through September 30, 2014.
However, this review was not current when provided to us and was limited in
scope in that it did not provide assurance that the DBA’s system security,
availability, processing integrity, data confidentiality, and privacy was adequate.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MCPA
a. conduct, or contract with an independent contractor to conduct, a
comprehensive annual audit of the DBA to ensure compliance with all
contractual requirements;
b. ensure that the DBA properly and timely resolves rejected federal fund
reimbursement claims;
c. ensure the DBA conducts the required provider audits and that the audits
are sufficient;
d. ensure that all bank reconciliations obtained from the DBA are dated,
signed, and properly supported; and
e. require the DBA to obtain a SOC 2 Type 2 review to ensure critical data
are properly safeguarded.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
MCPA uses a contractor for the operation and maintenance of the Electronic Data
Interchange Transaction Processing System (EDITPS), an Internet web-based
35

--- Page 38 ---
application that allows health care providers to electronically submit Medicaid
claims. After claims data have been received and subjected to limited edits, the
EDITPS application delivers the claims data to the MMIS II application, which
operates on the Annapolis Data Center (ADC), to complete claims processing and
payment. MCPA manages MMIS II’s application program development and
maintenance and uses the ADC’s security software to help secure MMIS II. In
addition, MCPA uses the MDH firewalls to protect critical EDITPS servers.
Finding 13
Sensitive PII within the EDITPS database was stored and transmitted
without adequate safeguards, and MCPA did not remediate 20 of the 21
reported security vulnerabilities identified in a consultant’s report on
EDITPS.
Analysis
Sensitive PII was stored and transmitted within the EDITPS database without
adequate safeguards, and MCPA did not remediate 20 of the 21 reported
information technology security vulnerabilities identified in a consultant’s report
on EDITPS.
 Sensitive PII within the EDITPS database was stored and transmitted in clear
text. Specifically, we determined that, as of September 14, 2015, the EDITPS
production database contained 1,725,324 unique social security numbers in
clear text along with full names, addresses, and dates of birth. In addition, we
determined that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial
mitigating controls. We further noted that the process used to transfer data
containing PII, from the EDITPS server to the ADC mainframe did not use
encryption.
This sensitive PII is commonly associated with identity theft. Accordingly,
appropriate information system security controls need to exist to ensure that
this information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed. The State of
Maryland Information Security Policy requires that agencies protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial
mitigating controls and must encrypt all media containing confidential
information during transmission.
 Our review disclosed that six months after a consultant issued its information
technology security report on EDITPS, only 1 of 21 reported vulnerabilities
identified by the consultant had been remediated; and, that as of August 2016
remediation efforts had ceased. Vulnerabilities included in this report
included use of outdated and unsupported database software. The consultant’s
36

--- Page 39 ---
report stated that the outdated/unsupported software may contain
vulnerabilities that could be exploited by adversaries to compromise EDITPS
confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
Federal regulations require a biennial information technology security review
of EDITPS. In early fiscal year 2016, a consultant conducted an EDITPS risk
assessment to fulfill this security review requirement. A final report was
issued to MCPA on November 23, 2015 which detailed a total of 21 findings.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that MCPA
a. perform an inventory of its systems to identify all sensitive PII, determine
if it is necessary to retain this PII, and delete all unnecessary PII;
b. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls;
c. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected;
d. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII in transit;
and
e. ensure that all significant vulnerabilities cited in the aforementioned
consultant’s report are addressed and remediated in a timely manner and
that these efforts are documented and retained for future reference.
Interagency Agreement
Background
MCPA has a longstanding interagency agreement with the University of
Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) to assist with the HealthChoice program.
Under HealthChoice, MCPA makes specified monthly capitation payments to
private MCOs that provide services to Medicaid recipients, who each must enroll
in one of eight MCOs. The MCOs contract with health care professionals and
other entities (such as hospitals) to provide the necessary medical services to
enrollees. The MCO capitation payments vary by enrollee and are adjusted
annually based on the individual MCO expenditures and the enrollee’s risk
adjusted category (RAC). For example, for the last quarter of fiscal year 2015,
the rates paid for the Family and Children RAC in Baltimore City ranged from
$79 (RAC 1) to $1,639 (RAC 7), depending on demographics and level of
services. According to MCPA records, payments to MCOs totaled approximately
$4.5 billion during fiscal year 2015.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Under the interagency agreement, UMBC assists MCPA with the MCO capitation
rate-setting process and RAC placements, and provides system support. In July
2014, MCPA approved a five-year agreement with UMBC valued at
approximately $33 million.
Finding 14
MCPA did not obtain documentation to support labor and overhead charges
invoiced by UMBC, representing 72 percent of amounts billed during fiscal
year 2015 under the agreement.
Analysis
MCPA did not obtain and review documentation to support labor and overhead
charges invoiced by UMBC under its interagency agreement for assisting in the
MCO rate setting process for the HealthChoice program. Consequently, MCPA
did not verify the propriety of the invoiced amounts prior to payment. Labor and
overhead costs (which included salaries, wages, and fringe benefits), accounted
for approximately 72 percent of the total UMBC charges for fiscal year 2015 of
$6.2 million.
Our review of UMBC’s invoices
under the agreement disclosed
that the invoices only reflected a
summary total for each major
billing category (such as labor
and overhead, and indirect costs)
and a certification as to the
accuracy of those totals. MCPA
did not request or obtain
documentation from UMBC to
support these summary charges.
Such documentation should
include the specific UMBC employees who worked on MCPA projects, their
hourly rates, and the number of hours worked.
Although UMBC provided several reports with additional information, such as
the names of employees assigned to MCPA projects and a project budget listing
employee salaries, these reports were not in any way correlated to the amounts
invoiced. Furthermore, since indirect costs were billed at 28 percent of modified
direct costs (which included labor and overhead), the propriety of the indirect
costs could also not be determined.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Recommendation 14
We recommend that MCPA obtain adequate documentation of labor and
overhead charges invoiced (such as timesheets and salary information) and
use that documentation to verify the accuracy of charges billed by UMBC
prior to payment.
Finding 15
MCPA did not authorize UMBC to transmit sensitive Medicaid protected
health information to a third-party vendor for data storage and did not
ensure UMBC executed a data-sharing agreement with this vendor as
required by federal regulation.
Analysis
MCPA did not authorize UMBC to transmit sensitive Medicaid enrollee medical
data to an information management vendor for off-site data back-up and storage.
MCPA also did not ensure that UMBC executed a data-sharing agreement with
this vendor, as required by federal regulation. MCPA shares sensitive health
records with UMBC, including encounter and diagnostic records for all Medicaid
enrollees, which UMBC needs in its responsibility to establish MCO capitation
rates. These medical data are considered protected health information (PHI) as
defined by the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA).
According to its interagency agreement, UMBC may share these data with third
parties only after MCPA provides written approval, and a data sharing agreement,
known as a Business Associate Agreement (BAA), is executed between UMBC
and the third party. The BAA is required by the interagency agreement to outline
permitted uses of PHI, prohibits the use of information for any other purpose not
stated in the agreement, and requires the entity to use appropriate safeguards to
prevent any unintended disclosure of the information.
After our June 2016 request, MCPA provided documentation of a BAA between
UMBC and its information management vendor, signed by the two parties on
May 20, 2016, which was almost two years after the effective date of the current
agreement (July 1, 2014) between MCPA and UMBC. MCPA did not document
its approval of the BAA.
Under HIPAA, MCPA could be liable for the acts of its agents, including business
associates. In addition to the risks of improper disclosure of PHI, MCPA could be
subject to penalties ranging from $100 to $50,000 for each incident (depending on
the incident category), with a calendar year maximum of $1.5 million for a single
39

--- Page 42 ---
incident category. The Maryland Confidentiality of Medical Records Act also
provides for civil and criminal penalties for violations, including prohibited
disclosure of protected information.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that MCPA
a. document its written approval for all data sharing arrangements between
UMBC and applicable third parties, including the aforementioned BAA;
and
b. ensure UMBC has entered into BAAs with all applicable third parties, as
required by federal regulations.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Medical Care Programs
Administration (MCPA) of the Maryland Department of Health for the period
beginning July 1, 2012 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MCPA’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal fund reimbursements, managed care
organizations, administrative service organizations, enrollee eligibility, long-term
care, hospital services, post-payment verifications, cash receipts, and information
systems. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding
audit report. Finally, because of a Department reorganization, we determined the
status of four of the findings included in our audit report of the former Mental
Hygiene Administration (MHA), dated September 18, 2014.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MCPA by the
Department. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, contract
procurement, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Department’s Office of the Secretary
and Other Units. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal
controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of MCPA’s compliance with those laws
and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
MCPA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MCPA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. In addition, we extracted data from the Medicaid
Management Information System (MMIS II) for the purpose of selecting test
items and assessing user access. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in
this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MCPA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MCPA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MCPA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
42

--- Page 45 ---
As a result of our audit, we determined that MCPA’s accountability and
compliance level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the
unsatisfactory rating were the significance of our audit findings, and the number
of repeat findings from preceding reports. Our rating conclusion has been made
solely pursuant to State law and rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit
Committee. The rating process is not a practice prescribed by professional
auditing standards.
The Department’s response, on behalf of MCPA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
43

--- Page 47 ---
Recipient Enrollment
Finding 1
MCPA did not assign a temporary enrollment status to 11,153 new enrollees,
resulting in delays in placing individuals in MCOs. Such delays, which were
allegedly caused by a computer compatibility issue, resulted in certain
associated claims being paid on a fee-for-service basis that would have been
paid by an MCO.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCPA
a. take the appropriate action to ensure the compatibility of the MMIS II
and HBX software; and
b. implement monitoring procedures to ensure all eligible HealthChoice
enrollees are placed in an MCO within 28 days. For example, MCPA
should run periodic queries of recipients not enrolled in MCOs after 28
days, investigate the status of each recipient, and place each in an MCO if
warranted.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. A monthly report is generated that identifies
MCO eligible recipients who have not been assigned to an MCO. The system
was modified in 2014 and 2015 to correct the defects.
b. The Administration concurs. Beginning in July 2016, monthly reports are run
of HealthChoice eligible recipients not enrolled in an MCO after 28 days.
These reports are reviewed by our Enrollment Unit to ensure those recipients
who are not given an enrollment span are legitimate. All reports are retained
for auditing purposes.
Finding 2
The current memoranda of understanding (MOUs) with DHS and MHBE
are not sufficient to ensure that eligibility determinations are timely and
proper.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPA modify the MOUs with DHS and MHBE to
require
a. quality control procedures be established,
b. the aforementioned longstanding deficiencies be addressed (repeat),
c. specific steps be taken when fraud or abuse is identified, and
d. corrective action be taken when deficiencies with eligibility
determinations are identified.
1

--- Page 48 ---
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. The Administration will work with MHBE to
modify the MOU by July 2018.
b. The Administration concurs. The Administration will work with DHS and
MHBE to modify MOUs by July 2018.
c. The Administration concurs. The Administration will work to modify MOUs
by July 2018.
d. The Administration concurs. The Administration will work with MHBE to
modify the MOU by July 2018.
Finding 3
MCPA did not take timely follow-up action on questionable enrollee
eligibility information it identified and did not ensure that critical eligibility
information was properly recorded on MMIS II. Our test disclosed certain
overpayments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPA
a. conduct timely and documented follow-up of potentially ineligible
recipients and recipients with missing social security numbers, and
ensure their prompt resolution;
b. generate monthly reports of discrepancies between MMIS II and HBX
regarding whether recipients were active or deceased;
c. promptly resolve all discrepancies identified in recipient data recorded in
MMIS II and CARES or HBX and document follow-up actions taken;
d. establish procedures to ensure changes to critical recipient eligibility
information recorded in MMIS II are subject to supervisory review and
approval, at least on a test basis;
e. develop a mechanism to monitor the timeliness of eligibility changes made
by DHS staff;
f. review the aforementioned improper claim payments, and take
appropriate corrective action, including recovery of overpayments;
g. document its efforts to monitor the timeliness of eligibility
redeterminations and the related follow-up efforts; and
h. monitor individuals enrolled in age-specific coverage groups and
document the related corrective actions.
2

--- Page 49 ---
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs in part. The federal government prohibits state
Medicaid agencies from efforts that “deny or delay services for an otherwise
eligible individual pending issuance of verification of the individual’s social
security number (SSN) by the Social Security Administration (SSA) or if the
individual meets one of the exceptions” 42 CFR 435.910 (f). Three
exceptions are listed at sec. 435.910(h): A Medicaid beneficiary is not
required to have a SSN if, like many recipients of Emergency Medical
Services who are undocumented aliens, the individual is not eligible to receive
one. Second, an individual who does not have a SSN and can only obtain one
for a “valid non-work reason” can get a Medicaid number without a SSN.
There is also an exception for individuals with “well-established religious
objections.” Due to these federal exceptions to the SSN requirement, and
relaxation of the former federal requirements that each recipient have a SSN,
we can expect to see large numbers of recipients who lack an SSN for a matter
of months or during the 90-day reasonable opportunity period, and the small
number who are never required to have an SSN as a condition for receiving
Medicaid. The MHC continues to implement system enhancements to ensure
that recipients’ cases close if they do not provide a SSN within the required
timeline. System enhancements will continue through 2018.
b. The Administration concurs. The Administration implemented reports in June
2016 to confirm and update cases where applicants are found to be deceased.
c. The Administration concurs. Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) will be
established and implemented by March 2018.
d. The Administration concurs. SOPs will be established and implemented by
March 2018.
e. The Administration concurs. The Administration will develop an audit
process to monitor and ensure that coverage group changes by DHS are
processed timely. The Administration will implement this process by March
2018.
f. The Administration concurs. MCPA has investigated the cases mentioned and
has recovered any appropriate overpayments.
g. The Administration concurs.
h. The Administration concurs.
Finding 4
MCPA did not take timely action to ensure recipients age 65 or older had
applied for Medicare as required by State regulations.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPA
a. establish a process to ensure recipients age 65 or older have applied for
Medicare on a timely basis, as required by State regulations (repeat); and
3

--- Page 50 ---
b. ensure that DHS terminates the eligibility of recipients who do not reply
to Medicare outreach efforts, as appropriate.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. DHS is now handling this process and has
developed a Corrective Action Plan/Standard Operating Procedure to handle
outreach timely. The Administration continues to make significant progress
in assuring that applicants apply for Medicare benefits; yet, there are
circumstances where recipients 65 years and older do not meet Medicare
eligibility requirements, so it is appropriate for Medicaid to pay these claims
in full.
The state regulation is that the customer age 65 or older must apply for and
accept any benefits that they may be eligible for; however, there are factors
that contribute to the fact that not all Medicaid recipients over 65 will meet
Medicare eligibility.
An applicant must present proof from the Social Security Administration the
applicant has filed. Although the applicant is required to apply for Medicare
Part A, there is no requirement to purchase this benefit; persons may not be
eligible for free Part A coverage. Nevertheless, applicants 65 or older must
apply for, but may reject this coverage if payment cannot be made.
b. The Administration concurs. Auditing functions will be implemented by
March 2018.
Finding 5
MCPA did not ensure that all reports of potential third-party health
insurance for Medicaid recipients were received and properly investigated in
a timely manner.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPA
a. require MHBE to submit reports of possible third-party insurance on a
monthly basis;
b. establish initial accountability over all insurance referrals received and
ensure all are properly investigated in a timely manner, in accordance
with federal regulations (repeat); and
c. conduct documented monthly supervisory reviews of investigative efforts
to ensure appropriate conclusions were reached (repeat) and the
insurance status was properly recorded in MMIS II.
4

--- Page 51 ---
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. Since this audit, the Administration has
established a process with MHBE where MHBE is sending TPL referrals to
the Division of Recoveries and Financial Services (DRAFS) in the same
format as Child Support Services Agency (CSEA).
b. The Administration concurs. By working with referral sources to reduce and
eliminate duplicate referrals, the Administration will be better able to timely
verify insurance information. MCPA is including TPL identification and
verification in the RFP currently being drafted for the new TPL contract to
begin July 1, 2018.
c. The Administration concurs. Supervisors are now performing monthly audits
to ensure that the work being done is timely and correct, and properly
recorded in MMIS II. MCPA is including TPL identification and verification
in the RFP currently being drafted for the new TPL contract to begin
July 1, 2018. Documentation related to the monthly audits will be retained for
future audits.
Finding 6
MCPA did not always assess damages against its MCO enrollment broker
which continuously failed to meet minimum enrollment levels required by
the contract.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MCPA assess damages when the enrollment broker
does not achieve the contractually required level of performance (repeat).
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs. MCPA did assess damages of approximately
$900,000 for VER shortfalls for the period of July 1, 2008-December 31, 2012 in
response to a prior OLA audit finding.
Beginning in January 2013, despite diligent efforts by the Broker to achieve the
contractually required level of performance, MCPA did assess applicable invoice
withholds as per the certified penalty tables for the period of January 2013-April
2013. For the period of July 2013-September 2013, MCPA granted the Broker a
service level waiver (SLA) including the VER requirement due to the unexpected
exit of a managed care plan from the HealthChoice program. The Broker was
tasked with enrolling all affected recipients from the exiting plan to another
managed care organization within 90 days.
Beginning in December 2013, MCPA transitioned approximately 90,000
recipients from the Primary Adult Care (PAC) program to the HealthChoice
program as part of the Medicaid expansion through the Affordable Care Act
(ACA). Again, the broker was tasked with transitioning recipients from PAC
5

--- Page 52 ---
Managed Care Organizations (MCOs) to HealthChoice MCOs. Subsequently,
MCPA granted the Broker a SLA waiver for the month of December 2013.
With the advent of the ACA on January 1, 2014 and under the terms of Contract
Modification #7 for the period for December 30, 2013 to December 31, 2014, the
Broker was granted an SLA waiver related to the emergency circumstances for
the work added by Modification #7. The waiver remained in effect until April
2014. Modification #7 in the amount of $2,000,000 was sought because of
technical problems plaguing the Health Information Exchange (HIX), an
eligibility and enrollment system operated by the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange, a large number of newly eligible Medicaid recipients who were
anticipated to receive assistance with their MCO choice through the HIX instead
required assistance through the Broker to select their MCO. As a result, the
modification provided increased services on a time and materials basis to those
recipients who were unable to select an MCO using the HIX. The Broker was
required to provide the following additional services:
1. Enrollment packet mailings.
2. Customer Service Representative services related to new enrollments who
were unable to select an MCO in the HIX.
3. Customer Service Representative services related to the new PAC annual right
to choose period from January 2014 through April 2014, and
4. Ancillary call center services including phone line capacity and other call
center infrastructure.
At the end of the waiver period in April 2014 and throughout Fiscal year 2015,
the Broker continued to receive a substantial increase in the number of newly
eligible Medicaid recipients to enroll. More specifically, there were several
months during this period in which the Broker received a 60% increase in the
number of recipients they were required to enroll which far exceeded enrollment
assumptions. Subsequently, the VER was only achieved for one month in FY
2015 as referenced in the auditor’s findings. SLA waivers were granted for the
remaining months.
It should also be noted on April 1, 2014, the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
approved a resolution to adopt the Connecticut Exchange Platform referred to as
“HBX” as the eligibility and enrollment system for the MHC to replace the failing
HIX. The HBX was adopted “as is” and only minor changes to notices, system
interfaces and branding were possible to meet the goal of implementation by
November 15, 2014. Once again, the functionality to enable Medicaid eligible
individuals to shop, select and enroll into an MCO did not exist and as such,
MCPA required the Broker to assist an increased number of recipients with
selecting an MCO.
Fiscal years 2014 and 2015 proved to be very challenging for enrolling eligible
recipients into the Medicaid Program. More specifically, the ACA created an
unanticipated number of eligible recipients, eligibility system transitions,
6

--- Page 53 ---
technical glitches and system inefficiencies in the HIX and HBX led to the
development of system workarounds and forced the Broker to make modifications
to automated processes, two MCOs joined the HealthChoice program and one
MCO exited the Program. These initiatives significantly impacted the Broker’s
ability to meet the contract requirements and metrics. The Broker has continued
to work diligently with MCPA and has made good faith efforts to meet the needs
of the Program. As such, MCPA is hereby waiving its right to seek damages for
failure to meet service level metrics including the VER requirement under RFP
Section 2.2.D.2 and 2.2.D.5 for the referenced months. It should be noted, formal
correspondence granting the referenced monthly SLA waivers were issued to the
Broker and copies were shared with the Auditor’s during the review period and
are available upon request. Please also note, the VER requirement no longer
remains in the current contract since consumers are able to enroll online.
Program Oversight - Hospitals and Long-Term Care (LTC)
Providers
Finding 7
MCPA has not conducted required audits of hospital claims processed since
calendar year 2007.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MCPA
a. ensure that hospital claims are audited in a timely manner (repeat), and
b. notify hospitals to retain claims data until audited.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. Between 2012 and 2017 the Administration
made numerous efforts to obtain a qualified Recovery Audit Contractor
(RAC) that meets federal requirements, including four separate requests for
proposal (RFPs). Three of the RFPs returned no qualified applicants. An
RFP issued in 2014 led to the award of a contract to a RAC in July 2015;
unfortunately, the vendor failed to meet the contractual requirements. After
numerous unsuccessful efforts to get the vendor into compliance, the contract
was terminated in November 2016. Federal regulations set the requirements
for the selection and reimbursement of RACs. The reimbursement is
contingency based and the contingency percentage is limited by federal
regulations. In addition, Maryland does not permit the results of audit
samples to be extrapolated to the entire audit universe. Thus, vendors do not
view RAC contracts as financially profitable. To address this issue, the
Administration has again made contact with CMS, with the goal of obtaining
relief from the federal contingency-fee RAC ceilings. Pending the outcome of
these discussions, the Administration may develop an alternative approach to
7

--- Page 54 ---
obtaining the required audits. Expected completion date for establishing a
plan for timely audits, is October 2017.
b. The Administration concurs. Such notification will be made to the hospitals
no later than September 2017.
Finding 8
MCPA did not adequately monitor the vendors responsible for conducting
credit balance audits and utilization reviews of long-term care facilities
and/or hospitals.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MCPA ensure that
a. credit balance audits are performed for all facilities, are sufficiently
comprehensive, and cover claims processed in all fiscal years, and;
b. the utilization control agent conducts proper continued stay and medical
eligibility reviews of LTC facilities, at least on a test basis.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. The Administration will monitor the contractor
auditing the facilities in accordance with the terms of the RFP/contract to
ensure the audits are sufficiently comprehensive and cover claims processed
in all fiscal years. Documentation pertaining to the specific audits will be
maintained.
b. The Administration concurs. The MCPA monitors the UCA based on
monthly reports, conducts biweekly random audits of decisions, and meets
with the UCA bi-weekly to discuss any discrepancies. In addition, a clinical
team made up of doctors and nurses from both the Administration and the
UCA meet monthly to review all resident cases to identify length of stay and
discharge expectations.
For LTC nursing facilities, the Administration audits monthly invoices for
timeliness of reviews, accuracy of clinical decisions, duplication of reviews,
and ensures appropriate letters and follow-up was conducted. All reviews not
meeting these requirements are denied.
8

--- Page 55 ---
Program Oversight – Behavioral Health
Finding 9
MCPA did not monitor the ASO to ensure that deficiencies noted during
provider audits conducted by the ASO were corrected and related
overpayments were recovered.
Recommendation 9
We recommend the MCPA maintain a record of deficiencies and
overpayments noted during the provider audits and ensure corrective action
is taken and documented, including recovery of any overpayments.
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs. Upon receipt of responsibility for monitoring the
contract, the MCPA Behavioral Health Unit in collaboration with the Behavioral
Health Administration implemented a tracking document which is shared among
responsible parties and managed by MCPA to closely monitor
recoveries. Documentation will continue to be maintained to support the audits
performed by the ASO.
Finding 10
MCPA did not ensure the ASO resolved rejected behavioral health claims
timely, resulting in the payment of potentially improper claims and the loss
of federal fund reimbursements.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MCPA
a. enhance processes to ensure that all rejected claims are investigated,
resolved, and resubmitted in a timely manner;
b. ensure that the ASO recovers any amounts due from providers for
rejected claims; and
c. determine the feasibility of recovering any lost funds from the ASO.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. The Administration receives weekly reports on
claims that were processed through the ASO, but rejected by MMIS. These
reports have been refined to include communication workflow and to identify
9

--- Page 56 ---
specific tasks to reconcile the claims. The Administration and the ASO work
collaboratively to ensure that all denied claims are investigated, resolved, and
resubmitted in a timely manner. This includes maintaining a tracking log and
email confirmation of completions of resubmissions.
b. The Administration concurs. If there was loss of match that was the
responsibility of the provider, MCPA would recoup funds from the provider.
c. The Administration concurs. MCPA recovered the Federal match from the
ASO as per the contract, any loss resulting from ASO error is the
responsibility of the ASO.
Finding 11
Access controls over the ASO’s servers hosting the portal and the web-server
software were inadequate, intrusion detection prevention system coverage
did not exist for encrypted traffic, and sensitive PII was stored without
adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MCPA
a. request that the ASO identify and restrict all unnecessary default user
account file modification access within the web server for the ASO portal;
b. request that the ASO implement necessary IDPS coverage for encrypted
traffic entering its network (repeat); and
c. require that the ASO encrypt all files and database objects containing
Maryland members’ PII, and mask or truncate social security numbers
applicable to Maryland members from online users that do not need to
see the full number (repeat).
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. On May 9, 2017, the ASO implemented controls
to identify and restrict all unnecessary default user account file modification
access within the Web server.
b. The Administration concurs. The ASO is completing a Proof of Concept to
enable cloud based web application firewall capabilities. Upon completion of
the Proof of Concept the ASO will make a determination to implement either
a cloud based web application firewall solution or an on premise Web
Application Solution to inspect all encrypted traffic.
c. The Administration concurs. The ASO migrated all data to a new data center
on May 9, 2017 where all information is stored on encrypted SAN that
provides full encryption of all Maryland Data. All data from internal disks
were moved to the encrypted SAN in this new Data Center.
10

--- Page 57 ---
Program Oversight – Dental Benefits
Finding 12
MCPA did not ensure that the former DBA was properly administering the
dental benefits program and was conducting required provider audits, and
did not ensure bank accounts were reconciled, and sensitive data were
secured.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MCPA
a. conduct, or contract with an independent contractor to conduct, a
comprehensive annual audit of the DBA to ensure compliance with all
contractual requirements;
b. ensure that the DBA properly and timely resolves rejected federal fund
reimbursement claims;
c. ensure the DBA conducts the required provider audits and that the audits
are sufficient;
d. ensure that all bank reconciliations obtained from the DBA are dated,
signed, and properly supported; and
e. require the DBA to obtain a SOC 2 Type 2 review to ensure critical data
are properly safeguarded.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. We have decided to implement a more proactive
solution. Instead of an annual after-the-fact audit, the Administration has
employed a dedicated staff person to validate that the Dental Vendor meets all
contractual obligations throughout the year; this allows the contract monitor to
ensure compliance on an ongoing basis.
b. The Administration concurs. The Administration meets weekly with the new
Dental Vendor to ensure timely resolution of denied claims. On a weekly
basis, the vendor sends a file of rejected claims that they have resolved, as
well as lists of claims that they cannot resolve. The Administration is in the
process of developing a more formalized response to the rejected claims from
the DBA.
c. The Administration concurs. The Administration, in collaboration with the
Dental Vendor, has developed an audit plan and the Contract Monitor reviews
the plan weekly. During the weekly call with the Dental Vendor all ongoing
audits are discussed and updates noted. The Administration has collaborated
with the Vendor to develop a tracker of all audits. The tracker is reviewed on a
weekly basis.
d. The Administration concurs. The Administration has informed the Dental
Vendor that all bank reconciliations must be signed, dated and have any
11

--- Page 58 ---
supporting documentation attached that would be needed to confirm the
reconciliation amounts.
e. The Administration concurs. As required by the contract, a SOC 2 Type 2
audit is completed annually. The DBA submitted the CY2016 SOC 2 audit to
the Administration in May 2017.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 13
Sensitive PII within the EDITPS database was stored and transmitted
without adequate safeguards, and MCPA did not remediate 20 of the 21
reported security vulnerabilities identified in a consultant’s report on
EDITPS.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that MCPA
a. perform an inventory of its systems to identify all sensitive PII, determine
if it is necessary to retain this PII, and delete all unnecessary PII;
b. determine if all necessary PII is properly protected by encryption or
other substantial mitigating controls;
c. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII not
otherwise properly protected;
d. use approved encryption methods to encrypt all sensitive PII in transit;
and
e. ensure that all significant vulnerabilities cited in the aforementioned
consultant’s report are addressed and remediated in a timely manner and
that these efforts are documented and retained for future reference.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. An inventory of the system, database, and other
data stores has been conducted to identify all sensitive PII/PHI information.
The Administration has determined that it is necessary to retain the PII/PHI
data to perform the functions EDITPS is tasked to execute such as, but not
limited to, eligibility verification, claims and encounter processing, eligibility,
Department of Corrections matching, etc. The inventory was performed
during initial design and development of EDTIPS to support the HIPAA
mandate and HIPAA Privacy Rule.
b. The Administration concurs with the recommendation but not the finding. The
EDITPS PII/PHI data is protected by substantial mitigating controls such as
but not limited to secured physical access to the server room, locked and
secured computer rack, data is stored on a SAN RAID-5 configuration – only
the SQL Server is configured to access that LUN where this data is stored.
12

--- Page 59 ---
compromised. Also, if EDIPTS was compromised, the encrypted data would
not prevent access to an adversary.
Auditor’s Comment: The items mentioned by MCPA as providing data
protection do not constitute substantial mitigating controls. During
previous discussions with MCPA personnel on this issue, we identified
various scenarios for which encryption would be beneficial. As a result,
MCPA had agreed to research the use of encryption for PII.
c. The Administration concurs. Use of approved encryption methods are in
place for PII/PHI data that is at rest for backups at off-site secure storage. All
other PII/PHI data is properly protected.
d. The Administration does not concur. Use of approved encryption methods to
encrypt all sensitive PII/PHI is in place for files sent or received outside of the
MDH Network. As to PII/PHI data transmitted between EDITPS and
Annapolis Data Center (ADC) mainframe, the data is transmitted over the
private State network. Using software that employs file access controls and
proprietary data compression (the data is unreadable) for file transfer to ADC.
The network is a private closed network therefore traffic does not travel
through the public internet. Consideration should be made at a State level to
upgrade to an encrypted network rather than by each agency.
Auditor’s Comment: While the State network is a private network, it
should not be assumed that the State agency and various contractors who
operate the network are trusted entities. During previous discussions with
MCPA personnel on this issue, MCPA agreed to encrypt data in transit.
e. The Administration concurs. All significant vulnerabilities cited in the
aforementioned consultant’s report have been addressed and some of the
remediation efforts are still being worked. The recommendations and
remediations are documented and retained for future reference.
Interagency Agreement
Finding 14
MCPA did not obtain documentation to support labor and overhead charges
invoiced by UMBC, representing 72 percent of amounts billed during fiscal
year 2015 under the agreement.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that MCPA obtain adequate documentation of labor and
overhead charges invoiced (such as timesheets and salary information) and
13

--- Page 60 ---
use that documentation to verify the accuracy of charges billed by UMBC
prior to payment.
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs. Beginning in FY18, the Administration will
periodically request and review payroll expenditure reports to verify information
such as the specific UMBC employees who worked on MCPA’s projects, their
hourly rates, and the number of hours worked. Grant Summary Reports and
Grant Detail Reports are also now submitted monthly by UMBC in addition to
semi-annual reports.
Finding 15
MCPA did not authorize UMBC to transmit sensitive Medicaid protected
health information to a third-party vendor for data storage and did not
ensure UMBC executed a data-sharing agreement with this vendor as
required by federal regulation.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that MCPA
a. document its written approval for all data sharing arrangements between
UMBC and applicable third parties, including the aforementioned BAA;
and
b. ensure UMBC has entered into BAAs with all applicable third parties, as
required by federal regulations.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. The Administration is currently in compliance
with this recommendation. Contract provisions requiring written approval are
new to the current agreement, which became effective in FY15.
Additionally, the Administration formally amended its agreement with UMBC
effective October 14, 2016, to include a provision which directly addresses
UMBC’s ability to archive data at UMBC’s designated off-site backup storage
facility using its information management vendor.
b. The Administration concurs. The Administration has established a
comprehensive tracking system for all data exchanges between UMBC and
third parties. To support this endeavor, the Administration has developed a
new data use agreement template. All data use agreements are executed
jointly by the Administration, UMBC, and the third party. The execution of
multi-party agreements simplifies the tracking process and ensures all
necessary protections are in place.
14

--- Page 61 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Thomas L. Allen, III
Jaime A. DeWitt, CPA
Christopher J. Fowler
Mindy R. Garrett
Staff Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Robert H. Dean
Information Systems Staff Auditors