Title: Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration
Date: 04/20/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d72456067444a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:53:11.811367
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
April 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Federal Funds
Finding 1 – SHA Did Not Have Adequate Procedures to Resolve 6
Certain Highway Construction-Related Expenditures That Were
Suspended From the Federal Reimbursement Process
Contract Awards
Finding 2 – SHA Did Not Consistently Comply With Publication 7
Requirements for Maintenance and Construction Contract Awards
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Transportation Article, Section 8-201, of the Annotated Code of Maryland
establishes the State Highway Administration (SHA) in the Maryland Department
of Transportation. SHA is responsible for the planning, construction,
improvement, maintenance, and operations of the State highway system. SHA
operates numerous facilities throughout the State, including a headquarters in
Baltimore City and seven district offices. According to the State’s accounting
records, SHA’s fiscal year 2015 expenditures totaled approximately $1.6 billion.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Based on our assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives,
our audit included a review to determine the status of the 10 findings contained in
our preceding audit report on SHA dated November 15, 2012 as well as 8 of the
10 findings contained in our special reviews, dated June 24, 2011 and November
21, 2011. These special reviews were initiated as a result of allegations received
through our fraud hotline related to possible improprieties in the procurement and
monitoring of construction-related contracts. We determined that SHA
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Federal Funds
Finding 1
The State Highway Administration (SHA) did not have adequate procedures
to resolve certain highway construction-related expenditures that had been
suspended from the federal reimbursement process, and related efforts were
not documented.
Analysis
SHA did not have adequate procedures for reviewing highway construction-
related expenditures that had been suspended from the federal reimbursement
process in order to identify an allowable federal grant to which these expenditures
could be charged. SHA also did not document its investigative efforts and the
ultimate disposition of these expenditures. According to SHA’s records, as of
June 2015, expenditures in this suspense account totaled approximately $13.3
million. Total federal reimbursements in fiscal year 2015 were $564 million.
Highway construction-related expenditures were initially charged to the
Transportation Trust Fund, which was later reimbursed, in part, from the Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA). SHA recorded these expenditures in the
Maryland Department of Transportation’s Financial Management Information
System (MDOT FMIS) and requested weekly federal reimbursement for the
appropriate percentage of these expenditures, which varied depending on the
grant agreements. In certain instances, such as when the initially identified grant
budget was exceeded, MDOT FMIS recorded these expenditures in a suspense
account pending review by SHA personnel. Using MDOT FMIS suspense
summary reports, SHA employees subsequently reviewed these expenditures to
identify other available federal grants under which these expenditures were
permissible, so that reimbursement could be requested. However, SHA had not
established a formal approach for investigating all items on the summary report
that considered timeliness and significance and for documenting their disposition
and the related investigative efforts. As a result, certain expenditures remained
unreimbursed in the suspense account for extended periods of time and there was
a lack of assurance that all such expenditures were properly investigated and
resolved.
Our test of reimbursable expenditures totaling $3.2 million that we selected from
three of the aforementioned suspense summary reports dated between April and
December of 2013, disclosed that SHA did not document its work to investigate
whether it had other federal funds available to reimburse these expenditures.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Working with SHA, we determined that, for $2.5 million of these expenditures,
SHA had obtained reimbursement but such reimbursements did not occur until 5
to 28 months after the expenditures had been made. While SHA asserts that the
remaining expenditures, totaling $670,000, had been investigated and reimbursed,
it could not support this assertion since the investigation and disposition of these
expenditures were not documented. As of June 2015, these expenditures were
made at least 21 months earlier.
We were advised by FHWA officials that, because of the nature of highway
construction projects, expenditures and federal reimbursements may occur over a
number of years following the initial obligation of funds for a project.
Nevertheless, efforts should be made to obtain reimbursements as soon as
practical and adequate records should be maintained to ensure all reimbursable
expenses placed in a suspense account are reimbursed.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHA
a. establish and implement formal procedures that consider timeliness and
significance for reviewing expenditures that were suspended from the
federal fund reimbursement process, and
b. document the investigation and disposition of suspended expenditures.
Contract Awards
Finding 2
SHA did not consistently comply with publication requirements for
maintenance and construction contract awards.
Analysis
SHA did not consistently comply with publication requirements for maintenance
and construction contract awards. Our test of six construction contracts awarded
during fiscal years 2012 through 2014, totaling $101 million, disclosed that four
contract awards totaling $74 million were not published on eMaryland
Marketplace (eMM) within 30 days of the contract award as required by State
law. Three of these contract awards totaling $61 million were published between
2 and 20 months after the contract award dates. The fourth contract for $12.7
million was awarded on April 9, 2012 and had not been published on eMM as of
January 2016. Similarly, our test of eight maintenance contracts totaling $3.2
million that were awarded during the same period disclosed the SHA had not
published awards for six contracts totaling $3 million on eMM as of January 2016.
7

--- Page 10 ---
State procurement regulations require such awards for contracts greater than
$25,000 to be posted to eMM within 30 days.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SHA publish contract awards on eMaryland
Marketplace as required.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the State Highway
Administration (SHA) for the period beginning July 1, 2011 and ending August 6,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SHA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurement and disbursements for highway
design and construction and SHA’s operating expenditures, federal funds, speed
enforcement, payroll, and information systems. Our audit included certain
support services (such as processing of personnel transactions and maintenance of
employee leave records) provided by SHA to other units of the Maryland
Department of Transportation (MDOT). We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report and certain findings contained in
our special reviews of SHA dated June 24, 2011 and November 21, 2011.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of SHA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including SHA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SHA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
9

--- Page 12 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System and the Maryland Department of
Transportation’s Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and
expenditure data), and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as
from the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program
(credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal
processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to
various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted
from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit. We also extracted data from SHA’s Trns*port
construction management information system for the purpose of selecting contract
test items and assessing user access. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
SHA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SHA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to SHA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
10

--- Page 13 ---
The response from MDOT, on behalf of SHA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise SHA regarding the results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Draft Audit Responses
Report Period July 1, 2011-August 6, 2014
Finding 1
The State Highway Administration (SHA) did not have adequate procedures to resolve
certain highway construction-related expenditures that had been suspended from the
federal reimbursement process, and related efforts were not documented.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHA
a. establish and implement formal procedures that consider timeliness and significance for
reviewing expenditures that were suspended from the federal fund reimbursement process,
and
b. document the investigation and disposition of suspended expenditures.
MDOT Response:
a. We agree with the Auditor’s recommendation. Formal written procedures to review and
resolve the unbilled receivables will be completed by June 2016. The procedures will
include thresholds, criteria, and timeliness of the review, as well as, procedures mandated
under the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) highway construction program.
Modifications to a federal project must occur within FHWA’s Federal Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) in accordance with regulations enacted in support of the Federal
highway construction program.
It should be noted that all MDOT FMIS grant numbers cited in the Analysis have been
modified and were collected as of September 2015.
Since 2010, the SHA Director of Finance has held weekly/bi-weekly internal meetings with
Federal Aid staff to monitor the weekly “Preview – Federal Aid Billing Summary Progress
Report.” The focus of the meeting is to reduce the unbilled amount outstanding by initially
targeting MDOT FMIS grant numbers with outstanding balances of $100,000 or more. We
reduced the threshold for review to $50,000 during Federal Fiscal Year 2016. These criteria
will be included in the formal written procedures.
b. We agree with the Auditor’s recommendation. Staff in the Federal Aid section maintains
files for each federally funded project as required by FHWA. Within these files are all
actions taken within the Federal FMIS system, which includes the initial project
authorization, as well as, any modifications to the federal project. If an unbilled cost exists

--- Page 17 ---
within an MDOT FMIS grant number, a modification to the federal project or a new federal
project authorization must occur in order to resolve and seek reimbursement of the
outstanding amount. The modification or the new project request is documented in the
federal project file.
Each federal project is managed within the Federal Aid Sections in accordance with the terms
of the FHWA authorization agreement and within the Federal law. A billing cannot occur
until we are able to justify to FHWA why a modification should be approved or a new
project number is created to seek another source of federal funds (appropriation code).
Exchanges of information during meetings and emails are typically maintained
electronically, however, the final resolution and actions taken to resolve the unbilled amount
is documented in the federal project file. We will ensure that these exchanges of information
are maintained in the federal project file in support of the unbilled outstanding amount and
the resolution.
Finding 2
SHA did not consistently comply with publication requirements for maintenance and
construction contract awards.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SHA publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) as
required.
MDOT Response:
We agree with the Auditor’s recommendation. SHA has implemented changes to the
procurement process. The Office of Construction (OOC) now verifies that the advertisement
has been placed into eMM prior to bid opening. OOC will enter award information into
eMM as the procurement process moves forward. Once the contract has been awarded,
support information is forwarded to the Office of Procurement and Contract Management
(OPCM) in order to have the Blanket Purchase Order (BPO) activated within FMIS.
Supporting this process is a BPO Checklist that was revised in the spring of 2015 to include
the eMM advertisement number and eMM award number along with a printout of each from
eMM. The checklist is signed by the Procurement Officer and maintained in the file as well.
Until all of the necessary information is forwarded to OPCM and verified, the BPO will not
be activated, and the package returned to OOC for correction.

--- Page 18 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Marissa L. Eby, CPA
Karen J. Howes
Senior Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Steven A. Crocker
Amanda L. Howell
Reni V. Lazova
Lauren E. McLain, CPA
Sarah L. Weddermann-Witkowski
Staff Auditors