Title: Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund - Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2014
Date: 04/27/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674266
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:37:14.439773
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) was
established to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland in Maryland.
MALPF, which is governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of 13 members,
purchases land easements with Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
(Fund) revenue and places certain restrictions on the use of the land. (For
example, the land may be restricted from subdivision for residential or
commercial purposes.) The Fund, which is administered by MALPF, generally
derives revenues from State transfer taxes, agricultural transfer taxes, and local
subdivision matching funds. In addition, MALPF uses proceeds of General
Obligation Bonds to fund easement purchases. According to its records, since
inception through June 30, 2014, MALPF had purchased 2,154 easements on
292,357 acres of land for a total cost of approximately $645 million.
Financial Information
According to State accounting records, as of June 30, 2014, the total resources
available to finance future MALPF expenditures, including easement acquisitions,
were $32.2 million, consisting of funds held in a Special Revenue Fund ($11.1
million) and General Obligation Bond funds ($21.1 million). Available resources
increased by $4.9 million compared to resources available at June 30, 2013. The
increase in resources available was primarily attributable to proceeds of General
Obligation Bonds of approximately $15.2 million received during fiscal year
2014.
During fiscal year 2014, MALPF acquired easements costing approximately
$26.3 million. The Special Revenue Fund balance is reserved for easement
acquisitions that were approved by MALPF’s Board of Trustees, but were not yet
presented to the landowners, as well as offers accepted by the landowners that
were awaiting Board of Public Works approval or settlement at year-end. General
Obligation Bonds have also been issued to finance future expenditures. In
addition to funds available to fund future expenditures, MALPF holds other funds
committed for the payment of easements purchased by MALPF on an installment
basis which, according to State accounting records, totaled $6.3 million as of June
30, 2014.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated June 19, 2014. We determined that this finding was
not satisfactorily addressed and is repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Easement Violations
Finding 1
MALPF did not have a comprehensive policy for timely investigation of
easement violations and did not ensure that all noted easement violations
were resolved in a timely manner.
Analysis
MALPF lacked a comprehensive policy for the timely investigation of easement
violations, including the documentation required for follow-up actions and the
criteria for assessing penalties. The local jurisdictions are generally responsible
for conducting periodic easement inspections and completing the related
inspection reports which are submitted to MALPF and entered into MALPF’s
database. MALPF is responsible for notifying the landowners of noted violations
and ensuring landowner compliance with easement terms.
We noted that follow-up actions on easement violations were not always
documented, certain violations were not resolved in a timely manner, and
penalties were not always assessed as applicable. Although MALPF management
advised us that it periodically reviewed a report of outstanding violations
generated by its database, this review and the related follow-up actions were not
documented. Our test of 8 unresolved violations as of December 3, 2014
disclosed that, for 2 violations, the last correspondence with the respective
landowners was 11 and 20 months previously. In addition, we were advised that
during the audit period, only one landowner was assessed a penalty for failure to
correct a violation condition. State regulations allow MALPF to impose civil
penalties of $2,500 per day per violation (up to a $50,000 maximum) on a
landowner for uncorrected violations. The lack of documented reviews was
commented upon in our preceding audit report, and untimely action to resolve
violations was commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
4

--- Page 7 ---
According to a report generated from MALPF’s database, as of October 27, 2014,
there were 496 unresolved violations identified prior to June 30, 2014. Of these,
93 violations were considered to be of relatively high priority (such as illegal
subdivisions or dwellings), which had been unresolved for periods of 6 months to
8 years, as of December 2014. Violations listed on this report include violations
identified during inspections, as well as those identified by other means (such as
from complaints).
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MALPF
a. develop a comprehensive policy that includes the appropriate and timely
steps to be taken to address easement violations, the documentation
required for follow-up actions, and the criteria for assessing penalties;
b. document periodic reviews of the database and related follow-up actions
(repeat);
c. perform and document appropriate and timely follow-up actions on
outstanding easement violations consistent with the policy it develops to
ensure corrective actions were taken (repeat); and
d. determine the status of the aforementioned unresolved violations and
impose penalties, if deemed appropriate (repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Fund (Fund) for the period beginning July 1, 2013 and ending June
30, 2014. The Fund is administered by the Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Foundation (MALPF). The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. The Fund is audited annually
as required by the Agriculture Article, Section 2-505 of the Code.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
5

--- Page 8 ---
addressed by the audit included disbursements for the purchase of easements, as
well as receipt of agricultural land transfer taxes, and compliance with easement
terms. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MALPF by the
Department of Agriculture. These support services (such as purchasing, data
processing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Department.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MALPF’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
MALPF management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MALPF’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to MALPF that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
The Department of Agriculture’s response, on behalf of MALPF, to our finding
and recommendation is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its
response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2014
Recommendations Responses
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MALPF:
a. develop and implement a written policy for addressing easement violations (including
frequency of follow up, documenting all follow up actions, and criteria for the assessing
of penalties);
MALPF staff has located a one page Policy on Handling Potential Violations of Easement
Restrictions that was approved by the MALPF Board of Trustees on March 23, 1999. This
policy is obsolete and would not be effective in resolving today’s violations. MALPF has
written a DRAFT Policy to Enforce Potential Easement Violations that will be presented to
the MALPF Board of Trustees for approval. This draft policy includes frequency of follow
up, documenting all follow up actions, and steps to follow for legal action or assessing of
penalties. The Draft Policy is under review by the MALPF Board of Trustees and hopefully
will be adopted at their May 26, 2015 meeting.
b. document periodic reviews of the database and related follow-up actions (repeat);
The Monitoring and Enforcement Coordinator will run a query three times yearly. Staff will
follow up with this list to check for accuracy and to input any actions taken or needed into
the landowner file and/or database. Staff will coordinate running of the query with the
attorney meetings three times yearly.
c. perform appropriate and timely follow-up actions on outstanding easement violations to
ensure corrective actions were taken (repeat);
Actions taken:
1. Instituted a requirement that all contacts with landowners, attorneys and/or county
program administrators are documented in the file. We are working with IT to update
the database. Not all telephone calls have been noted. We will do a better job of
providing dates and deadlines for actions to be taken (see Draft policy).
Maryland Department of Agriculture Page 1

--- Page 12 ---
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2014
Recommendations Responses
2. Twice a year staff provides a list of easement violators to the MD Agriculture Water
Quality Cost-Share (MACS) Program. Any easement violator who has applied for
cost share is sent a letter that if his violation is not corrected he will not be eligible to
receive the cost share funding.
3. Staff meets three times a year with the Assistant Attorneys General to follow-up on
outstanding violations that are categorized as High or Medium priority to get advice
from the attorneys as to next steps. Some items are removed from the list as they
have been resolved. Some items are re-prioritized. Discuss items that have been
turned over to the attorneys for legal action. We will document the outcome of these
meetings and update files and database as necessary.
4. 90% of the violations on the Foundation’s list are soil conservation and water quality
plan (SCWQP) and forest stewardship plan related. As a result of teaming with the
MDA Resource Conservation office to assist staff in updating this very extensive list
of violations, the number of outstanding SCWQP violations has been reduced from
465 to 166. We have consistently carried this high number of violations due to a
tremendous lag time in MALPF’s receipt of updated information from the soil
conservation districts. Going forward, MALPF staff will continue to work with the
Resource Conservation office and the local Soil Conservation District offices to
monitor the list of SCWQP violations as reported in the easement inspection reports.
d. determine the current status of the aforementioned unresolved violations and impose
penalties, if deemed appropriate (repeat).
Staff meets three times a year with the Assistant Attorneys General to follow-up on
outstanding violations that are categorized as High or Medium priority to get advice
from the attorneys as to next steps. Some items are removed from the list as they
have been resolved. Some items are re-prioritized. Discuss items that have been
turned over to the attorneys for legal action. We will document the outcome of these
meetings and update files and database as necessary.
The MALPF Board of Trustees will be reviewing the DRAFT Policy to Enforce
Potential Easement Violations at their April meeting. They continue to use civil
penalties as a last resort, not the first.
Maryland Department of Agriculture Page 2

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Annette L. Manning
Staff Auditor