Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Health Professional Boards and Commission - State Board of Physicians - State Board of Nursing

NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Health Professional Boards and Commission - State Board of Physicians - State Board of Nursing. Effective July 1, 2009, these entities were transferred to the newly created Regulatory Services.
Date: 01/21/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d19cc9d724560674680
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:41:09.704713
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Health Professional Boards and Commission
State Board of Physicians
State Board of Nursing
January 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 21, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Health Professional Boards and Commission, the State
Board of Physicians, and the State Board of Nursing, units of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH), for the period beginning June 1, 2005 and
ending January 31, 2008. These units are responsible for licensing and regulating
health professionals (such as pharmacists, physicians, and nurses) in the State.
Our audit again disclosed that DHMH had not consolidated certain fiscal and
license recordkeeping functions of the boards and commission, and had not
provided adequate oversight of these functions. Numerous internal control
weaknesses continued to exist, primarily related to controls over the collection of
cash receipts and license processing. For the three boards tested, annual
collections were approximately $10.7 million and the boards issued and renewed
approximately 158,000 licenses. Some of these control issues have appeared in
audit reports dating back to 1983.
The State Boards of Physicians and Nursing had certain deficiencies pertaining to
their oversight of licensees and related recordkeeping. For example, the State
Board of Physicians did not have sufficient procedures to verify that physicians
had obtained required continuing education, the State Board of Nursing did not
ensure its licensee records were accurate and both Boards lacked adequate
security controls over licensee databases.

--- Page 4 ---
An Executive Summary of our findings can be found on page 5. DHMH’s
response, on behalf of the boards and commission, to this audit is included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
during the course of this audit by the boards and commission.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Organizational Change 7
Information Systems Overview 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Cash Receipts and Licensing Controls
* Finding 1 – Certain Boards Had Not Established Adequate Controls Over 9
Collections and Professional Licenses
Consolidation of Fiscal and License Recordkeeping Functions
* Finding 2 – (Policy Issue) DHMH Had Not Consolidated Certain Fiscal 10
and License Recordkeeping Functions of the Various Units
State Board of Physicians
Finding 3 – The Board Did Not Have Sufficient Procedures to Verify That 12
Physicians Had Obtained the Required Continuing Medical Education
and Taken Actions Accordingly
Finding 4 – Controls Over the Licensing Database Were Not Adequate 13
State Board of Nursing
Finding 5 – The Board Had Not Established Adequate Procedures to 14
Ensure the Accuracy of License Status in the Licensing Database
Finding 6 – Access Controls Over the Licensing Database and Monitoring 15
of Critical Database Activity Were Not Adequate
Finding 7 – The Board Had Not Obtained an Annual Independent Audit of 15
the Online License Renewal System Maintained by an Independent
Contractor
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
State Board of Pharmacy
Finding 8 – The Board Did Not Register and Approve Pharmacy 16
Technicians as Required by State Law
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Health Professional Boards and Commission,
the State Board of Physicians, and the State Board of Nursing
January 2009
• The three boards reviewed had not established adequate control and
accountability over collections and professional licenses. For example,
the three boards did not properly perform a deposit verification to ensure
that all collections were deposited, and two boards did not perform a
reconciliation of licenses issued and examinations given with the related
cash receipts deposited. In addition, the three boards did not adequately
restrict access to the automated licensing system, and two boards did not
have controls in place to ensure that only qualified individuals were
issued a new or renewed license.
The boards should take the recommended corrective actions to ensure that all
amounts received were deposited and credited to the board, access to the
automated licensing system is adequately restricted, and that licenses issued
were paid for and were proper.
• DHMH had not consolidated certain fiscal and license recordkeeping
functions of the boards and commission, and had not provided adequate
oversight of these functions. Numerous internal control weaknesses
continue to exist, some of which have been reported upon dating back to
1983.
DHMH should develop a work plan to consolidate the fiscal functions of the
boards and commission, including the collection of funds and control and
accountability over licensing transactions. In addition DHMH, in conjunction
with the boards and commission, should develop uniform guidelines and
policies to be followed by all boards and the commission and should develop
an ongoing oversight function.
• The State Board of Physicians did not have procedures to adequately
verify that physicians had obtained the required continuing medical
education, and did not take appropriate administrative action when
physicians could not demonstrate that continuing medical education
requirements had been met.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The Board should ensure that physicians have completed the required
continuing medical education and take appropriate action (such as imposing
civil penalties or suspending licenses as provided for in State law) when
physicians fail to complete the required continuing education.
• The State Board of Nursing had not established adequate procedures to
ensure that the license status of nurses who did not renew their licenses
was changed to non-renewed status in the Board’s licensing system. As a
result, the license status of 470 nurses who had not renewed their licenses
was still recorded as active in the system.
The Board should establish procedures to ensure that the license status of
nurses who do not renew their license is changed to non-renewed status in the
online licensing system, and take immediate action to correct the license status
of the aforementioned 470 nurses in the system.
• The State Board of Nursing had not obtained an annual independent
audit of the online license renewal system maintained by an independent
contractor to determine whether the systems’ controls and related
policies and procedures were suitably designed and properly operating
and whether personal and licensing data were secure.
The Board should obtain an annual independent audit of the controls over the
online license renewal system.
• The State Board of Physicians and that State Board of Nursing did not
have adequate controls over their respective licensing databases.
The Boards should take the recommended corrective actions to improve
security over these critical licensing databases.
• The State Board of Pharmacy did not begin registering pharmacy
technicians until January 2008 even though State law required that
practicing pharmacy technicians be registered by January 1, 2007.
The Board should register and approve pharmacy technicians as required by
State law and ensure that future actions required by State law are implemented
within the specified timeframe.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Health Professional Boards and Commission budgetary unit of the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Office of the Secretary consists of 16
health-related professional boards and one commission. These units, the State
Board of Physicians, and the State Board of Nursing (which are separate
budgetary units) are responsible for licensing and regulating health professionals
(such as pharmacists, physicians, and nurses) in the State. According to the
State’s records, fiscal year 2007 revenues and expenditures for these units totaled
approximately $25.6 million and $21.5 million, respectively.
Organizational Change
Chapter 185, Laws of Maryland 2007, effective October 1, 2007, renamed the
State Board of Morticians to the State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors,
and required an individual to be licensed by the Board before practicing funeral
direction in the State.
Information Systems Overview
Three boards’ licensing systems reside on the Comptroller of the Treasury’s
Annapolis Data Center (ADC), with security software used as the primary means
to protect the licensing applications, online transactions, and related license data.
Eleven boards and the one commission have licensing systems maintained by
board and commission information technology staff on a consolidated licensing
application database system. The remaining four boards maintain licensing
systems residing on servers located at each board’s office and principally use
application security to provide system security.
Our audit of these systems was limited to the review of certain database controls
for the State Board of Physicians, the State Board of Nursing, and the boards and
commission consolidated licensing database. Our audit also included reviewing
certain general controls (such as file backup procedures and disaster recovery
planning) for the State Board of Physicians, the State Board of Nursing, and the
State Board of Pharmacy.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the twelve findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 23, 2006. We determined
that the boards and commission satisfactorily addressed ten of the findings. The
remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts and Licensing Controls
Finding 1
Certain boards had not established adequate control and accountability over
collections and professional licenses.
Analysis
Adequate control and accountability had not been established over collections and
professional licenses at each of the three boards we selected for detail review (that
is, the State Boards of Nursing, Pharmacy, and Physicians). According to
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) records, during calendar
year 2007, cash receipts for these three boards totaled approximately $10.7
million and, during fiscal year 2007, these boards issued and renewed
approximately 158,000 licenses. Specifically, our review disclosed the following
conditions:
• The procedures at two boards did not always require the recordation of certain
collections immediately upon receipt and, at all three boards, independent
deposit verifications were not performed to ensure that all recorded collections
were properly accounted for and deposited. Additionally, at one board,
renewal license collections, which included renewals processed online by a
contractor and which, according to the State’s records, totaled approximately
$4.5 million during calendar year 2007, were not reconciled with the related
fees deposited into the State’s bank account and with the amounts recorded in
the State’s accounting records. The lack of immediate recording of receipts
by certain boards has been commented upon in our five preceding audit
reports, and the lack of adequate deposit verifications by certain boards has
been commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
• Two boards did not perform a reconciliation of licenses issued and
examinations given with the related cash receipts deposited. Although a
reconciliation was performed at the third board, the reconciliation was
incorrectly performed because it did not verify that funds were collected for
each license issued. The lack of such reconciliations by certain boards has
been commented upon in our audit reports dating back to 1983.
• All three boards had not adequately restricted access to the automated
licensing systems. For example, at one board, 41 employees could process
and issue new licenses without supervisory review, and 37 of these employees
could also record a payment in the system. In addition, 47 employees could
9

--- Page 12 ---
make changes to critical license data (such as name, address, and license type)
without adequate supervisory review, and 41 employees could change the
license status (from inactive to active) without supervisory review.
• Controls at two of the boards were inadequate to ensure that only qualified
individuals were issued a new or renewed license. For example, at one of the
boards, supervisory personnel responsible for approving new licenses did not
review the related supporting documentation (such as the application,
examination results, and results of the background check). Additionally, two
boards did not adequately safeguard and periodically account for the
prenumbered licenses as to issued, voided, or on hand. The lack of periodic
accountings for prenumbered licenses by certain boards has been commented
upon in our six preceding audit reports.
Each board has been advised in writing of the specific control deficiencies
applicable to its respective unit. While we tested three boards during the current
audit, during our preceding audit we tested all of the boards and commission and
found control issues at each unit. Although the responsibilities of each board
reviewed are similar, there was a lack of a coordinated approach related to the
aforementioned fiscal functions. Rather, as commented upon in Finding 2 of this
report, each board and commission essentially operated independently and
DHMH’s oversight of the units was not adequate.
Recommendation 1
We again recommend that the boards and commission establish procedures
to ensure that all amounts received are deposited into the State Treasury and
credited to the respective unit, and that all licenses issued were paid for and
were proper. We also recommend that the boards and commission
adequately restrict access to the automated licensing systems. We made
detailed recommendations to each board reviewed which, if implemented,
should provide the necessary controls.
Consolidation of Fiscal and License Recordkeeping Functions
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
DHMH had not consolidated certain fiscal and license recordkeeping
functions of the boards and commission, and had not provided adequate
oversight in these areas.
Analysis
DHMH had not consolidated certain fiscal and license recordkeeping functions of
the boards and commission. In this regard, the April 11, 2005 Joint Chairmen’s
10

--- Page 13 ---
Report requested that DHMH provide a report, including a proposed work plan,
on centralizing the administrative functions of the health occupations boards. In
our preceding audit report, we noted that the report submitted by DHMH did not
include the requested work plan, but did note that there may be opportunities for
the boards to operate more efficiently through restructuring or centralization of
functions, most notably in licensing and application processing. Our preceding
audit report recommended that DHMH develop a work plan to consolidate the
fiscal functions for the boards and commission, including the collection of funds
and control and accountability over the licensing transactions. The preceding
audit report also recommended that this work plan address whether DHMH
needed to seek legislation to authorize the consolidation.
Our current audit disclosed that DHMH had still not developed a consolidated
work plan, and had taken only limited action to consolidate the recordkeeping
functions of the boards and commission. Furthermore, DHMH obtained formal
legal advice that indicated that statutory changes were necessary to accomplish
the recommended consolidation. However, as of August 26, 2008, the needed
statutory changes had not been made.
Our preceding audit report also recommended that DHMH, in conjunction with
the boards and commission, develop uniform guidelines and policies to be
followed by all units, and that DHMH develop an ongoing oversight function
(such as internal audits) for the units. Our current audit disclosed that DHMH had
not developed uniform guidelines and policies to be followed by all units.
Additionally, although DHMH’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG) had
provided some guidance to the boards and commission (for example, worked with
the boards and commission to address certain internal control deficiencies
identified in our preceding audit), OIG had not conducted any audits of the fiscal
operations of the boards and commission during our audit period. Our current
audit disclosed that significant internal control weaknesses related primarily to
collections and license recordkeeping continued to exist over the administrative
functions of the boards that we reviewed (see Finding 1). Similar internal control
weaknesses have appeared in our audit reports dating back to 1983.
Recommendation 2
We again recommend that that DHMH develop a work plan to consolidate
the fiscal functions of the boards and commission, including the collection of
funds and control and accountability over the licensing transactions. In
conjunction with the work plan development, DHMH should address the
statutory changes needed to accomplish the consolidation. Furthermore, we
again recommend that DHMH, in conjunction with the boards and the
commission, develop uniform guidelines and policies to be followed by all
11

--- Page 14 ---
boards and commission. Additionally, we again recommend that DHMH
develop an ongoing oversight function (such as internal audits) for the
boards and commission.
State Board of Physicians
Finding 3
The Board did not have sufficient procedures to verify that physicians had
obtained the required continuing medical education, and did not withhold
renewal licenses from physicians who had failed to complete educational
requirements.
Analysis
The Board’s efforts to ensure that physicians had obtained the required continuing
medical education (CME) were not adequate. Specifically, the Board randomly
selected a sample of 100 physicians at the completion of each renewal period and
required the physicians to submit documentation of CME completed during the
preceding two years. However, the Board’s review of CME completed by the
physicians selected for review was incomplete and not performed timely. In
addition, the Board had not withheld or suspended the licenses of physicians who
failed to meet CME requirements, as permitted by State law. Our review
disclosed the following conditions:
• Eleven physicians selected for the 2005 renewal period (ending in November
2005) submitted documentation indicating that less than the required amount
of CME had been completed. One of these 11 physicians submitted no
documentation of CME obtained; the other 10 submitted documentation
showing that they were from 6 to 33.5 credits short of the required CME.
Although the Board notified these physicians that they would be required to
submit documentation of CME completed during the next renewal period,
these physicians were allowed to subsequently renew their licenses without
submitting any documentation of CME completed.
• Of the physicians selected for review for the 2006 renewal period (ending in
November 2006), 12 physicians had not submitted any documentation of
CME completed and the Board had neither made further attempts to obtain the
documentation, nor taken appropriate administrative action (such as
suspending the physician’s license). Additionally, the Board had received
documentation of CME from 32 physicians during the period from December
2007 through January 2008 but, as of March 2008, had not reviewed the
documentation to ensure that the required CME was completed.
12

--- Page 15 ---
• As of March 2008, the Board had not selected the sample of physicians for
review who had renewed their licenses during the 2007 renewal period
(ending in November 2007).
State regulations require that each physician receive 50 credits of CME every two
years in order to renew a license in Maryland. State law provides that a license
may be suspended in the event the physician does not complete the required
CME. Additionally, effective June 2007, the law allows the Board, in certain
cases, to impose a civil penalty of up to $100 per CME credit for failure to obtain
the necessary CME in lieu of sanctions (such as license suspension). CME
generally serves to maintain, develop, and increase knowledge, skills, and
professional performance that a physician uses to provide health care services to
the public. According to the Board’s records, during fiscal year 2007, the Board
renewed 12,741 licenses.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Board ensure that physicians have completed the
required CME and take appropriate action (imposing civil penalties,
suspending license) when physicians fail to complete the required CME. The
Board should request documentation of CME completed by physicians, and
review documentation submitted, in a timely manner.
Finding 4
Controls over the licensing database were not adequate.
Analysis
Controls over the licensing database were not adequate. Specifically, we noted
the following conditions:
• Numerous users had unnecessary, direct modification access to five critical
production database tables. As a result, unauthorized modifications to these
critical tables could occur.
• Although database auditing capabilities were enabled, the use of critical
database privileges (such as profile creation or granting database roles) was
not logged. As a result, unauthorized changes to production data could occur
and not be detected by management.
• Password controls were not in compliance with the Department of Information
Technology’s State Security Access Control Standard. Specifically, the
standards for password complexity and history were not enforced and
13

--- Page 16 ---
password aging was set to unlimited for 59 user accounts despite the standards
requiring that passwords be changed at least every 90 days.
• Database administrators used an unencrypted protocol, which transmitted
userids and passwords in clear text over the network, to access the database.
Accordingly, database administrators’ userids and passwords could be
intercepted in a usable form, and then used to gain unauthorized access to the
production licensing database.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Board establish adequate controls over the licensing
database. Specifically, we made detailed recommendations to the Board
which, if implemented, will establish adequate controls over the licensing
database.
State Board of Nursing
Finding 5
The Board had not established adequate procedures to ensure that the
license status recorded for nurses on its online licensing system was accurate.
Analysis
Adequate procedures had not been established to ensure that the license status of
nurses who did not renew their licenses was changed to non-renewed status in the
Board’s licensing system. In this regard, although the Board had developed a
software program to change the status of licenses from active to non-renewed in
the licensing system for nurses who did not renew their licenses, the Board did
not ensure that the program was functioning as intended. In this regard, our
review of the license status of nurses who did not renew their licenses during the
period from January 2005 through December 2007 disclosed that, as of March
2008, the license status of 470 nurses was still active in the online licensing
system. Employers have access to the online licensing system and may use the
system to determine if nurses are licensed to practice in Maryland. Consequently,
the accuracy of the license status reflected in the system is critical.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Board establish procedures to ensure that the
license status of nurses who do not renew their license is changed from active
to non-renewed status in the licensing system. We also recommend that the
Board take immediate action to correct the license status of the
aforementioned 470 nurses in the system.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 6
Access controls over the licensing database and critical database activity
monitoring were not adequate.
Analysis
Access controls over the licensing database and critical database activity
monitoring were not adequate. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• A default group of all licensing database users had unnecessary read access to
all licensing database tables. As a result, any licensing database user could
logon to this database (via two default database accounts which were using
default passwords) and have read access to the licensing database tables
outside of normal application processing. These database tables included
sensitive non-public licensee information, such as licensee social security
numbers, medical information, complaints, and related discipline.
• Auditing capabilities were not enabled for the licensing database.
Accordingly, critical security data generated by these auditing features were
not collected and analyzed. Examples of database activities which should be
logged and analyzed include direct changes to critical data tables, changes to
database security settings, and use of certain critical privileges. Therefore,
unauthorized or inappropriate activities, affecting the integrity of the
production database information, could occur and not be detected by
management.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that access to the licensing database be properly restricted
and that auditing capabilities for this database be enabled. We further
recommend that management, using this auditing data, generate security
reports and analyze these reports for unauthorized or inappropriate
activities. We also recommend that all security report reviews be
documented and retained.
Finding 7
The Board had not obtained an annual independent audit of the online
license renewal system maintained by an independent contractor.
Analysis
The Board had not required nor obtained an annual independent audit of the
online license renewal system maintained by an independent contractor. Such
audits, which are provided for in generally accepted auditing standards
15

--- Page 18 ---
established for service organizations, could determine whether the systems’
controls and related policies and procedures were suitably designed and properly
operating. Consequently, the system could be vulnerable to a variety of
exposures, of which the Board is unaware, including third party access to critical
system data (such as credit card information used to pay for license renewals).
The Board places considerable reliance on the system to ensure the accurate and
complete processing of license renewals and related collections. Controls over
the automated system take on increased importance when the issues noted in
Finding 1 are considered.
Although the Board had presented the contractor with a series of questions about
the security measures taken to protect the online licensing system from outside
entities, the Board did not verify the accuracy of the contractor’s responses to the
questions posed. In addition, the Board did not inquire about what steps had been
taken to ensure that the online license data had been safeguarded from improper
access by contractor employees.
According to the Board's records, approximately 89,000 nursing licenses were
renewed during fiscal year 2007. Generally, licenses are renewed using the online
license renewal system.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the Board obtain an annual independent audit of the
controls over the online license renewal system.
State Board of Pharmacy
Finding 8
The Board did not register and approve pharmacy technicians within the
timeframe specified by State law.
Analysis
The Board did not register and approve pharmacy technicians, as required. In this
regard, State law specifies the requirements that must be met by an individual to
practice as a pharmacy technician (such as, completion of a pharmacy technician
training program and successfully passing a Board-approved examination) and,
effective July 1, 2006, required the Board to register and approve practicing
pharmacy technicians by January 1, 2007. According to Board management
personnel, approximately 4,000 pharmacy technicians are expected to eventually
be registered. We were advised by Board management personnel that the
registration of pharmacy technicians was not completed timely due to delays in
adopting related State regulations, and that these delays were caused by the
16

--- Page 19 ---
involvement of stakeholders (such as pharmacies, local and national pharmacists’
associations and exam boards, and pharmacy colleges) in the development of the
regulations. The regulations were adopted in January 2008 and, as of that time,
we were advised that only two pharmacy technicians had been registered by the
Board.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that the Board take immediate action to register and
approve pharmacy technicians, as required by State law. In addition, we
recommend that, in the future, the Board implement actions required by
State law within specified timeframes.
17

--- Page 20 ---
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Health Professional Boards and Commission, the State
Board of Physicians, and the State Board of Nursing for the period beginning June
1, 2005 and ending January 31, 2008. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Boards’ and
Commission’s financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate
its compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Boards’ and Commission’s operations. We
also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for
background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not
independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Boards and
Commission by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. These support
services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and
related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Department’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
Our audit scope was limited with respect to the Boards’ and Commission’s cash
transactions because the Office of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the
State’s main bank accounts during a portion of the audit period. Due to this
condition, we were unable to determine, with reasonable assurance, that all
Boards’ and Commission’s cash transactions prior to July 1, 2005 were accounted
for and properly recorded on the related State accounting records as well as the
banks’ records.
19

--- Page 22 ---
The management of the Boards and Commission is responsible for establishing
and maintaining effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed
to provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of
financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including
safeguarding of assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Boards’ and
Commission’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively
and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our
report also includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance
with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Boards and Commission that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response, on behalf of the
Boards and Commission, to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department
regarding the results of our review of its response.
20

--- Page 24 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts and Licensing Controls
Finding 1
Certain boards had not established adequate control and accountability over
collections and professional licenses.
Recommendation 1
We again recommend that the boards and commission establish procedures
to ensure that all amounts received are deposited into the State Treasury and
credited to the respective unit, and that all licenses issued were paid for and
were proper. We also recommend that the boards and commission
adequately restrict access to the automated licensing systems. We made
detailed recommendations to each board reviewed which, if implemented,
should provide the necessary controls.
Boards’ Response
Board of Physicians Response:
The Maryland Board of Physicians does not concur with the repeat finding.
All funds received for the Board are deposited at Sun Trust Bank. The funds are
then sent to the “State Depository” at Bank of America and are credited to the
Comptroller of the Treasury. The Comptroller of the Treasury then credits the
appropriate Units thru the FMIS system. On a monthly basis, the Chief of
Executive Services reconciles all deposits made through this system and reports
any discrepancies to the Comptroller of the Treasury and the Deputy Director of
the Board. This process ensures proper distribution of funds to the Board.
Checks received by mail are opened by employees of the Executive Division,
independent of any cash functions, and are stamped “for deposit only Board of
Physicians”. All checks are then given to another staff person, independent of any
cash functions, who prepares a daily manifest of the checks received. This
manifest is reconciled by the Chief of Executive Services. All checks are sent to
the SunTrust LockBox within 24 hours. This process directly corresponds with
the Comptroller of the Treasury’s Accounting Procedures. The Board has
updated all “cash generating” applications to read that all payments should be
made directly to the SunTrust LockBox address. Any licensee who attempts to
hand deliver a check to the Board is advised to redirect the check to the SunTrust
LockBox. No hand delivered check is accepted at the Board.
The reconciliation reports generated by Sun Trust Bank reflect current deposit
activity. The Board performs a daily reconciliation of deposits to applications
received to verify receipts. If a check is returned due to insufficient funds, a

--- Page 25 ---
“Bounced Check” report is generated by the Fiscal Unit. The applicant’s database
record is flagged by the Fiscal staff and a hold is placed on the processing of the
application. The Licensure unit issues a status letter to the applicant to resolve the
issue before the processing of the application is resumed. Licenses are not printed
until the issue is rectified. Only the Fiscal Unit can facilitate the completion of
the application at this point by removing the hold status when funds are received.
Initial medical license applications require extensive research and verification.
The processing time for an initial medical license exceeds 30 days on average,
well beyond the notification time for a returned check.
The Board does not concur with the finding and recommendation for the need for
an employee independent of the cash receipts and license issuance functions to
periodically (for example, quarterly) reconcile its license activity with the related
cash receipts deposited. The reconciliation reports generated by Sun Trust Bank
reflect current deposit activity. The recommendation refers to a reconciliation of
current licenses issued to past deposit activity. The proposed reconciliation could
only be accomplished if MBP staff compare a “New License Issued Report” to
past deposit activity, a process that would encompass approximately 14,000
transactions annually and may include multiple fiscal years. This is highly
inefficient and cost prohibitive. The typical application process exceeds one
month period, and some can take several months to complete, depending on how
quickly the applicant provides the prerequisite documentation to the Board. The
MBP currently performs a daily reconciliation of deposits to applications received
to verify receipts. Due to the repeat nature of this finding, the Board has
developed a task force to revisit this issue. The task force will commence
immediately and, by the spring of 2009, develop recommendations to improve the
reconciliation process.
During the audit an additional layer of oversight was implemented to ensure
applications were complete. To ensure systemic and procedural compliance with
MBP licensure statutes and regulations, the Chief of Licensure performs an audit
of all applications pre-approved by the licensure analysts. These pre-approved
applications and backup documents are forwarded to the Chief for review. A
checklist of requirements is compared to the contents of the application to verify
compliance. The Chief confers with the analyst to rectify any issues that may
arise. If the application is complete, the Chief initiates the printing of the license,
signs off on the checklist and retains a copy for audit purposes. These current
processes ensure a license is not issued to an applicant that does not fully qualify
in both credentialing and financial obligation.
The Board has established mechanisms to restrict access, safeguard, and account
for pre-numbered licenses. The bulk of the unused licenses are kept in a secure
computer equipment storeroom which can only be accessed by the data
processing staff. A working stock of blank licenses is kept in a locked cabinet
located in the office of a supervisory employee.

--- Page 26 ---
Four individuals print and issue licenses and a notation of the serial numbers are
logged on a list. In order to actually print the licenses, however, the serial number
must be assigned in the computer system by one of the two employees who have
the authority to do this. The employee who assigns the serial numbers and holds
the stock of blank licenses does not have license printing privileges. Furthermore,
the computer system restricts the printing of licenses to those employees who are
authorized to print those licenses. The Board Secretary is responsible for the
periodic accounting of all pre-numbered licenses, including those issued, those
voided, and those on hand. Voided licenses are destroyed in the presence of two
employees not involved in issuing licenses and signed off by the Deputy Director.
In the event that there are any serial numbers which cannot be accounted for, a
report is made to the Deputy Director.1
Board of Nursing Response:
The Board concurs with the recommendation. Effective July 1, 2008, the Board
of Nursing implemented a process of deposit verification for licenses issued.
Additionally, two separate ledgers are kept by separate individuals for walk-ins.
This is balanced and deposited the next day and reconciled to the cash receipt
ledger. The ledgers are based on licensure/obtained by type. It is not possible to
reconcile on a daily basis due to the stage of process for exam candidates and
endorsement individuals. However, at the end of the process it is reconciled.
The Board of Nursing is confident that it has adequately restricted access to the
licensure system. Based on roles, the appropriate employees can process
functions necessary for renewal or licensure. One of the controls is that the
individual receiving confirmation of licensure exam results cannot issue the
license. That individual must forward the results to another Board employee in a
separate department for issuance of the license. Many individuals have read-only
access to information but are not able to change anything in the system. The
Board recognized security of the confidential information. However, individuals
still must have access. For example, Board Counsel are able to access a
licensee/certificate holder in the system including information such as, social
security number, date of birth, etc. This information is necessary for writing and
processing Board Orders. They are not able to change information and have
signed, as have all employees of the Board, the following Policies:
1 Auditor’s Comment: The Board of Physicians’ response indicates various disagreements and
outlines Board procedures related to the cash receipts and licensing controls finding. Similar
comments were made by the Board at the conclusion of our audit. As confirmed with the Board,
certain of these processes were established after the audit period. Furthermore, subsequent
verification procedures performed by our Office confirmed that certain processes had not been
effectively implemented. For example, the Board’s response describes its procedures for
recordation of receipts immediately upon receipt. Our review disclosed that the Board had not
followed its established procedures on a number of occasions, as we noted receipts were not
immediately recorded for a number of days.

--- Page 27 ---
1. 02.01.01 Policy on use of DHMH Electronic Information Systems (EIS);
2. 02.01.02 Software Copyright Policy & the State of Maryland software
Code of Ethics;
3. 02.01.06 Policy to Assure Confidentiality, integrity and Availability of
DHMH Information (IAP); and
4. Statement of Confidentiality Acknowledgement for Background Checks.
The Board of Nursing has designated specific individuals with expertise to
evaluate applications for licensure. For example, the Exam Specialist reviews the
exam application and supporting documentation to ensure that the applicant is
qualified to sit for the exam. This individual reviews exam results but cannot
issue the license. The Board of Nursing does not issue pre-numbered licenses.
Board of Pharmacy Response:
The Board of Pharmacy partially concurs with finding #1. Specifically, that
independent verification was not performed to insure that all recorded
collections were properly accounted for and deposited after submission to the
fiscal officer under joint employment by all of the Boards. The Board
however, did verify that the deposits were made as appropriate when the
banking statements were received.
The Board concurs with the recommendation to establish procedures to ensure
that all amounts received are deposited into the State Treasury and
appropriately credited to the Board of Pharmacy. Specifically, to ensure
immediate confirmation in the future, the Board of Pharmacy will request a
copy of the daily deposit receipt each business day following submission
collected funds to the fiscal officer.
The Board also concurs that it did not restrict access to certain functions of its
automated licensing system for one of its employee’s whose position at the
Board had changed. Review of her activities during the period when she had
access revealed that she did not actually access the system inappropriately.
The Board is in the process of implementing a new licensing system that will
list users by positions rather than name, thereby avoiding this type of error in
the future.
Smaller Boards Response:
The smaller boards and commission have establish procedures to ensure that all
amounts received are deposited into the State Treasury and credited to the
respective unit, and that all licenses issued were paid for and were proper. The
smaller boards and commission have adequately restricted access to the
automated licensing systems.

--- Page 28 ---
Consolidation of Fiscal and License Recordkeeping Functions
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
DHMH had not consolidated certain fiscal and license recordkeeping
functions of the boards and commission, and had not provided adequate
oversight in these areas.
Recommendation 2
We again recommend that that DHMH develop a work plan to consolidate
the fiscal functions of the boards and commission, including the collection of
funds and control and accountability over the licensing transactions. In
conjunction with the work plan development, DHMH should address the
statutory changes needed to accomplish the consolidation. Furthermore, we
again recommend that DHMH, in conjunction with the boards and the
commission, develop uniform guidelines and policies to be followed by all
boards and commission. Additionally, we again recommend that DHMH
develop an ongoing oversight function (such as internal audits) for the
boards and commission.
Department’s Response
The Department does not concur that this item is a repeat finding. As the
Department has pointed out in response to the previous two legislative audits,
consolidation of the fiscal functions of the boards, including the collection of
funds and control and accountability over licensing transactions, and oversight of
these functions, requires legislative action. The need for legislation was
confirmed by our Assistant Attorney General.
The Department has taken steps to determine the benefits of such a change, using
a consultant hired by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) to
ascertain the cost-benefits of consolidating business functions. The study
determined that minimal cost savings would occur from consolidation. Following
the previous audit the Department attempted to convince the boards to use the
same licensing software, with an interest in consolidating functions to limit
redundancy. The majority of the boards rejected the offer. More recently,
legislation was passed by the 2008 General Assembly (HB 811) requiring a task
force to study the differences in board disciplinary actions. This legislation called
for the task force to recommend potential changes to the organizational structure
of the health occupation boards and the relationship of all boards to the
Department. Absent legislative action the Department has no authority to comply

--- Page 29 ---
with this audit finding. Consequently, we disagree with the categorization of this
as a repeat finding.2
As stated in our response in the previous audit report, the Department lacks
sufficient personnel to devote a dedicated audit staff to the Boards and
Commission. In addition to monitoring required monthly status reports outlining
corrective action plans, the Office of the Inspector General and the Department of
Budget and Management also have conducted on-site visits to provide assistance
as resources allowed. The OIG provided OLA with an audit trail of sample emails
and an outline of our communications with the Boards and DBM in an attempt to
resolve the outstanding audit findings and recommendations.
State Board of Physicians
Finding 3
The Board did not have sufficient procedures to verify that physicians had
obtained the required continuing medical education, and did not withhold
renewal licenses from physicians who had failed to complete educational
requirements.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Board ensure that physicians have completed the
required CME and take appropriate action (imposing civil penalties,
suspending license) when physicians fail to complete the required CME. The
Board should request documentation of CME completed by physicians, and
review documentation submitted, in a timely manner.
Board of Physicians Response:
The Board concurs with this finding and recommendation. A physician who is
renewing his/her medical licenses is required to affirm all responses on the
application, including a response to the following:
2 Auditor’s Comment: The Department’s response indicates that it does not concur that this
item is a repeat finding and that absent legislative action, the Department has no authority to
comply with this finding.
Our finding was intended to point out that the Department had not developed a work plan to
consolidate certain administrative functions of the boards and commission as was requested in a
prior year’s Joint Chairmen’s Report. This condition was noted in our preceding audit report.
Furthermore, our report specifically acknowledged the need for statutory changes to accomplish
the recommended consolidation, and we also specifically recommended that the Department
address the statutory changes needed to accomplish the consolidation as part of its work plan
development.

--- Page 30 ---
CONTINUING MEDICAL EDUCATION Choose one statement that applies to
you.
a. CME met. I have earned 50 credit hours of Category 1 continuing medical
education during the two years prior to this renewal.
b. First renewal and NPO. I am exempt from CME during the renewal period
because this is my first renewal after initial medical licensure in Maryland and I
have completed the Board’s New Physician Orientation Program. (If you need to
complete the Board’s New Physician Orientation Program, please visit our
website at www.mbp.state.md.us to complete the orientation. Your license will
not be renewed unless you have completed the orientation.)
c. First renewal after reinstatement. I am exempt from CME during the renewal
period because this is my first renewal after reinstatement of my medical
licensure in Maryland.
As outlined in the previous paragraph, there is an attestation on the renewal
application regarding CME. By completing the renewal application, the physician
is attesting to earning 50 credit hours. The Board does not renew the license of
any physician who fails to affirm that he/she has met the continuing education
requirement. The Board performs an audit of documentation of CME by taking a
random sample of those physicians who renewed their licenses in the previous
renewal period and requesting submission of the supporting documentation. A
licensure clerk reviews all documentation for acceptability (based on date of CME
and criteria established in regulation).
The Board performs roughly 600 physician CME audits, or 5% of the total
renewing physicians, annually. One hundred of the audits are random and the
balance is done during a full compliance investigation. Prior to 2003, the Board’s
practice had been to refer physicians who could not document their CME to the
Compliance Division. The physicians were given the opportunity to sign a
consent agreement stating that they had failed to obtain the CME, were guilty of
unprofessional conduct, and would pay an administrative fine for the missing
CME. In 2003, Board Counsel advised the Board that they did not have either
statutory or regulatory authority to impose fines in this way. Therefore, the Board
discontinued this practice and began consideration of regulations. The Board
continued the random sample audit and sent advisory letters to physicians who
had not submitted adequate documentation. The draft regulations considered by
the Board in 2006 were not approved by the Board at that time. Instead, there was
consideration given to requesting a statutory provision that would allow the Board
to impose a fine without charging the physician with violation of the Medical
Practice Act (specifically, unprofessional conduct) by failing to obtain CME.
This provision was included in the Board’s Sunset Legislation (SB 255), which
passed in 2007. Therefore, the new process is as follows: a random sample of
physicians is selected; physicians are requested to submit documentation;
documentation is reviewed; if the physician falls a few credits short of the
required 50 credit hours within the two-year cycle, a letter is sent to the physician
and an administrative fine of up to $100 per missing CME credits in lieu of a
sanction is imposed; if the physician falls significantly short of the required 50
credit hours, it is the Board’s decision to open a case on the grounds of

--- Page 31 ---
unprofessional conduct in the practice of medicine; if the Board so decides, the
physician will be referred to compliance for action.
Each of the physicians selected during the 2005 renewal period was sent an
advisory letter in August 2008 indicating that if his/her CME requirement was not
fulfilled within 30 days, he/she would be fined. In addition, if the Board so
decides, his/her name would be referred to the Compliance Division for action.
Each of the physicians selected for review during the 2006 renewal period
(ending in November 2006) who had not submitted any documentation of CME
completed, was sent an advisory letter in September 2008 indicating that if his/her
CME requirement was not fulfilled, his/her license will not be renewed.
For those physicians renewing during the 2007 renewal period (ending in
November 2007), the Board will select the sample of physicians for CME review
in January 2009.
Finding 4
Controls over the licensing database were not adequate.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Board establish adequate controls over the licensing
database. Specifically, we made detailed recommendations to the Board
which, if implemented, will establish adequate controls over the licensing
database.
Board of Physicians Response:
The Board concurs with the finding and recommendation. All user accounts have
been reconfigured and trimmed of unnecessary critical roles (DBA,
IMP_FULL_DATABASE, and EXP_FULL_DATABASE). The ADMIN option
has also been eliminated from certain accounts. The ADMIN option is limited to
the database administrator account. Access to critical roles is restricted to only
those individuals who require them for their job responsibilities. These changes
were completed during the audit.
A critical database utility program has been deleted from all user computers,
except for those within our Information Systems Division that require access as
part of their job function.
The Board recently migrated to a newer version of the database. A critical
database utility program is a new utility included with this new version and runs
as a service on the database server. This service has been disabled. No one can

--- Page 32 ---
access the database via this service. We have also implemented roles limiting
access to critical tables to those individuals who require such access.
The use of critical database privileges is being logged via the database’s audit
logging capabilities. MBP is also using triggers to record before and after images
of changes to data from our key tables.
MBP has developed a monthly summary report to be reviewed and retained by the
Deputy Director that will highlight suspicious activity within key tables. If
suspicious activity is detected, the more detailed “before and after” image tables
will help assess the propriety of these changes. Evidence of these reviews and
assessments will be retained for audit verification. Full implementation occurred
on October 31, 2008.
Primary access to the database is through the BPQA legacy system. This system
does not provide the user with any warnings about database accounts that are
about to expire. Strong password controls will be implemented in a gradual
process. Turning on strong password controls would require ISD staff to manually
change each user’s password immediately and every ninety days thereafter.
Modifications to the BPQA legacy system are currently under way to provide
users with advance password expiration times and allow the users to manage their
own passwords. These modifications will be in compliance with the DOiT State
Security Access Control Standard and also support strong password controls.
Modifications should be completed and implemented by June 30, 2009.
Idle time before locking a user account is set to thirty minutes. A user account is
also locked if 4 unsuccessful login attempts are made. The user account will be
locked indefinitely, until an administrator unlocks the account. Password history
is also set to eliminate the use of past passwords.
A critical database utility service has been disabled on the database server, so
access to this utility no longer applies. Access to the database interface is
currently through http and does create a potential of capturing clear text via a
sniffer connected directly to our internal network.
The Central Services group, within the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene, has reconfigured our network infrastructure, creating two subnets upon
which only Board staff members have access. No longer does the entire building
operate on one network, as was the case when this audit was conducted. This new
infrastructure is more secure and requires a sniffer to be placed on our subnet,
which is physically located in a secure area.
ISD will research the cost and feasibility of using https when attaching to the
database.

--- Page 33 ---
State Board of Nursing
Finding 5
The Board had not established adequate procedures to ensure that the
license status recorded for nurses on its online licensing system was accurate.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Board establish procedures to ensure that the
license status of nurses who do not renew their license is changed from active
to non-renewed status in the licensing system. We also recommend that the
Board take immediate action to correct the license status of the
aforementioned 470 nurses in the system.
Board Response:
The Board concurs with the recommendations. A second program has been
implemented as a backup to ensure that license status for nurses on its online
licensing system is accurate. In May 2008 the Board corrected the status of the
470 nurses prior to completion of the audit.
Finding 6
Access controls over the licensing database and critical database activity
monitoring were not adequate.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that access to the licensing database be properly restricted
and that auditing capabilities for this database be enabled. We further
recommend that management, using this auditing data, generate security
reports and analyze these reports for unauthorized or inappropriate
activities. We also recommend that all security report reviews be
documented and retained.
Board’s Response:
The Board concurs with the recommendations. The Board has restricted access
and is confident that both users and activities are appropriate. The Board has one
super-user. The activities of the super-user are monitored and retained by another
employee on a monthly basis. These activities are reviewed quarterly by the
Executive Director. Any discrepancy will immediately be brought to the attention
of the Executive Director. This process was implemented July 1, 2008 and has
yielded no unauthorized or inappropriate activity to date.

--- Page 34 ---
Finding 7
The Board had not obtained an annual independent audit of the online
license renewal system maintained by an independent contractor.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the Board obtain an annual independent audit of the
controls over the online license renewal system.
Board Response:
The Board does not concur with the recommendation of the Auditors. The
recommendation is cost prohibitive with an estimated cost of approximately
$1million. In lieu of this recommendation, the Board audited the vendor. In
February 2008, Information Technology (IT) and the fiscal staff of the Board
went to Chicago to audit the vendor utilizing security documentation provided by
the Information Assurance Coordinator of the Information Resources
Management Administration. The results of this audit were provided to OLA
auditor. After review, OLA auditors requested additional information. In May
2008, the IT Board staff went to Chicago to further audit controls over the online
license renewal system. Three software programs provided by OLA were used to
extract the data required by the auditors and retained by the Board. No
deficiencies were found. The Board considers this audit to be adequate and the
process will continue. It is anticipated that the vendor will be audited again by
March 2009, and annually thereafter.3
State Board of Pharmacy
Finding 8
The Board did not register and approve pharmacy technicians within the
timeframe specified by State law.
3 Auditor’s Comment: The Department’s response indicated that it did not concur with the
recommendation to obtain an annual independent audit of the State Board of Nursing’s online
license renewal system. The response indicated that the recommendation is cost prohibitive
and, in lieu of the recommendation, the Board had audited the vendor itself. As commented in
the report, the Board’s initial efforts to audit the vendor were not sufficient. We did not review
any subsequent efforts made by the Board that were alluded to in the response. We continue to
believe that the Board should determine if the system’s controls are suitably designed and
properly operating due to the high level of reliance that the Board places on the system to
ensure the accurate processing of license renewals and related collections. While we believe
that an independent audit is preferable, we will review the procedures performed by the Board
to audit the system during our next audit.

--- Page 35 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that the Board take immediate action to register and
approve pharmacy technicians, as required by State law. In addition, we
recommend that, in the future, the Board implement actions required by
State law within specified timeframes.
Board’s Response:
Board of Pharmacy Response: The Board concurs with Finding #8 and
Recommendation #8, with explanation.
In an attempt to meet the January 2007 date noted in the statute, the Board
prepared and released an informal draft of the Pharmacy Technician regulations
on September 27, 2006. Based on stakeholders’ comments, it released a second
draft on February 26, 2007. Regulations were formally published on May 11,
2007 with a 30 day comment period that ended on June 11, 2007. An identical
emergency proposal was submitted at the same time for two reasons. The main
reason was the Board’s concern that although given leeway after January 1, 2007,
the Board wanted to begin registration as close to that date as possible. The
second reason was that individuals who qualified to be grandfathered wanted to
register as soon as possible to give them the opportunity to seek other
employment as registered pharmacy technicians.
The emergency proposal was never published because the Joint Committee on
Administrative, Executive, and Legislative review (AELR) placed a hold on both
proposals on June 21, 2007 in response to concerns received from some
stakeholders and their lobbyists. The emergency proposal was subsequently
withdrawn. Following numerous subsequent discussions between the Board and
stakeholders over a period of a year, a re-proposal was submitted July 24, 2007.
AELR released the re-proposal and it was published on September 28, 2007.
Following the thirty day comment period and responses provided by the Board,
the Board recommended adoption of the re-proposal as proposed. The Notice of
Final Action was published in December and the regulations became effective on
January 28, 2008. The Board has subsequently begun registering pharmacy
technicians with over 5,000 technicians having been registered to date.
The Board of Pharmacy will implement actions required by State law within
specified timeframes in the future if circumstances allow such action in the future.

--- Page 36 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark A. Ermer, CPA
Audit Manager
A. Jerome Sokol, CPA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Athenia M. Rock, CFE
Shalom N. Warburg
Staff Auditors
David J. Burger
Information Systems Staff Auditor