Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Western Maryland Region


NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Western Maryland Region due to the establishment of the DPSCS - North Region.
Date: 10/18/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745ba
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:29:13.494211
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Western Maryland Region
October 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Western Maryland Region is a separate budgetary unit within the Division of
Correction of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services and
consists of two facilities for adult male offenders.
Facilities Within the Division of Correction’s Western Maryland Region
Inmate
Security Population as
Facility Location
Level of June 30,
2011
Western Correctional Maximum
Cumberland, MD 1,680
Institution Security
North Branch Correctional Maximum
Cumberland, MD 1,460
Institution Security
Total 3,140
According to the State’s records, the Region’s expenditures totaled approximately
$105 million during fiscal year 2011. In addition, the Region’s fiscal year 2011
appropriation provided for 1,063 positions, including 812 correctional officers.
The Western Correctional Institution is accredited by the American Correctional
Association’s Commission on Accreditation for Corrections.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 16, 2008. We determined that the
Region satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Region’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Region and to the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services. Since there are no recommendations in
this report, a written response was not necessary.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services –
Western Maryland Region for the period beginning April 14, 2008 and ending
June 19, 2011. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, inmate funds, the purchasing
function, equipment, materials and supplies, and payroll. Our audit procedures
included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and
records, and observations of the Region’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Straw
Staff Auditor