Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Hagerstown Region


NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Hagerstown Region due to the establishment of the DPSCS - North Region.
Date: 01/07/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745ac
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:27:08.390799
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Hagerstown Region
January 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410 946-5400 or 301
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Reorganization 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Inmate Funds
Finding 1 – Cash Receipts Received on Behalf of Inmates Were Not 5
Adequately Accounted for and Controlled
Finding 2 – The Region Lacked Certain Critical Controls Over Inmate 6
Working Fund Transactions and Records
Payroll
Finding 3 – Controls Over Critical Payroll Adjustments Were Not 8
Sufficient
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 4 – Corporate Purchasing Card Transactions Were Not 9
Verified as Required
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Prior to a Department-wide reorganization discussed below, the Hagerstown
Region was a separate budgetary unit within the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS), consisting of the Maryland Correctional
Institution – Hagerstown, the Maryland Correctional Training Center, and the
Roxbury Correctional Institution. These institutions are medium security
facilities for adult male offenders. As of June 30, 2012, the Region had a total
population of 6,135 inmates and its fiscal year 2012 appropriation provided for
1,613 employee positions, including 1,229 correctional officers. According to the
State’s records, total Region expenditures were approximately $189.4 million
during fiscal year 2012.
Reorganization
In fiscal year 2012, DPSCS initiated a Department-wide reorganization to
establish three regions within the State (North, Central, and South) for the purpose
of creating a regional approach to providing essentially all inmate-related
functions, such as incarceration, probation, parole, and reentry into society.
Through the reorganization, DPSCS is seeking to keep inmates in one region as
they move within the DPSCS system. The reorganization is also meant to find
efficiencies, and to improve inmate reentry into society. While the reorganization
was initiated in fiscal year 2012, for budgetary purposes, the reorganization was
implemented via budget amendment in October 2012.
Accordingly, effective October 2012, the Hagerstown Region ceased to exist as a
separate budgetary unit. The Region’s institutions and functions are now
budgeted under the newly established North Region and, in the future, these
activities will be included in other DPSCS audits.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Inmate Funds
Finding 1
The Region lacked accountability and control over inmate cash receipts.
Analysis
Collections received for inmates, which constituted the majority of the Region’s
cash receipts, were not adequately accounted for and controlled. According to the
State’s records, during fiscal year 2012, inmate collections totaled approximately
$4.8 million. These collections were received primarily through the mail and in
person from inmates on work release (paychecks). Collections received in the
mail were recorded on automated cash receipts logs, which generated a numbered
receipt for the inmate. Collections from work release inmates were recorded on
separate manually prepared prenumbered receipt forms. Our review disclosed the
following conditions:
 The employee responsible for verifying recorded mail collections to deposit
had access to the collections and, at times, made the deposits. Additionally,
this employee verified the deposits using cash receipts logs obtained from the
employees who regularly prepared the deposits, rather than using copies of the
logs obtained directly from the staff who initially recorded the collections.
Accordingly, funds could be lost or misappropriated without detection.
Furthermore, our test of 17 deposits, totaling approximately $113,000,
disclosed that the verifications were performed 7 to 112 business days after
deposit.
 There was no procedure to ensure the numerical sequence of receipt numbers
recorded on the cash receipts logs. Although these numbers were
automatically recorded on the logs as collections were recorded, the mailroom
employees in all three Region institutions had necessary system access that
would allow them to alter or delete the data, including the receipt numbers. It
is important to verify the numerical sequence of recorded receipt numbers as
part of the deposit verification process to help detect any misappropriation of
cash receipts.
 Collections recorded on prenumbered receipt forms used for work release
collections were not verified to deposit. In addition, the forms were not
periodically accounted for as to issued, voided, or on hand, and the employee
who received collections and prepared the receipt forms also maintained the
5

--- Page 8 ---
inventory of unused forms. Accordingly, this employee was in a position to
conceal a misappropriation of funds.
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) written
procedures require that employees who verify collections to deposit not have
access to those collections, and that the initial record of collections be verified to
validated bank documentation on a daily basis. Those procedures also provide for
the proper maintenance of and accounting for receipt forms issued.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts processing
functions verifies the deposit of all collections on a daily basis;
b. ensure that documentation used to initially record collections (that is, the
logs and the prenumbered receipt forms) is given directly to the
independent employee responsible for performing the deposit
verifications; and
c. properly account for receipt forms as to issued, voided, or on-hand and
ensure that the inventory of receipt forms is maintained by an employee
without access to cash receipts.
We advised DPSCS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Finding 2
The Region lacked certain critical controls for ensuring the propriety of
inmate working fund transactions and records.
Analysis
The Region lacked certain critical controls for ensuring the propriety of inmate
working fund transactions and records. The inmate working fund was established
through an advance from the Comptroller of Maryland and consists of certain
invested funds, funds on deposit in a checking account, as well as petty cash on
hand. The working fund is used to disburse funds belonging to inmates and is
replenished from collections deposited in the State’s account on behalf of the
inmates. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2012, working fund
disbursements totaled approximately $1.7 million. We noted the following
conditions:
 One of the two employees who regularly signed (with a signature stamp)
working fund checks did not examine the related supporting documentation,
such as an inmate withdrawal voucher, prior to approving and signing the
6

--- Page 9 ---
checks. Furthermore, this signature stamp was left unsecure, and as a result,
several employees who were not authorized to sign checks had access to blank
checks and the signature stamp.
 Although supervisory personnel reviewed and initialed bank reconciliations
prepared for the working fund, this review did not include a verification of
critical data, such as reconciling items, for propriety. The Region’s March
2012 reconciliation included reconciling items totaling approximately
$284,000. Based on our review of the March 2012 reconciliation, we noted
that reconciling items appeared proper.
 Working fund composition statements, which provide an accounting for all
working funds advanced to the Region by the Comptroller, were not prepared
monthly as required. At the time of our review in July 2012, only one
composition (March 2012) had been completed since February 2011. This
March 2012 composition accounted for the entire $175,000 advance from the
Comptroller.
Under these conditions, errors or other irregularities could occur without timely
detection. The DPSCS written procedures include specific requirements for
preparing and reviewing inmate working fund transactions and records, including
restrictions on who may perform those functions and the required time frames for
completion.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that employees responsible for approving working fund
disbursements review supporting documentation prior to approval;
b. adequately secure blank checks and signature stamps, and limit access to
employees who need access;
c. ensure that the supervisory review of bank reconciliations includes a
verification of critical data, including reconciling items; and
d. prepare fund compositions for the working fund on a monthly basis as
required.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Payroll
Finding 3
Controls over critical adjustments to the Region’s payroll were not sufficient.
Analysis
The Region’s procedures for verifying the propriety of payroll adjustments were
not sufficient, and adjustments for overtime worked were not always supported by
required documentation. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that critical
adjustments, such as payments for overtime and payments to former employees
for accumulated leave, were proper.
The employee responsible for approving automated time reports submitted to the
Comptroller of Maryland’s Central Payroll Bureau for processing did not review
supporting documentation for payroll adjustments included on the reports.
Rather, after the payroll was processed, an employee independent from the
payroll process verified the propriety of the payroll payments on a test basis.
However, this review was not adequate because it included only six randomly
selected employees for each pay period, and selections were made without regard
to whether adjustments had been recorded for the employees. According to the
State’s records, during fiscal year 2012, the Region had 1,613 authorized
positions.
Our test of 10 overtime adjustments for 785 hours, totaling approximately
$28,000, disclosed that some of the overtime hours were not documented for 9 of
the adjustments. Specifically, 307 hours totaling $11,000 were not supported by
approved documentation, such as the overtime verification form required by
DPSCS’ written procedures. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year
2012, DPSCS’ payroll expenditures totaled approximately $118.6 million and
adjustments to payroll totaled approximately $7.3 million, including $6 million
for overtime.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that critical payroll adjustments are selected for review and
verified to supporting documentation, at least on a test basis;
b. increase the number of employee payroll payments verified each pay
period based on an evaluation of significance and risk; and
c. ensure that overtime payments are made only if the required
documentation is completed and submitted as required.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 4
Corporate purchasing card transactions were not verified for propriety as
required.
Analysis
Corporate purchasing card (CPC) transactions were not verified as required.
Although supervisory personnel approved cardholder activity logs of purchases
made, they did so without reviewing the required supporting documentation for
those purchases, such as itemized receipts and invoices. Consequently,
unauthorized purchases could be made without detection. According to the
State’s accounting records, CPC expenditures totaled approximately $2.6 million
during fiscal year 2012. There were 21 cards issued to Region employees.
The Department of Budget and Management’s Corporate Purchasing Card
Procedures Manual requires the cardholder’s supervisor to review for propriety
all card transactions by examining the related documentation, including receipts
and invoices. The DPSCS written procedures call for a similar verification of
purchases made.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPSCS ensure that all documentation supporting CPC
transactions is reviewed by supervisory personnel as required.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) – Hagerstown Region for the period beginning July 1, 2009 and ending
June 3, 2012. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, payroll, and inmate funds. Our audit procedures included
inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and
observations of the Region’s operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational purposes
were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
10

--- Page 13 ---
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Region’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also
includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Region that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of the Region, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 16 ---
We agree. Effective immediately, DPSCS will:
a. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts processing function
verifies the deposit of all collections on a daily basis;
b. ensure that documentation used to initially record collections (that is, the logs
and the prenumbered receipt forms) is given directly to the independent
employee responsible for performing the deposit verifications; and
c. properly account for receipt forms as to issued, voided, or on-hand and ensure
that the inventory of receipt forms is maintained by an employee without
access to cash receipts.
Finding 2:
The Region lacked certain critical controls for ensuring the propriety of
inmate working fund transactions and records.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that employees responsible for approving working fund
disbursements review supporting documentation prior to approval;
b. adequately secure blank checks and signature stamps, and limit access to
employees who need access;
c. ensure that the supervisory review of bank reconciliations includes a
verification of critical data, including reconciling items; and
d. prepare fund compositions for the working fund on a monthly basis as
required.
We agree. Effective immediately, DPSCS will:
a. ensure that employees responsible for approving working fund disbursements
review supporting documentation prior to approval;
b. adequately secure blank checks and signature stamps, and limit access to
employees who need access; and
c. ensure that the supervisory review of bank reconciliations includes a
verification of critical data, including reconciling items.
In addition,
d. DPSCS will prepare fund compositions for the working fund on a monthly
basis as required.
Finding 3:
Controls over critical adjustments to the Region’s payroll were not sufficient.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that critical payroll adjustments are selected for review and
verified to supporting documentation, at least on a test basis;
2

--- Page 18 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Joseph E. McWilliams
Senior Auditor
Robert J. Smith
Staff Auditor