Title: Comptroller of the Treasury - Compliance Division
Date: 04/25/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d724560674388
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:21:01.685889
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of the Treasury
Compliance Division
April 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 25, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Comptroller of the Treasury – Compliance Division for the
period beginning July 1, 2003 and ending December 31, 2006.
While the Division uses various techniques to identify individuals and businesses
that are non-compliant with applicable tax laws and regulations and to collect
delinquent taxes due, we have identified certain procedures that we believe would
enhance these existing techniques. For example, many individuals identified by a
computer match who had not filed for tax year 2004 were excluded from further
follow-up action and a match was not performed for the 2003 tax year.
Procedures were also not in place for identifying taxpayers who improperly
itemized deductions or claimed the earned income credit on their State tax returns
without filing a corresponding federal return, as required. Our audit identified a
number of such taxpayers who had not filed the required federal return.
Our audit also disclosed that, even though it has taken certain actions, including
referral of the matter to its legal counsel, the Division has been unable to resolve
the failure of certain local subdivisions to withhold liquor licenses from
businesses with delinquent tax liabilities. In addition, we found that controls over
certain cash receipts were not sufficient, and access to make critical adjustments
to taxpayer accounts was not always adequately controlled and monitored.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Current Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Identifying and Investigating Taxpayer Noncompliance
Finding 1 – Procedures Used to Detect Individuals Who Failed to File 9
Required Income Tax Returns Could Be Improved
Finding 2 – Procedures Were Lacking for Identifying Taxpayers Who 11
Improperly Itemized Deductions or Claimed the Earned Income
Credit
Finding 3 – The Potential Benefit of Using Certain Automated Matching 12
Procedures to Help Identify Businesses that Failed to File Required
Tax Returns Was Not Adequately Assessed
Liquor License Renewals
Finding 4 – Certain Local Subdivisions Did Not Withhold Liquor 13
Licenses From Businesses with Delinquent Tax Liabilities In
Apparent Violation of State Law
Cash Receipts
Finding 5 – Controls Over Certain Cash Receipts Were Not Sufficient 14
Account Adjustments
Finding 6 – System Access to Make Critical Adjustments to Taxpayer 15
Accounts Was Not Always Adequately Controlled and Monitored
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Comptroller of the Treasury
Compliance Division
April 2008
• Procedures used to detect individuals who failed to file required tax
returns could be improved because many potential non-filers identified
by a computer match for tax year 2004 were excluded from further
follow-up action and a match was not performed for the 2003 tax year.
We selected 25 individuals who had significant earnings for tax year 2004
but who failed to file a State tax return for the year; we found that 11
individuals, with wages totaling approximately $21 million, were not
detected by the Division’s match procedures.
The Division should improve the procedures it uses to identify and follow up
on individuals who fail to file required income tax returns.
• The Division had no procedure for identifying and investigating
taxpayers who itemized deductions or who claimed the earned income
credit on their State tax returns without filing a corresponding federal
return, as required. At our request, the Division examined a limited
number (169) of such occurrences in which records initially indicated that
no federal return had been filed. In about 70 cases, the Division
confirmed that no federal returns had been filed and, therefore, these
taxpayers would not have been eligible to itemize deductions or claim the
earned income credit.
The Division should develop procedures for identifying and investigating
taxpayers who itemize deductions or who claim the earned income credit on
their State tax returns without filing a corresponding federal return, as
required.
• The potential benefit of using certain automated matching procedures
was not adequately assessed to help identify businesses that failed to file
required Maryland tax returns. For example, automated reports
identifying employers who reported employee wages to DLLR for
unemployment insurance purposes, but who failed to file withholding tax
returns, were not generated or investigated.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The Division should perform, on a pilot basis, the recommended automated
techniques to help identify businesses that fail to file required tax returns.
Based on the results of the pilot, the Division should also evaluate the costs
and benefits to determine whether these techniques should be continued.
• The Division has been unable to resolve the failure of two local
subdivisions to withhold liquor licenses from businesses with delinquent
tax liabilities in spite of its efforts, which included referring the
subdivisions to legal counsel. Because licensees are required to conform
to all laws and regulations relating to their businesses, the Comptroller’s
legal counsel has previously concluded that the renewal of a liquor license
for a licensee that has an unpaid State tax liability is contrary to State
law. As of November 2006, 198 licensees in these two subdivisions owed
approximately $4 million in unpaid State taxes.
The Division, in conjunction with the Office of the Comptroller and the Office
of the Attorney General, should take the necessary action to resolve this
matter.
• Controls over certain cash receipts were not sufficient, and employee
access to make critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts was not always
adequately controlled and monitored.
The Division should take the recommended steps to improve controls over
cash receipts and account adjustments.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Compliance Division’s primary responsibilities include enforcement of all
tax laws administered by the Comptroller of the Treasury, including those relating
to individual income taxes, as well as business taxes such as corporate income,
withholding, and sales and use taxes. Primary functions include conducting
taxpayer audits and investigations, collecting delinquent taxes, and performing
other taxpayer compliance activities. In conjunction with these functions, the
Division levies tax assessments, processes tax appeals, and enforces certain
sanctions such as asset liens provided for by law. The Division is also responsible
for administering the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act.
According to the Division’s records, as of June 30, 2007, outstanding individual
income taxes and business taxes which were subject to collection by the Division
totaled approximately $347.1 million and $151.3 million, respectively.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2007, the Division’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $25.1 million.
Current Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report, dated May 26, 2004. We determined that
the Division satisfactorily addressed these findings. Our audit also included a
review to determine the current status of two findings contained in a preceding
audit report of the Comptroller of the Treasury’s Revenue Administration
Division, dated November 20, 2003. We determined that the Division
satisfactorily resolved these findings.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Identifying and Investigating Taxpayer Noncompliance
Background
The Division currently uses various techniques to identify individuals and
businesses that are non-compliant with applicable tax laws and regulations, and to
collect delinquent taxes due. To allow time for taxpayers to file and to obtain
relevant federal tax data, the Division typically performs matches at least two
years after the filing year. Our audit has identified certain additional techniques
and enhancements to current procedures which we believe would further help the
Division to effectively identify and investigate noncompliant taxpayers. The
Division has advised us that it agrees that it is desirable to expand compliance
programs, but in doing so, it must consider the availability of human and system
resources and the most effective use of those resources. We were also advised
that the Comptroller requested funding for additional positions and technology
resources in its budget for fiscal year 2009. While we recognize that there are
limits on available resources and that decisions must be made as to their most
effective use, we believe that the following recommended practices would
enhance existing collection techniques and procedures.
Finding 1
Procedures used to help detect individuals who failed to file required tax
returns could be improved.
Analysis
Procedures used by the Division to help detect individuals who failed to file
required income tax returns could be improved. We found that the Division did
not follow up on many potential non-filers identified by the match results, and not
all tax years were included in the match process that was performed. The
Division performed matching procedures for tax years 2001 and 2002 by
comparing W-2 wage data from the Comptroller’s database to tax return data on
the Comptroller’s automated tax system. However, matching procedures were
discontinued for tax year 2003, and when resumed for tax year 2004, the
procedures used by the Division resulted in excluding many potential non-filers.
We selected 25 individuals who had significant wages (that is, between $396,000
and $4.1 million) reported in the Comptroller’s database for tax year 2004 but
who had not filed a State tax return for that year. We determined that, while 14 of
the 25 non-filers were included in the Division’s match results for 2004, 11 were
not. In total, these 11 individuals had wages totaling approximately $21 million.
The Division advised us that this may have occurred because it had refined its
9

--- Page 12 ---
match results to include only individuals currently employed in Maryland.
Specifically, the Division advised that it initially determined that approximately
138,000 individuals had wages of at least $15,900 but had not filed a tax return
for the year. From this total, approximately 78,000 were identified as having a
current employer and, therefore, further follow-up action was being taken. The
Division decided that the remaining 60,000 would not be pursued through the
match project. According to the Division, this decision was made in order to
better focus its collection techniques and resources. Although we recognize the
Division’s intent to better utilize its collection resources, we believe that the
methodology used excluded potential non-filers that should have been pursued.
At our request, the Division determined that the aforementioned 11 individuals
had tax withholdings totaling approximately $1 million, which ranged from no
withholdings for 3 individuals to withholdings of approximately 8 percent for 1
individual. We recognize that an individual who fails to file a tax return may not
owe any additional taxes because of amounts already withheld and submitted to
the Comptroller. However, the extent to which withholding amounts are
sufficient to satisfy tax liabilities is unknown without the corresponding tax return
and possible further investigation. Regardless of whether additional taxes are
due, State law requires a return to be filed by individuals meeting specified
criteria and provides for fines and penalties for the willful failure to file a required
return.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Division improve the procedures it currently uses to
identify and follow up on individuals who fail to file required income tax
returns. Specifically, we recommend that the Division include for follow-up,
at least on a test basis, non-filers who do not have a current employer. For
example, the Division might focus these efforts on individuals with significant
reported earnings for the tax year in question. Furthermore, we recommend
that the Division perform the matches for each tax year. Finally, we
recommend that the Division take steps to investigate, at least on a test basis,
non-filers for tax year 2003, as well as the 11 non-filers noted above for tax
year 2004.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
The Division lacked procedures for identifying and investigating taxpayers
who itemized deductions or who claimed the earned income credit on their
State tax returns, without filing a corresponding federal return, as required.
Analysis
The Division had no procedures to identify and investigate individual taxpayers
who itemized deductions or who claimed the earned income credit on their State
income tax return, without filing a corresponding federal return, as required.
State law stipulates that only those individuals who itemize deductions on their
federal income tax returns may elect to itemize deductions on their State returns.
Similarly, the law provides that a taxpayer is eligible to receive an earned income
credit on his or her State return only if the taxpayer was eligible to receive the
federal earned income credit and the credit was claimed on the corresponding
federal tax return. Therefore, failing to file a corresponding federal return would
preclude a taxpayer from itemizing deductions and from claiming the earned
income credit on his or her State return.
At our request, the Division generated automated reports of individuals who had
itemized deductions or who had claimed the earned income credit on their State
tax returns for tax year 2004, but who had failed to file federal tax returns for the
same year. These reports initially identified over 12,000 such occurrences. The
Division’s investigation of 169 of these occurrences disclosed that, although
many taxpayers had actually filed a federal return (often under a separate
identification number), there were approximately 70 occurrences (approximately
40 percent of cases reviewed) for which a corresponding federal return had not
been filed. Therefore, these taxpayers were not eligible to itemize deductions or
to claim the earned income credit on their State returns.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Division develop procedures, such as using
automated reports like those noted above, to specifically identify and
investigate taxpayers who itemized deductions or who claimed the earned
income credit on their State tax returns, but who failed to file corresponding
federal returns. We also recommend that the Division further investigate
those taxpayers noted above as having failed to file federal returns and take
appropriate follow-up action, such as denial of itemized deductions or the
earned income credit, and recovery of any applicable refunds and taxes due,
including any applicable interest and penalties. Finally, we recommend that
the Division further evaluate the 12,000 taxpayers noted above for ineligible
itemized deductions and earned income credits, and take appropriate follow-
up action.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
The Division did not adequately assess the potential benefit of using certain
automated matching procedures to help identify businesses that failed to file
required tax returns.
Analysis
The Division did not adequately assess the potential benefit of using certain
automated matching procedures to help identify businesses that failed to file
required Maryland tax returns. For example, the Division did not generate and
investigate automated reports identifying employers who reported employee
wages to the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR) for
unemployment insurance purposes, but failed to file withholding tax returns.
Furthermore, the Division did not adequately investigate Maryland businesses that
received significant payments for goods or services from State agencies to ensure
sufficient income was reported for tax purposes.
The Division advised us that it had made certain attempts to perform procedures
related to the DLLR match but the results were, for the most part, not worthwhile
and that these efforts would not be continued. However, our review of the
Division’s efforts disclosed a general lack of documentation as to the results. In
addition, we noted, in some cases, a lack of adequate follow-up when the Division
investigated Maryland businesses receiving significant payments.
For example, our review of the Division’s follow-up efforts for 10 businesses that
received significant State payments in 2003 disclosed that the Division’s efforts
for 8 businesses were not sufficient. The Division sent letters to 7 of the 8
businesses requesting additional State and federal tax return information. Three
of the entities did not respond and 4 responded with insufficient information.
However, no additional investigation of these businesses was conducted by the
Division. Furthermore, for the remaining business, an accurate vendor address
could not be located, and the case was not pursued further.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Division perform, on a pilot basis, the automated
techniques described above to help identify businesses that fail to file
required returns. Based on the results of the pilot, we also recommend that
the Division formally evaluate the costs and benefits to determine whether
these techniques should be continued. We further recommend that
documentation of the Division’s evaluations be maintained for future
verification purposes.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Liquor License Renewals
Finding 4
Certain local subdivisions allowed businesses with delinquent tax liabilities
totaling approximately $4 million to renew their liquor licenses in apparent
violation of State law; the Division has been unable to fully resolve this
matter.
Analysis
The Division has been unable to fully resolve the failure of certain local
subdivisions to withhold liquor licenses from businesses (licensees) with
delinquent tax liabilities, even though the subdivisions’ position has been deemed
contrary to State law. This issue was commented upon in our preceding audit
report and most subdivisions now withhold liquor licenses from businesses with
delinquent tax liabilities at renewal. However, notwithstanding the Division’s
efforts, including referral to legal counsel in May 2005, two subdivisions still do
not. According to the Division’s records, as of November 2006, 198 licensees in
these two subdivisions owed approximately $4 million in unpaid State taxes.
Under the Comptroller’s Liquor License Renewal Project, the Division informs
the State’s subdivisions of licensees that have delinquent tax liabilities. The
subdivisions are then required to withhold liquor licenses from such businesses at
renewal. Because licensees are required to conform to all laws and regulations
relating to their businesses, the Comptroller’s legal counsel has previously
concluded that the renewal of a liquor license for a licensee that has an unpaid
State tax liability is contrary to State law. The Comptroller’s legal counsel also
advised that bringing a lawsuit against the two subdivisions may be the only
recourse to gain compliance. At the time of our review, no further legal action
had been taken. According to the Division’s records, approximately $4.9 million
was collected under the Project during the period from January 2006 through June
2006.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Division, in conjunction with the Office of the
Comptroller and the Office of the Attorney General, take the necessary
action to resolve this matter.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Controls over certain receipts collected by the Division’s accounting and
unclaimed property units were not sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over certain receipts collected by the Division’s accounting and
unclaimed property units were not sufficient. Collections processed by the
accounting unit, such as delinquent tax payments, were recorded and forwarded to
the Comptroller’s Revenue Administration Division (RAD) for deposit.
Collections received by the unclaimed property unit were processed and deposited
directly by the unit. Unclaimed property collections may come from holders of
the property, such as banks, or from the subsequent sale of tangible unclaimed
property at auction. According to the Division’s records, collections submitted to
RAD during fiscal year 2006 totaled approximately $85 million, and collections
received directly by the unclaimed property unit in the same year totaled
approximately $108 million. Our review disclosed the following conditions:
• Independent verifications were not always performed to ensure that all
recorded collections received by the accounting unit were forwarded to RAD
for deposit. Our test of 20 days of collections totaling approximately $24
million disclosed that the required verifications were not performed for certain
receipts totaling approximately $773,000 collected over 3 days.
• Deposit verifications of unclaimed property receipts were not adequately
documented and were not performed in a timely manner. Although the dates
the verifications were performed were not documented, we were advised by
the employee who performs the verifications that the procedure was being
performed one to three months after the deposits were made.
• The employee who initially received unclaimed property checks from
property holders could also receive the corresponding reports which
documented the property being submitted. The reports, which could be
submitted by holders separately or directly with the checks, were used to
initially record and account for the property. When the checks and reports
were received together, this employee had complete control over the
collections since the nature of the receipts makes it impractical to control them
in advance, such as through an accounts receivable record.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that verifications of recorded collections to deposit be
performed consistently in a timely manner by an employee independent of
14

--- Page 17 ---
the collections process, and that these verifications be adequately
documented. We also recommend that two employees, working together,
open unclaimed property collections, with one processing the collections and
one processing any accompanying property reports.
Account Adjustments
Finding 6
System access to make critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts was not
always adequately controlled and monitored.
Analysis
Certain employees had system access to make critical adjustments to taxpayer
accounts, such as to reduce a taxpayer’s liability, without such adjustments being
subject to supervisory review. In addition, some employees had access to make
adjustments even though they did not require it for their job responsibilities.
Furthermore, we noted that supervisory reviews of adjustments processed to abate
penalties and interest were not always performed on a timely basis or were not
performed at all.
The Division had established certain procedures to provide for supervisory review
of critical adjustments posted to taxpayer accounts on the automated tax system.
Approximately 90 employees had access to make adjustments. However, we
noted that 11 of these employees had access to make adjustments which were not
subject to these verification procedures since a supervisor was not given
responsibility for reviewing the employees’ adjustments. In addition, we noted 5
employees who had access to post adjustments even though that access was not
necessary for them to perform their job duties.
Furthermore, our test of 10 adjustments, totaling approximately $210,000,
processed to abate penalties and interest, disclosed 5 totaling $184,000 that were
not reviewed until three to eight months after they were recorded, and 2 totaling
$13,500 which had not been reviewed at all. We were advised that, although the
Division’s procedures provide for a review of all recorded abatements of penalties
and interest, this was not always done because of some confusion regarding which
employee was responsible for this function.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the Division ensure that all critical adjustments posted
to taxpayer accounts are subject to supervisory review and approval. In
addition, we recommend that system access to record account adjustments be
restricted to employees who need it for their job duties. Furthermore, we
15

--- Page 18 ---
recommend that all adjustments recorded to abate penalties and interest,
including the two for $13,500 noted above, be reviewed for propriety in a
timely manner in accordance with the Division’s procedures.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Comptroller of the Treasury – Compliance Division for the
period beginning July 1, 2003 and ending December 31, 2006. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Division’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the current
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report of the Compliance
Division and the current status of two findings contained in our audit report of the
Comptroller of the Treasury’s Revenue Administration Division, dated November
20, 2003.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Division’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Division by the
Comptroller of the Treasury – Office of the Comptroller. These support services
(such as processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller. Our audit also did not include certain support services provided to
the Division by the Comptroller of the Treasury – Information Technology
Division related to the procurement and monitoring of information technology
equipment and services. These support services are included in the scope of our
audits of the Information Technology Division.
Our audit scope was limited with respect to the Division’s cash transactions
because the Office of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the State’s main
bank accounts during a portion of the audit period. Due to this condition, we
17

--- Page 20 ---
were unable to determine, with reasonable assurance, that all Division cash
transactions prior to July 1, 2005 were accounted for and properly recorded on the
related State accounting records as well as the banks’ records.
The Division’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect the Division’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Division that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Office of the Comptroller’s response to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 22 ---
Identifying and Investigating Taxpayer Noncompliance
Finding 1
Procedures used to help detect individuals who failed to file required tax returns
could be improved.
Division Response: This is a question of resource allocation. We agree that use of
automated matching procedures to detect non-filers is desirable and useful. However,
the resulting “matches” require non-automated, case-by-case investigation before any
assessment is possible. After the prior legislative audit finding regarding detection of
non-filers, the agency submitted a budget request for additional personnel to work these
manual cases. That request was denied by the Department of Budget and Management.
We renewed the request in our 2008 budget request, and sixteen new positions were
approved for the Compliance Programs section. Additionally, our request for a data
warehouse has been approved, which will enable us to work these cases in an automated
fashion.
We are in the process of investigating the eleven 2004 non-filers identified by the
auditors. To date, three have filed returns and we have assessed a fourth; there are
questions regarding residency in the other seven cases that must be resolved before a
determination can be made. We will document our efforts and take appropriate action
as indicated. Additionally, with the implementation of our new positions and data
warehouse technology, we will develop an automated non-filer program that will provide
effective follow-up action including assessments based on various sources of income.
This automated program will be implemented for tax years 2005 and forward. We will
perform further investigations for tax years 2003 and 2004 manually on a limited basis.
Finding 2
The Division lacked procedures for identifying and investigating taxpayers who
claimed itemized deductions or who claimed the earned income credit on their State
return, without filing a corresponding federal return, as required.
Division Response: Once again, this is a resource issue rather than a lack of procedures.
The Comptroller does have some programs for identifying abuses related to the earned
income credit (EIC) and excessive deductions. In response to a recommendation in the
recent audit of the Revenue Administration Division, RAD QRDT has implemented a
procedure for comparing all EIC claims greater than $10 to IRS data. This process will
identify those taxpayers who have not filed a federal return using a Maryland address.
Additionally, the Division has a STAX IDP (itemized deduction program using IRS data)
that identifies excessive itemized deductions.
In response to the discussion note in the instant audit, we are working the list of 12,000
taxpayers identified by the auditors as having claimed EIC or itemized deductions in
Maryland in 2004 but failed to file a federal return. We selected a statistically valid

--- Page 23 ---
sample of the two types of cases, and are investigating 500 IDP cases and 219 EIC cases.
Of the 500 returns under investigation for propriety of itemized deductions, 272 had
actually filed federal returns and in each case the federal itemized deductions matched
the Maryland deductions claimed. We sent notices and made adjustments for the
remaining 228. Additionally, we sent notices and made adjustments to the accounts for
the 219 EIC cases. We will do follow-up on these cases, maintain documentation of our
work and results, take appropriate action and make resource allocation decisions
accordingly.
Finding 3
The Division did not adequately assess the potential benefit of using certain
automated matching procedures to help identify businesses that failed to file
required tax returns.
Division Response : In response to the auditors’ concerns, we generated an updated
report and worked it on a test basis. The report, which was the result of matching
employers who reported employee wages to the Department of Labor, Licensing and
Regulation (DLLR) for unemployment purposes, to the Comptroller’s Central
Registration files generated a total of 1803 items, and we selected 71 for review. We
were able to close 47 accounts - 24 that were under a different FEIN and 23 that do not
have employees subject to withholding. We are continuing to investigate the remaining
cases, and we will document our efforts, take appropriate action and again make
resource allocation decisions based on the results. We will retain documentation of this
effort for future audit.
Regarding State payments, the Division had initiated a project in the Compliance
Programs section to verify that companies receiving State payments properly report such
payments for tax purposes. It became apparent very early in the project, however, that
an actual audit would be necessary to make such a determination. Therefore, the scope
of that compliance program was changed to identify businesses receiving State payments
who were not filing a return. Accordingly, we confirmed the 8 businesses identified by
the auditors had filed a 2003 Maryland return. These businesses will be subject to the
possibility of audit in the normal selection process. We are continuing to review cases
and will document our efforts and the results, and take appropriate action as indicated.

--- Page 24 ---
Liquor License Renewals
Finding 4
Certain local subdivisions allowed businesses with delinquent tax liabilities totaling
approximately $4 million to renew their liquor licenses in apparent violation of State
law; the Division has been unable to fully resolve this matter.
Division Response: This matter was referred to the Attorney General in May 2005.
Pending resolution by that office, the Division will pursue collection by other means
permitted to the Comptroller. For example, we will schedule sales and use tax license
revocation hearings for liquor licensees with delinquent tax liabilities in those two
subdivisions.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Controls over receipts collected by the Division’s Accounting and Unclaimed
Property units were not sufficient.
Division Response: We agree with the auditors' recommendation. Timely verification
of deposits by an employee independent of the collections process is an integral part of
the Division’s written cash receipts procedures. The legislative auditors found that the
verifications for collections received by the accounting unit and forwarded to the
Revenue Administration Division (RAD) had not been performed for three days’ deposits
during the audit period. Subsequent testing by the Comptroller’s internal auditors
confirms that this lapse was an isolated instance. Furthermore, we have confirmed that
the receipts for the three days in question were properly deposited by RAD.
Additionally, the auditors found inadequate documentation of timely verifications for
unclaimed property receipts. While we do not excuse this situation, it is instructive to
note that there was a window of time in this audit period during which the workload in
the unclaimed property section increased substantially without a corresponding increase
in personnel. For example, the number of claims paid by the unit in FY05 represented a
230% increase over FY04, while reports received from holders increased by 39% and
notices sent to owners increased by 29%.
We have reemphasized to all Division personnel the importance of strict adherence to
this and all procedures to maintain adequate internal controls over our processes.
As for the recommendation that two employees open mail to prevent mishandling when
reports and checks are received together, it is important to consider the millions of pieces
of mail that contain checks and associated reports received by the Comptroller every

--- Page 25 ---
year. Besides paper filings of income tax returns by individuals and businesses, the
Comptroller also receives reports and checks for sales and use tax, withholdings,
admissions and amusement, motor fuel and alcohol, Bay Restoration fund, etc. The
Comptroller does not have adequate personnel to assign two employees to open and
process mail, nor would it be a cost-effective use of resources. The Comptroller has a
well-developed system of internal controls to prevent and detect defalcations, which
includes controls for opening and processing collections received by mail.
Specifically, the risk associated with abandoned property collections received by mail
does not justify assigning two employees, particularly in a time of scarce resources. An
employee would need system access to the holder reports and the checks to be assured
that he/she could pocket a check without detection. Employees who open mail in the
unclaimed property section do not have system access. Furthermore, fewer than 20% of
holders send paper checks, and most of those holders file their reports electronically,
even though they may include a copy of the report with the check. Finally, the
delinquency control function helps detect missing checks and reports from existing
holders.
Adjustments
Finding 6
System access to make critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts was not always
adequately controlled or monitored.
Division Response: We agree that system access should be limited to employees' current
job responsibilities and certain transactions, including adjustments, should be reviewed
in a timely manner. Division policies and procedures require both, and we have re-
emphasized management's responsibility for ensuring adherence. In response to the
auditor's findings, we have undertaken a comprehensive review of the system access of
all Division employees and are creating new user classes to match the functions of
employees in the various sections. In the future, employees who require a change of
access due to a change in responsibilities will have their old access deleted and new
access established; this will help to prevent carryover of unnecessary access related to
previous job responsibilities.
It is important to note that the five employees who had the unnecessary access made no
improper adjustments; four had made no adjustments at all and one had made
adjustments only as required by previous job responsibilities. Additionally, each of the
seven adjustments reviewed by the auditors that were determined to have not been
reviewed timely or at all have subsequently been reviewed and determined to be proper.
These adjustments were requested by a hearing officer from the Hearings and Appeals
Section after review by the Business Tax Audit Section and Division administration. We

--- Page 26 ---
have re-emphasized the necessity of supervisory review to ensure adjustments as entered
in the system reflect the reviewed and approved adjustments.

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
A. Jerome Sokol, CPA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Shawnielle D. Predeoux, CPA
Senior Auditor
David J. Burger
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Susanne M. Anacker
Amber M. Schon
Robert A. Wells
Staff Auditors