Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Division of Pretrial Detention and Services
Date: 04/10/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d7245606745a6
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:26:25.939720
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Division of Pretrial Detention and Services
April 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 10, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services (DPDS) of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services for the period beginning
June 3, 2004 and ending June 13, 2007.
Our audit disclosed that DPDS did not adequately monitor certain service
agreements to ensure that payments were consistent with services received.
Furthermore, one service agreement did not include specific payment terms and
deliverables, and DPDS could not document that it adhered to Department
procedures to obtain temporary employees at the lowest available cost.
Our audit also disclosed internal control and recordkeeping deficiencies in certain
areas, such as payment processing, corporate purchasing card transactions,
payroll, budget closeout, property, and materials and supplies.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Current Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Service Agreements
Finding 1 – An Agreement with a State’s Attorney Office Did Not Include 9
Sufficient Specifications
Finding 2 – Service Agreements Were Not Adequately Monitored to 10
Ensure Payments Were Made in Accordance with Related Terms
and That All Requirements Were Met
Purchases and Disbursements
* Finding 3 – Proper Internal Control Was Not Established Over the 12
Processing of Certain Disbursement Transactions
* Finding 4 – Adequate Control Over Certain Corporate Purchasing Card 13
Transactions Had Not Been Established
Payroll
* Finding 5 – Supervisory Review of Supporting Documentation for 14
Payroll Adjustments Was Not Documented
Budget Closeout
Finding 6 – Adequate Documentation of Year End Entries Was Not 14
Maintained and Certain Entries Effectively Allowed Funds Provided
by Fiscal Year 2006 Accruals to be Used to Fund Fiscal Year 2007
Expenditures
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Property
* Finding 7 – Property Records Were Not Adequately Maintained, and 16
DPDS Did Not Reconcile its Physical Inventory with its Related
Detail Records
Materials and Supplies
Finding 8 – Procedures and Controls Over the Materials and Supplies 17
Inventory Were Inadequate
Accounts Receivable
Finding 9 – DPDS Had Not Executed a Lease with an Entity That Had 18
Been Using DPDS Facilities, and Certain Rent Payments Had Not
Been Requested
Referrals to Authorities
* Finding 10 – Certain Fraudulent Acts Discovered by DPDS Were Not 19
Immediately Reported to Authorities
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on Division of Pretrial Detention
and Services (DPDS)
April 2008
• DPDS did not adequately monitor its service agreements to ensure
payments were consistent with services received. In addition, an
agreement with a State’s Attorney Office did not include payment terms
and specific deliverables; related payments totaled $794,100 during fiscal
year 2007. Furthermore, a contract for temporary office help was not
properly managed to ensure that such employees were obtained at the
lowest available hourly rates.
DPDS should monitor its service agreements to ensure that requirements are
met and invoices are approved. In addition, DPDS should ensure that its
agreements include the payment terms and specific deliverables. Furthermore,
DPDS should ensure that temporary employees hired under the temporary
office contract are obtained at the lowest available hourly rate.
• Proper internal control was not established over certain disbursement
transactions.
DPDS should fully use the available FMIS security features by establishing
independent online approval requirements for all critical disbursement
transactions.
• Certain corporate purchasing card transactions were artificially split into
smaller purchases to avoid individual transaction spending limits. In
addition, certain purchases were not adequately documented and certain
equipment items purchased were not adequately accounted for.
DPDS should comply with the Comptroller of the Treasury’s Corporate
Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual and establish
adequate controls over the corporate purchasing card transactions.
• DPDS lacked documentation that certain fraudulent acts discovered were
promptly reported to authorities.
DPDS should promptly inform the appropriate authorities of instances of
possible criminal or unethical conduct.
5

--- Page 8 ---
• Internal control and recordkeeping deficiencies were noted in the areas of
payroll, budget closeout, property, materials and supplies, and accounts
receivable.
DPDS should take the recommended actions to improve controls in these
areas.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Pretrial Detention and Services (DPDS) consists of an
administrative unit, the Pretrial Release Services Program, the Baltimore Central
Booking and Intake Center, and the Baltimore City Detention Center. DPDS is
directed by a Commissioner who is appointed by the Secretary of the Department
of Public Safety and Correctional Services.
The Pretrial Release Services Program is responsible for presenting pretrial
release recommendations to various courts and for supervising all defendants
released to its custody. The Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center is a
centralized booking facility for Baltimore City. In addition, this facility and the
Baltimore City Detention Center house persons committed to the custody of
DPDS while awaiting trial in Baltimore City or for service of a sentence of usually
one year or less. We were advised that, as of June 30, 2007, these two units had a
combined population of 4,150 detainees. In addition, according to the State’s
records, the DPDS fiscal year 2007 appropriation provided for 1,596 employee
positions, including 1,223 correctional officers, and DPDC expenditures totaled
approximately $154 million during fiscal year 2007.
Current Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
We reviewed the current status of the ten findings from our preceding audit report
dated February 23, 2005. We determined that DPDS satisfactorily addressed five
of these items. The remaining five findings are repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Service Agreements
Finding 1
An agreement with a State’s Attorney Office did not include sufficient
specifications.
The agreement between the Division of Pretrial Detention Services (DPDS) and a
State’s Attorney Office (SAO) for an agreed-upon Quality Case Review (QCR)
process excluded critical elements, such as specific deliverables to assess the
effectiveness of the QCR process, and payment terms, including amounts.
According to the related agreement, the QCR process is designed to provide a
systematic approach—coordinating efforts of DPDS with the SAO and the Office
of the Public Defender—to reduce the number of defendants held in the Baltimore
Central Booking and Intake Center and the number of hearings held for each case.
The systematic approach should include screening pretrial detainee cases and
identifying cases for dismissal and charge reductions.
According to DPDS budget documents, the annual appropriation approved for
payments to the SAO was $708,512 for each of the fiscal years 2005, 2006, and
2007; however, no documentation could be provided to indicate how that amount
was determined. Furthermore, although the basis for payment was not specified in
the agreement, quarterly invoices from the SAO included a list of employees and
total related salaries and benefits. We were advised by DPDS management that
there was no verification performed to ensure that the invoices were for the actual
costs of the QCR program. In addition, other documentation was not available,
such as the number of cases screened, to enable DPDS to assess the impact of the
QCR process. During fiscal years 2006 and 2007, SAO payments totaled
$786,145 and $794,100, respectively.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPDS modify the SAO agreement to include the
payment terms and deliverables. We further recommend that DPDS ensure
that payments are made consistent with the revised agreement.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
Service agreements were not adequately monitored to ensure payments were
made in accordance with terms of the agreements and that all requirements
were met.
Analysis
Our review disclosed that DPDS was not adequately monitoring certain service
agreements, as noted below:
• Oversight of payments related to a three-year contract for off-site housing for
inmates who do not have a history of violent crimes was not sufficient. The
$4 million contract included base payments of $3.5 million and per diem
payments of $500,000. Our test of three invoices, totaling $121,600, disclosed
that, for two of the three invoices for per diem housing charges totaling
$24,662, the related daily census reports were not signed by the DPDS
contract monitor, as required by the contract, and all three invoices were paid
without evidence of supervisory approval. Therefore, assurance was lacking
that these services were actually received and that the billed amounts were
accurate.
• The contract to provide inmate food also required the contractor to provide the
first $800,000 of related annual maintenance costs (such as for the kitchen and
serving equipment) and required that these costs be documented. However,
DPDS did not verify that such costs were provided. Since DPDS paid
maintenance costs over this amount to be provided by the contractor (for
example, DPDS paid $765,030 in fiscal year 2007), monitoring of this
contractual provision is necessary. During the contract year covering the
period from February 2006 through January 2007, $496,475 of the
contractor’s costs were payments to an outside vendor to monitor and oversee
the maintenance function; however, we were advised by DPDS management
that it did not obtain documents to support these payments. Although copies
of invoices from the outside vendor were subsequently provided after our
inquiry, the invoices did not specify what services were provided.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that the contractor paid the
required amount of annual maintenance costs.
The contract also required the contractor to provide an annual inventory of
related food service equipment and to replace any missing equipment. During
our field work, DPDS was unable to provide us with any evidence that the
required physical inventories had been conducted since the contract began in
10

--- Page 13 ---
2003. Subsequently, DPDS provided copies of recent physical inventories;
however, there was no documentation that these physical inventories had been
reconciled with the related equipment records to determine if any items were
missing.
• DPDS could not adequately document that it was adhering to procedures
established by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) to ensure that temporary employees were obtained at the lowest
available costs. Specifically, DPSCS entered into a department-wide contract
with nine vendors for temporary employees. The contract required that
DPSCS units needing temporary employee services first contact the lowest
cost vendor and continue to contact each subsequently higher cost vendor, as
necessary, to obtain the needed services. Although DPDS management
indicated that they followed the required procedures, there was inadequate
documentation maintained that this was done. Furthermore, our discussions
with several of the lower cost vendors identified one vendor who stated that it
had always had an available employee for the position we inquired about
(office secretary – advanced word processing). For this position, this firm
charged $11.55 an hour; the firms used by DPDS, which were ranked as
having the two highest costs of the nine vendors, charged $16.75 and $24.50
an hour. In two cases, the same temporary employees were employed by the
vendor charging $16.75 an hour and immediately thereafter by the vendor
charging $24.50 an hour to perform the same DPSCS jobs. During fiscal
years 2006 and 2007, DPDS temporary personnel expenditures totaled
$888,116 and $893,305, respectively.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the DPDS adequately monitor its service agreements.
Specifically, we recommend that DPDS ensure that all requirements are met
and all invoices are approved by appropriate supervisory personnel prior to
payment. In addition, we recommend that the DPDS improve the
management of its temporary employee contract and ensure that lower cost
vendors are used for all placements of temporary employees, if available, as
required by the contract, and that this process be documented.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 3
Proper internal control was not established over the processing of certain
disbursement transactions.
Analysis
DPDS did not fully use the security features available on the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) to establish proper internal control over
certain disbursement transactions. As a result, unauthorized transactions could be
processed which may not be readily detected. According to the State’s accounting
records, during fiscal year 2007, DPDS used FMIS to process disbursements
totaling approximately $29.4 million.
Specifically, five DPDS employees could both initiate and approve certain
disbursement transactions without being subject to independent online review and
approval. In addition, one of these employees could also add vendors to the
system. During fiscal year 2007, disbursement transactions initiated and approved
by the same employee totaled approximately $10 million.
In addition, DPDS paid certain invoices without verifying that the related goods or
services were received. Specifically, our test of seven payments made during
fiscal years 2005 through 2007, totaling approximately $145,000, disclosed that
five payments, totaling approximately $97,000, lacked documentation to support
that the related goods and services were received (such as a signed receiving
report). For example, DPDS paid $18,000 for ammunition without a receiving
report or other documentation that the goods were received.
A similar condition pertaining to the lack of full use of FMIS security features
was commented upon in our four preceding audit reports dating back to 1996.
Recommendation 3
We again recommend that DPDS fully use the available FMIS security
features by establishing independent online approval requirements for all
critical disbursement transactions. Specifically, employees who initiate
disbursement transactions should not also have the capability to approve
them. We also recommend that DPDS establish procedures to ensure that
documentation supporting the receipt of goods and services is received prior
to processing related vendor invoices.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 4
The DPDS had not established adequate control over certain corporate
purchasing card transactions.
Analysis
DPDS had not established adequate control over certain corporate purchasing card
(CPC) transactions. Our test of 103 items purchased with corporate purchasing
cards during the period from July 2005 through June 2007 totaling $69,000
disclosed the following deficiencies:
• Based on our test of 50 items totaling $15,073, 14 items valued at $3,883
(including air conditioners and televisions), could not be located on the DPDS
premises.
• DPDS appears to have split three CPC purchases, totaling $10,082, into eight
smaller purchases to circumvent the single transaction limit of $2,500, and to
avoid more stringent procurement requirements. A similar condition was
commented on in our preceding audit report.
• Supporting documentation (such as, invoice and/or receipt) was not always
adequate or on file for 24 individual charges tested. For example, for 21
transactions totaling $16,875, either the invoices did not provide sufficient
detail to determine what was being purchased or the amount of hourly labor
costs or individual supplies was not detailed.
The Comptroller of the Treasury's Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy
and Procedures Manual states that equipment purchased with corporate
purchasing cards is to be accounted for following the Department of General
Services guidelines. In addition, the Manual establishes maximum limits on
individual transaction purchases to facilitate agency control over the use of the
cards. Furthermore, documentation is required for all transactions. According to
the bank’s records, fiscal year 2007 CPC activity totaled $1.1 million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPDS comply with the provisions of the Comptroller of
the Treasury's Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures
Manual. Specifically, we recommend that DPDS record and account for
equipment items purchased with the CPC. In addition, we again recommend
13

--- Page 16 ---
that purchasing card transactions not be split to circumvent the single
transaction limit. We also recommend that DPDS maintain appropriate
documentation for all corporate card purchases.
Payroll
Finding 5
Supervisory review of supporting documentation for payroll adjustments
was not documented.
Analysis
Supervisory employees who approved the payroll timekeeping reports did not
document that they had reviewed, for propriety and accuracy, the documentation
(such as time sheets and overtime authorization forms) for payroll adjustments
recorded in the State’s payroll system prior to electronically releasing the entries
to the State’s Central Payroll Bureau. Without verifying the propriety of payroll
adjustments, errors and unauthorized adjustments could be processed without
detection. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2007, the DPDS
payroll expenditures totaled approximately $72.8 million, including
approximately $8.8 million in employee overtime. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We again recommend that supervisory personnel document their verification
of payroll adjustments to source documents (time sheets and overtime
authorization forms).
Budget Closeout
Finding 6
DPDS did not maintain documentation to support certain fiscal year 2006
accrued expenditures. Additionally, journal entries processed on the State’s
accounting system effectively allowed DPDS to use funds provided by fiscal
year 2006 accruals to fund fiscal year 2007 expenditures.
Analysis
DPDS did not maintain proper documentation to support certain fiscal year 2006
accrued expenditures. Additionally, journal entries processed on the State’s
14

--- Page 17 ---
accounting system effectively allowed DPDS to use funds provided by fiscal year
2006 accruals to fund fiscal year 2007 expenditures. Fiscal year 2006 general
fund accrued expenditures totaled $2.9 million. Our review disclosed the
following conditions:
• Our test of six fiscal year 2006 accrued expenditures totaling $652,500
disclosed that, for three accruals totaling $295,000, there was inadequate
supporting documentation for the accruals or the documentation indicated that
the accrual was improper. For example, we were advised by DPDS
management that one fiscal year 2006 accrual for $126,390 related to an
unpaid invoice; however, we noted that the invoice had previously been paid.
Therefore, this item was not a valid accrual. The amounts improperly accrued
should be reverted to the State’s General Fund.
• DPDS routinely processed journal entries after year-end that had the potential
effect of allowing it to use the funds provided by a prior year accrual to fund
current year expenditures. This practice, which was used with respect to its
$2.9 million accruals as of June 30, 2006, was not consistent with the
Comptroller of the Treasury — General Accounting Division’s Accounting
Procedures Manual. This guidance provides that, when paid, expenditures
should be charged to the year the funds were appropriated. Furthermore,
because of this practice, expenditures were not identified by appropriation
year and it could not be readily determined if accruals were liquidated. In the
event that an accrual was not fully liquidated (as would be the case with the
$126,390 above), funds that should be reverted to the General Fund would not
be readily identified and would be available to DPDS to supplement the
current year appropriation.
The aforementioned Accounting Procedures Manual requires that agencies
maintain supporting documentation for its accrued expenditures. It also
recommends that expenditure transactions related to accruals be charged to the
same appropriation year as the accrual entry.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DPDS comply with Comptroller of the Treasury –
General Accounting Division’s Accounting Procedures Manual by
maintaining proper documentation to support accrued expenditure entries
and by discontinuing the aforementioned practice relating to year-end
accruals. Finally, we recommend that DPDS analyze its accrual entries and
related liquidation, and revert any unliquidated accruals, as well as the
aforementioned $126,390, to the General Fund.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Property
Finding 7
Property records were not adequately maintained, and DPDS did not
reconcile its physical inventory with its related detail records.
Analysis
Property records were not maintained in compliance with certain requirements of
the Department of General Services (DGS) Inventory Control Manual. As of
June 30, 2007, the reported book value of DPDS equipment totaled approximately
$5 million. Our review of DPDS recordkeeping and inventory procedures
disclosed the following deficiencies:
• A physical inventory conducted in July 2007 was not reconciled with the
existing detail records. Rather the physical inventory conducted was used as
the basis for new detail records intended to be maintained by the agency.
However, we noted that, as of August 2007, these records did not include
values for many items. Furthermore, without a reconciliation of the results of
the physical inventory with the existing detail records, DPDS lacked assurance
that all items had been accounted for. For example, our review of the June
2007 detail records identified 99 washers and dryers; however, the new detail
records included only 48 washers and dryers. Agency management could not
explain this discrepancy.
• An equipment control account was not maintained as required. A control
account is a continuous summary of transactions and serves as a total dollar
value control over amounts in the detail records.
• DPDS detail property records were not adequately maintained. Our test of 32
equipment items purchased during fiscal years 2006 and 2007, at a cost of
$9,200, disclosed that only 8 of the 32 items were recorded in the detail
records.
• The annual report of fixed assets was not submitted to DGS for fiscal year
2006, as required. Additionally, although the DPDS submitted the annual
report of fixed assets for fiscal year 2007, the amount reported was not reliable
as DPDS reported that many equipment items did not reflect an acquisition
cost in the records.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Similar record keeping deficiencies have been commented upon in our four
preceding audit reports dating back to November 1996. The DGS Inventory
Control Manual requires that a control account and detail records be properly
maintained for all categories of property, and that the detail records be reconciled
with the related control account balance. The Manual further provides that the
results of physical inventories are to be reconciled with the related detail records.
Recommendation 7
We again recommend that DPDS comply with the aforementioned
requirements of the DGS Inventory Control Manual.
Materials and Supplies
Finding 8
Procedures and controls over the DPDS’ materials and supplies inventory
were inadequate.
Analysis
Procedures and controls over the materials and supplies inventory in the DPDS
central storeroom were inadequate. Specifically, we noted the following
deficiencies:
• DPDS management advised us that, during January 2007, new materials and
supplies perpetual inventory records were created for items in the central
storeroom because the previous records were either non-existent or not
adequately maintained. Differences between these perpetual inventory record
balances and physical inventories performed at the end of June 2007 were not
adequately investigated and resolved. Rather, the records were adjusted to
reflect the physical inventory counts and the differences between the actual
physical inventory counts and the perpetual inventory records had not been
investigated as of August 31, 2007. For example, the total value of uniforms
according to the inventory records ($219,000) exceeded the value according to
the physical inventory counts ($191,000) by approximately $28,000. In
addition, these adjustments generally were not reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel.
17

--- Page 20 ---
• The value of DPDS materials and supplies had not been reported to DGS for
fiscal years 2006 and 2007, as required.
As a result of the aforementioned deficiencies, DPDS management may not
readily detect any misappropriations or irregularities involving its materials and
supplies inventories. The DGS Inventory Control Manual establishes certain
requirements regarding internal controls and related recordkeeping to be followed
by State agencies. During fiscal year 2006, DPDS spent approximately $3.1
million for materials and supplies and, as of June 30, 2007, the materials and
supplies located at the central storeroom (which excluded maintenance supplies
and ammunition) had a value of $666,359 according to the physical inventory of
these items.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that the DPDS comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that differences
between the physical quantities on hand and the related perpetual records be
investigated and resolved by an employee who does not have access to the
materials and supplies inventory and related adjustments be reviewed and
approved by supervisory personnel, as required. Additionally, we
recommend that the investigations and adjustments be documented and
retained for future reference. We also recommend that DPDS report the
fiscal year-end materials and supplies balances to DGS, as required.
Accounts Receivable
Finding 9
DPDS had not executed a lease with an entity that had been using DPDS
facilities for an extended period. Furthermore, no requests for rent payments
had been made since December 2005.
Analysis
DPDS had not entered into a new lease agreement with a nonprofit entity that
occupied space in a DPDS facility. Specifically, the lease agreement, originally
executed in 1992, had lapsed and no subsequent lease agreement had been
executed. Furthermore, DPDS had not attempted to collect rent from the entity
for the period from January 2006 through December 2007, and an outstanding
balance for the prior period remained unpaid. Specifically, the entity had an
18

--- Page 21 ---
outstanding receivable balance of $27,606 related to billings from April 2005
through December 2005, which was forwarded to the State’s Central Collection
Unit for collection, according to DPDS records. No subsequent billings were
issued.
We were informed that the entity previously rented office space in a DPDS facility
for $3,744 per month. As a result of water damage, that office became
uninhabitable, and DPDS provided the entity with alternative office space to
continue offering its services (such as drug counseling to the public). Since the
entity had to move to the new location and limit its services, DPDS did not hold it
to the prior lease agreement; however, a new lease agreement was not executed.
We were advised by DPDS management that, as of December 2007, the entity
ceased to operate from this location.
State law requires that leases of State-owned real property be approved by the
Board of Public Works (BPW).
Recommendation 9
We recommend that the DPDS, in conjunction with the Assistant Attorney
General, determine lease amounts owed, but unbilled, and follow-up to
collect amounts due. We also recommend that any future uses of DPDS
facilities be supported by a lease agreement that has been approved by BPW.
Referrals to Authorities
Finding 10
There was a lack of documentation that certain fraudulent acts discovered by
DPDS were immediately reported to authorities.
Analysis
There was a lack of documentation that certain fraudulent acts discovered by
DPDS were immediately reported to the Office of the Attorney General –
Criminal Division (CD) and the Chief Counsel to the Governor. DPDS
administrative investigations, which were completed in May and June 2007,
disclosed that three employees presented fraudulent medical documentation to
justify their absences from duty and that another employee failed to properly
report time worked. As a result of these investigations, DPDS advised that one
employee was terminated and the other three resigned. However, there was a lack
of documentation that DPDS forwarded the results of these administrative
19

--- Page 22 ---
investigations to the Attorney General – Criminal Division (CD) and the Chief
Counsel to the Governor. Rather, the referral letters were received by these units
in October 2007, subsequent to our inquiry. According to DPDS records, the
monetary loss to the State for two of these cases may be more than $18,000.
A February 2007 Executive Order issued by the Governor states that all
departments and agencies of the State shall immediately refer to the Assistant
Attorney General of the Department or Agency or to the Deputy Attorney General
with supervisory responsibility for the Attorney General’s Criminal Division, any
instance of possible criminal or unethical conduct by any employee or contractor
of this State, for such action as the Office of the Attorney General deems
appropriate. All departments and agencies shall also immediately advise the
Chief Legal Counsel to the Governor of any such referrals.
A similar condition was commented on in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 10
We again recommend that, in the future, DPDS promptly inform the
appropriate authorities of instances of possible criminal or unethical conduct
in accordance with the requirements of the aforementioned Executive Order.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services (DPDS) of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services for the period beginning
June 3, 2004 and ending June 13, 2007. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DPDS’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the current
status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of DPDS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit scope was limited with respect to DPDS’s cash transactions because the
Office of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the State’s main bank
accounts during a portion of the audit period. Due to this condition, we were
unable to determine, with reasonable assurance, that all DPDS cash transactions
prior to July 1, 2005 were accounted for and properly recorded on the related State
accounting records as well as the banks’ records.
DPDS’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors, or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may change
or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DPDS’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DPDS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
DPDS’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DPDS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
22

--- Page 25 ---
APPENDIX
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
300 E. JOPPA ROAD • SUITE 1000 • TOWSON, MARYLAND 21286-3020
(410) 339-5000 • FAX (410) 339-4240 • TOLL FREE (877) 379-8636 • V/TTY (800) 735-2258 • www.dpscs.state.md.us
STATE OF MARYLAND April 7, 2008
MARTIN O’MALLEY
GOVERNOR
ANTHONY G. BROWN
LT. GOVERNOR
GARY D. MAYNARD
SECRETARY
Mr. Bruce A. Myers, CPA
G. LAWRENCE FRANKLIN
DEPUTY SECRETARY Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
DIVISION OF CORRECTION
Room 1202
DIVISION OF PAROLE AND
PROBATION 301 West Preston Street
DIVISION OF PRETRIAL Baltimore, Maryland 21201
DETENTION AND SERVICES
PATUXENT INSTITUTION
Dear Mr. Myers:
MARYLAND COMMISSION ON
CORRECTIONAL STANDARDS
CORRECTIONAL TRAINING The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services has reviewed
COMMISSION
the draft audit report for the Department’s Division of Pretrial Detention and
POLICE TRAINING
COMMISSION Services (DPDS) for the period beginning June 3, 2004, and ending June 13,
MARYLAND PAROLE 2007. The DPDS, as well as the Department, strive to ensure that the complex
COMMISSION
business functions and operations of all the DPDS facilities are managed properly.
CRIMINAL INJURIES
COMPENSATION BOARD Accordingly, we acknowledge the importance of each finding and appreciate the
EMERGENCY NUMBER constructive recommendations that were made as a result of this audit. In fact, as
SYSTEMS BOARD
a result of the DPDS’ commitment to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its
SUNDRY CLAIMS BOARD
operations, I am pleased that Commissioner Ray reports that steps were taken to
INMATE GRIEVANCE OFFICE
implement several of the auditor’s recommendations prior to the issuance of this
report.
It should also be noted that during this audit period, the Division has
undertaken some significant initiatives that were designed to improve customer
service to Maryland's citizens by increasing economy and efficiency, creating safer
communities, and enhancing relationships with local governments and other
stakeholders that share a mutual vision. The Department is proud of the Division’s
record of accomplishments and continues to strongly support its ongoing efforts to
develop, administer, and deliver quality services to the people it serves. Some
significant recent accomplishments/initiatives include:
• DPDS has developed a violence reduction process that involves a bi-
weekly analysis of incidents by a management committee and
continuous adjustments and corrective actions to reduce assaults on
both detainees and staff. This process has been successful in
reducing the number of assaults in the Baltimore Central Booking and
Intake Center from a high of 352 in FY 2005 to 206 in FY 2007.
• In January 2007, the Department entered into a consent agreement
with the Department of Justice (DOJ) over the conditions of
confinement at the Baltimore City Detention Center (BCDC). DOJ
representatives and subject experts have already acknowledged that

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
DIVISION OF PRETRIAL DETENTION AND SERVICES
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER
400 E. MADISON STREET• BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 21202
(410) 209-4290 • FAX (410) 209-4250 • TOLL FREE (866) 274-0105 • V/TTY (800) 735-2258 • www.dpscs.state.md.us
STATE OF MARYLAND
MARTIN O’MALLEY
GOVERNOR 4 April 2008
ANTHONY G. BROWN
LT. GOVERNOR Gary D. Maynard, Secretary
GARY D. MAYNARD Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
SECRETARY
300 East Joppa Road, Suite 1000
G. LAWRENCE FRANKLIN
DEPUTY SECRETARY Towson, MD 21286-3020
HOWARD RAY
COMMISSIONER
BENJAMIN F. BROWN, CCE Dear Secretary Maynard:
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER
RENARD E. BROOKS
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER This is the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services’ (DPDS) response to the
Report of the Legislative Auditor for the audit period beginning 3 June 2004
and ending 13 June 2007. DPDS has begun, and will continue, to take the
necessary steps to ensure complete implementation of the agreed-upon
recommendations of the Legislative Auditor’s Report.
Finding #1 - An agreement with a State’s Attorney Office did not include
sufficient specifications.
Recommendation #1 - We recommend that DPDS modify the SAO
agreement to include the payment terms and deliverables. We further
recommend that DPDS ensure that payments are made consistent with
the revised agreement.
We agree. DPDS will draft a new agreement with the State’s Attorney Office
(SAO) that includes appropriate payment terms and specifies the services to
be provided. We expect to have a suitable agreement in place by 1 July 2008.
In addition, DPDS will review each invoice received from the SAO and verify
that it contains appropriate documentation to support the services provided, as
specified in the new agreement. This verification process shall be in place by
1 September 2008 or at the time of the first payment under the new
agreement, whichever occurs first.
Finding #2 - Service agreements were not adequately monitored to
ensure payments were made in accordance with terms of the agreements
and that all requirements were met.
Recommendation #2 - We recommend that the DPDS adequately monitor
its service agreements. Specifically, we recommend that DPDS ensure
that all requirements are met and all invoices are approved by the
appropriate supervisory personnel prior to payment. In addition, we
recommend that the DPDS improve the management of its temporary
employee contract and ensure that lower cost vendors are used for all

--- Page 28 ---
DPDS Response to Legislative Auditor’s Report Page 2 of 5
placements of temporary employees, if available, as required by the contract, and that
this process be documented.
We agree. The payment approval process for service agreements will be modified to
require identification of the contracted critical service requirements, acknowledgement that
requirements have been met during the invoiced period, and formal authorization of
payment by the contract monitor, using a form prepared for each contract. This revised
process has been in place since 1 April 2008. The process for temporary employee
placements has been modified to use a form prepared for each placement request to
properly document efforts to obtain the lower cost vendors as directed in the contract.
Finding #3 - Proper internal control was not established over the processing of
certain disbursement transactions.
Recommendation #3 - We again recommend that DPDS fully use the available FMIS
security features by establishing independent online approval requirements for all
critical disbursement transactions. Specifically, employees who initiate
disbursement transactions should not also have the capability to approve them. We
also recommend that DPDS establish procedures to ensure that documentation
supporting the receipt of goods and services is received prior to processing related
vendor invoices.
We agree. The FMIS security authorizations were corrected on 19 July 2007 to ensure that
employees initiating disbursement transactions could not also approve them. Formal
accountability was established to ensure that appropriate documentation for receipt of goods
and services is available at the time invoices are processed initially for payment.
Finding #4 - The DPDS had not established adequate control over certain corporate
purchasing card transactions.
Recommendation #4 - We recommend that DPDS comply with the provisions of the
Comptroller of the Treasury’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual. Specifically, we recommend that DPDS record and account for
equipment items purchased with the CPC. In addition, we again recommend that
purchasing card transactions not be split to circumvent the single transaction limit.
We also recommend that DPDS maintain appropriate documentation for all corporate
card purchases.
We agree. The CPC (Corporate Purchasing Card) authorization process has been changed
to ensure that the Property Officer receives a copy of the approved requisition form for all
equipment purchased with a CPC. Service contracts are being appropriately established to
preclude the appearance of transactions being split. Monthly CPC statements are reviewed
to identify any potential split transactions and individual card holders will be held
accountable for prohibited transactions. Formal accountability was established to ensure
that proper CPC purchases documentation is received and maintained.

--- Page 29 ---
DPDS Response to Legislative Auditor’s Report Page 3 of 5
Finding #5 - Supervisory review of supporting documentation for payroll adjustments
was not documented.
Recommendation #5 - We again recommend that supervisory personnel document
their verification of payroll adjustments to source documents (time sheets and
overtime authorization forms).
We agree. Procedures to ensure proper documentation of payroll adjustments were
changed in July 2007. Additional steps were taken recently to implement the requirements
of Secretary’s Department Directive 115-1 (Staffing Analysis and Overtime Management)
and to provide for management verification of specific areas of concern.
Finding #6 - DPDS did not maintain documentation to support certain fiscal year 2006
accrued expenditures. Additionally, journal entries processed on the State’s
accounting system effectively allowed DPDS to use funds provided by fiscal year
2006 accruals to fund fiscal year 2007 expenditures.
Recommendation #6 - We recommend that DPDS comply with Comptroller of the
Treasury – General Accounting Division’s Accounting Procedures Manual by
maintaining proper documentation to support accrued expenditure entries and by
discontinuing the aforementioned practice relating to year-end accruals. Finally, we
recommend that DPDS analyze its accrual entries and related liquidation, and revert
any unliquidated accruals, as well as the aforementioned$126,390, to the General
Fund.
We agree in part, disagree in part. DPDS will comply with Comptroller of Maryland –
General Accounting Division’s Accounting Procedures Manual and will maintain proper
documentation to support accrued expenditure entries. In addition, DPDS will submit to the
Office of the Secretary, Division of Financial Services, a complete listing of accrued
expenditures and related documentation with the year end closing package.
However, the Department disagrees that the practice of preparing adjusting journal entries
to move the accrued expenditure reversing entries from the prior Appropriation Year to the
current Appropriation Year in order to ensure that the reversing entry properly offsets the
expenditure when it is paid during the normal course of business, is not consistent with the
requirements of the Comptroller.
Finally, DPDS agrees to revert the $126,390 referenced by the auditor during the fiscal year
2008 closing. However, DPDS does not have adequate resources to analyze fiscal year
2006 accrued expenditures and related liquidations, because all available fiscal office staff
are required to handle the current workload and process current transactions.
Finding #7 - Property records were not adequately maintained, and DPDS did not
reconcile its physical inventory with its related detail records.
Recommendation #7 - We again recommend that DPDS comply with the
aforementioned requirements of the DGS Inventory Control Manual.

--- Page 30 ---
DPDS Response to Legislative Auditor’s Report Page 4 of 5
We agree. DPDS will comply with the requirements of the DGS Inventory Control Manual.
The physical inventory taken in July 2007 has been reconciled to the existing detail records
and the appropriate Missing, Lost, or Stolen Reports prepared for submission to DGS. The
control accounts were confirmed and are being maintained as required. The detail property
records are properly maintained in 4 newly established data bases for DPDS using software
purchased by the Department for this purpose. The required annual physical inventory of
fixed assets will be completed by 30 June 2008. The annual report of fixed assets will be
filed with DGS for fiscal year 2008 in August 2008, using the confirmed records.
Appropriate management accountability has been established and will be verified by 31 May
2008.
Finding #8 - Procedures and controls over the DPDS’ materials and supplies
inventory were inadequate.
Recommendation #8 - We recommend that the DPDS comply with the requirements of
the DGS Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that differences
between the physical quantities on hand and the related perpetual records be
investigated and resolved by an employee who does not have access to the materials
and supplies inventory and related adjustments be reviewed and approved by
supervisory personnel, as required. Additionally, we recommend that the
investigations and adjustments be documented and retained for future reference. We
also recommend that DPDS report the fiscal year-end materials and supplies
balances to DGS, as required.
We agree. DPDS will comply with the requirements of the Department of General Services’
Inventory Control Manual. The differences between the physical quantities on hand and the
related perpetual records have been investigated and resolved by an employee who does
not have access to the materials and supplies stock, and the inventory adjustments were
reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel, as required. The investigations and
adjustments have been documented and retained for future reference. Manual inventory
records maintained by DPDS were converted to electronic spreadsheets to eliminate
arithmetic discrepancies noted during the audit. Additional required inventory records will be
established in specific areas by 30 May 2008. DPDS will report the fiscal year end materials
and supplies balance to DGS in August 2008, based on the required inventory records and
physical inventory.
Finding #9 - DPDS had not executed a lease with an entity that had been using DPDS
facilities for an extended period. Furthermore, no requests for rent payments had
been made since December 2005.
Recommendation #9 - We recommend that the DPDS, in conjunction with the
Assistant Attorney General, determine lease amounts owed, but unbilled, and follow-
up to collect amounts due. We also recommend that any future uses of DPDS
facilities be supported by a lease agreement that has been approved by BPW.
We agree. DPDS is currently working with its Assistant Attorney General to determine the
lease amounts owed, but not billed. Initial estimates indicate that the receivables previously
forwarded to the Central Collection Unit are sufficient to cover the lease amounts for the
period in question. Further review of this issue will be completed by 15 May 2008. DPDS
does not expect to approve use of its facilities by outside organizations in the future, except
those allied agencies that are an integral part of its operations; however, should such

--- Page 32 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Phyllis M. Clancy, CPA
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Tamufor Nchumuluh
Staff Auditor