Title: Maryland State Board of Contract Appeals
Date: 05/06/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d724560674392
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:21:41.738253
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland State Board of Contract Appeals
January 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenam ThomasJ. BarnickelIII,CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
January 11, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Maryland State Board of
Contract Appeals for the period beginning March 20, 2013 and ending June 30,
2016. The Board’s primary responsibility is to hear and decide appeals made by
contractors regarding disputes over the formation ofcontracts with the State, as
well as disputes arising under executed contracts with the State.
Our audit did not disclose any findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis
audit by the Board.
Respectfully submitted,
72
)
ThomaIl. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street• Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-fRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland State Board of Contract Appeals consists of three members
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
primary responsibility of the Board is to hear and decide appeals made by
contractors regarding disputes over the formation of contracts with the State
and/or disputes arising under executed contracts with the State. The Board’s
responsibility does not include certain disputes, such as those concerning the
formation of contracts to procure architectural or engineering services, which may
be appealed to the Board of Public Works. The Board also lacks jurisdiction over
labor disputes and/or certain disputes relating to a lease of real property.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2016, the Board had five
authorized positions (including the three Board members), and operating
expenditures totaled approximately $733,000.
Organizational Change
Chapter 143, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective July 1, 2016, established the
Board as a program under the Executive Department – Boards, Commissions, and
Offices. Prior to that date, the Board was a separate budgetary unit within
Executive and Administrative Control. As a result of this change, this will be our
final audit of the Board as a separate entity. In the future, the Board will be
subject to audit during our audits of the Executive Department – Boards,
Commissions, and Offices.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Board’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Board. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland State Board of
Contract Appeals for the period beginning March 20, 2013 and ending June 30,
2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Board’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. Based on these
assessments, the only area addressed by the audit was payroll.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Board’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data) and the
State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part
of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
The Board’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
4

--- Page 7 ---
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Senior Auditor