Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Information Technology Division (Data Center and Network Review)
Date: 12/21/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d724560674470
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:58:20.928410
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
December 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410 946-5400 or 301
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
December 21, 2010
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology
Division (ITD). ITD provides computing and network resources and operates as a
computer services bureau for the Comptroller of Maryland and other customer
agencies.
Our audit disclosed that mainframe security software access and password
controls were not adequate, and ITD did not properly monitor mainframe security
software reports and changes to critical production procedure programs. In
addition, on-site contractors had unnecessary access to critical ITD systems, and
intrusion detection and prevention systems were not used to monitor traffic on a
data line used by certain data center partners, such as financial institutions, to
access the mainframe computer.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s response to this audit, on behalf of ITD, is
included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us during our audit by ITD.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Mainframe Software
Finding 1 – Mainframe Security Software Access and Password Controls 5
Were Not Adequate
* Finding 2 – Monitoring of Security Software Reports and Controls Over 6
Changes to Critical Production Procedure Programs Were Not Adequate
Network Security
Finding 3 – The ITD Internal Network Was Not Properly Secured 7
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 8
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Information Technology Division (ITD) operates the Annapolis Data Center
as a computer service bureau, and all operating costs are reimbursed by user
agencies that are charged for services performed. In addition, the ITD develops
and maintains application systems for the Comptroller of Maryland, and provides
data center disaster recovery capabilities. Additionally, the ITD maintains the
operating system and security software environment in which agency applications
are executed.
The ITD operates an internal network that provides services, including Internet
and Statewide Intranet access, email, and file sharing, to all the divisions of the
Comptroller of Maryland (approximately 1,200 employees). According to the
State’s records, the ITD fiscal year 2010 operating budget totaled $29.4 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 13, 2006. We determined that ITD
satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Mainframe Software
Finding 1
Mainframe security software access and password controls were not
adequate.
Analysis
Mainframe security software access and password controls were not adequate.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Eighty-four users had unnecessary direct unlogged or logged access to many
critical production programs. Accordingly, unauthorized changes to these
production programs could occur, resulting in unauthorized changes to
production data and, for unlogged items, these changes could go undetected.
 Fifty-two active accounts, with access to critical files, had passwords set to
never expire. Of these 52 accounts, 3 were user accounts and 49 were
system/application accounts, which could be used by individuals to directly
log on to the system. Accordingly, if the passwords for these accounts were
compromised, they could be used as long as the accounts are active. For the
aforementioned 49 accounts, we noted that ITD could enable parameters to
prevent such access by individual users.
 The Information Technology Division (ITD) Help Desk, which can perform
password resets for users who forget their passwords, did not request
sufficient information to adequately verify the legitimacy of an individual
requesting a password reset. Specifically, the Help Desk only requested the
name of the individual requesting the reset. As a result, individuals could
fraudulently gain access to a legitimate user’s account and improperly use the
privileges associated with that account.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ITD
a. restrict access to critical production programs to only those individuals
requiring such access and log all such accesses,
b. enforce appropriate password lifetimes and restrict direct user logon with
system/application accounts, and
c. request sufficient information to adequately verify the legitimacy of
individuals requesting password resets.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 2
Monitoring of security software reports and controls over changes to critical
production procedure programs were not adequate.
Analysis
Monitoring of security software reports and controls over changes to critical
production procedure programs were not adequate. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 Security software violation logs for critical ITD data files were reviewed only
for violations by ITD employees, rather than for all violations, which would
include other agency users. Additionally, security software reports of changes
to userids and failed logon attempts were not reviewed. Furthermore, entries
on the log of changes to security rules were not verified to ensure the
propriety of the changes made, and the person who reviewed this log could
change the security rules. Accordingly, there was a lack of assurance as to the
propriety of the changes made to critical data files.
 Changes to critical production procedure programs, which initiate and control
the processing of agency production programs and data files, were not
adequately controlled. Specifically, for four of five of these changes tested, a
change request form did not exist, and there was no documentation that these
changes were reviewed by management. As a result, there was a lack of
assurance that production data and programs were processed in a manner
approved by management. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ITD
a. review the aforementioned security software logs and reports for all
users,
b. perform an independent verification of the propriety of changes to
security rules, and
c. generate and retain a change request form for all changes to critical
production procedure programs and retain evidence of the review and
approval of these forms (repeat).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Network Security
Finding 3
The ITD internal network was not properly secured.
Analysis
The ITD internal network was not properly secured from third parties.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 The Comptroller of Maryland is developing a new tax system with extensive
use of on-site contractors. We were advised that these contractors only
required access to the new tax system’s servers and to a few support systems,
such as email. However, these on-site contractors had unnecessary network
level access to numerous critical ITD systems.
 The ITD computer network was not effectively protected by intrusion
detection and prevention system (IDPS) devices, which are used to monitor
network traffic. Specifically, IDPS protection was not applied to traffic on
ITD’s data line used by certain data center partners, such as financial
institutions, to access the mainframe computer. Although the ITD had
previously purchased an IDPS device for this line, it was not installed at the
time of our audit.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that ITD
a. restrict contractors’ network level access to only those systems to which
they require access,
b. perform a documented review and assessment to identify how IDPS
coverage should be applied to its network and implement such coverage
(including installing the previously-purchased IDPS device on the
aforementioned data line) for all critical segments of its network.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology
Division (ITD). Fieldwork associated with our review of the data center was
conducted during the period from January 2010 to June 2010. Additionally,
fieldwork associated with our audit of the network was conducted during the
period from May 2010 to September 2010. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ITD’s internal
control over the Comptroller’s data center and network and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations for the computer
systems that support the Comptroller and user agencies. Our audit also included
an assessment of the security controls for critical routers, firewalls, switches, and
virtual private network appliances, as well as an assessment of security controls
related to the Comptroller’s wireless connectivity. ITD’s fiscal operations are
audited separately as part of our audit of the ITD; the latest report that covered
ITD’s fiscal operations was issued on May 29, 2008. We also determined the
status of the findings included in our preceding audit report on ITD dated
September 13, 2006.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major areas of operations
based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas addressed by the audit
included general controls and security controls over operating systems, databases,
firewalls, routers, and virtual private networks. Our audit procedures included
inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, and
observations of ITD’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives.
Data provided in this report for background or informational purposes were
deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
ITD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ITD’s ability to operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply
with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Other less significant findings were communicated to ITD that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
The response from the Comptroller, on behalf of ITD, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Comptroller regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 15 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Staff Auditors