Title: Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund - January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2008
Date: 03/06/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744ff
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:23:58.425695
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund
January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 6, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
As required by the Insurance Article, Section 19-808 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have audited the receipts and disbursements of the Maryland Health
Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1, 2008
and ending December 31, 2008.
The Fund is administered by the Commissioner of the Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA), and consists primarily of revenues generated by an annual
premium tax imposed on health maintenance organizations and managed care
organizations. The Fund serves several purposes, including retention of certain
health care providers in the State by subsidizing their malpractice insurance
premiums for a specified number of years, and by increasing certain rates paid to
providers by the Maryland Medical Assistance program and payments to managed
care organizations that serve that program.
Our audit did not include procedures designed to verify the propriety of the
subsidy payments made to medical professional liability insurers since State law
requires MIA to conduct annual audits of each insurer for this purpose. However,
our audit again disclosed that these audits were not being completed on a timely
basis.
A schedule of the Fund’s financial activity for the 2008 calendar year is included
in this report. As disclosed in that schedule, the Fund’s cash balance was
approximately $63.5 million as of December 31, 2008.

--- Page 4 ---
MIA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by
MIA.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Establishment and Purpose of the Fund
The Insurance Article, Section 19-802 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
established the Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund effective
April 1, 2005. The law provides that the Fund will serve several purposes,
including retention of certain health care providers in the State by subsidizing
their malpractice insurance premiums for a specified number of years, and by
increasing fee-for-service rates paid to providers by the Maryland Medical
Assistance program (Medicaid) and payments to managed care organizations that
serve that program. The Fund is administered by the Commissioner of the
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA).
The Fund consists primarily of revenues generated by an annual premium tax
imposed on health maintenance organizations and managed care organizations.
All revenues are to be initially deposited into the Fund, and then allocated, in
accordance with a schedule established in the law, to two accounts: the Rate
Stabilization Account and the Medical Assistance Program Account. Amounts
allocated to the Rate Stabilization Account are to be paid, in accordance with
established criteria, to medical professional liability insurers who apply to MIA
for rate subsidies on behalf of insured health care providers. Amounts allocated
to the Medical Assistance Program Account are to be paid by MIA to the State’s
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to increase payments to Medicaid
providers and managed care organizations. The law provides that revenue
allocations to the two accounts will continue through fiscal year 2009. Beginning
in fiscal year 2010, all Fund revenues are to be allocated to the Medical
Assistance Program Account.
Allocation of Balance in Rate Stabilization Account
Chapter 589, Laws of Maryland 2008 provided that $83,275,000 of the balance
remaining in the Rate Stabilization Account at the end of fiscal year 2008 shall be
transferred as follows:
• $7,000,000 to the State’s Medical Assistance Program Account to be used
to increase fee-for-service provider rates to dentists in fiscal year 2009,
• $3,000,000 to the State’s Health Care Coverage Fund established under
Title 15, Subtitle 7 of the Health – General Article to be used for
allowable expenses in fiscal year 2009, and
3

--- Page 6 ---
• $73,275,000 to the Health Care Coverage Fund to be used for allowable
expenses in fiscal years 2010 and 2011.
These transfers were made by MIA in October 2008 and are included in the
payments made to the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene as reflected in
the Summary of Financial Information on page 5.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 10, 2008. We determined that MIA
satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
Financial Information
On page 5 is a summary of the receipts and disbursements for the Maryland
Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1,
2008 and ending December 31, 2008, based on the State’s accounting records.
This summary is not intended to and does not provide the financial position and
results of operations in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Specifically, certain financial statements and disclosures (for example, balance
sheet, summary of significant accounting policies) have not been provided as
would be required had this summary been prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.
4

--- Page 7 ---
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITY
January 1, 2008 to
December 31, 2008
RECEIPTS:
Premium taxes $ 85,956,072
Premium tax exemption value (1) 9,286,956
Interest income 7,885,600
Total receipts 103,128,628
DISBURSEMENTS:
Payments to medical professional liability insurers 10,014,570
Payments to Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 161,860,826
Administration expenses 375,125
Total disbursements 172,250,521
EXCESS OF DISBURSEMENTS OVER RECEIPTS (69,121,893)
FUND BALANCE (cash basis), December 31, 2007 132,586,897
FUND BALANCE (cash basis), December 31, 2008 $ 63,465,004
(1)
Premium tax exemption value represents amounts paid by non-profit health maintenance organizations
in lieu of premium taxes.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Audits
Finding 1
Required audits of applications submitted by insurers for subsidy payments
were not completed on a timely basis.
Analysis
Required audits of application information submitted by medical professional
liability insurers that applied for and received subsidies from the Fund were not
completed on a timely basis. Such audits provide assurance that insurers properly
calculated subsidy amounts due the insurers. We were advised that, as of
February 2009, the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) had completed
audits and issued final reports for just two of the four insurers who had applied for
and received subsidy payments for subsidy year 2005, although responses to one
of those reports had not yet been received from the applicable insurer. Audits of
the other two insurers were in process.
Regarding subsidy year 2006, none of the audits of the five insurers who had
applied for and received subsidy payments were completed, although a draft
report had been issued for two of the insurers. According to MIA, audits of the
remaining three insurers had not yet been started. MIA also advised us that it was
not practical to start these audits because the insurers anticipate requesting
additional subsidy year 2006 reimbursements. This condition was commented
upon in our preceding audit report. Subsidy payments to insurers totaled $8.8
million and $13.3 million for subsidy years 2005 and 2006, respectively
(excluding payments initially made to then returned by the Medical Mutual
Liability Insurance Society of Maryland).
The law requires the Commissioner (or designee) to conduct an annual audit to
verify application information submitted by each medical professional liability
insurer that applied for a subsidy payment from the Fund for an applicable
subsidy year. Since all participating insurers do not implement rate changes on
the same date and often renew policies on a staggered basis throughout the year,
the subsidy year for each insurer will vary and may not end for months after the
end of the related calendar year (for example, subsidy year activity may not be
completed for more than a year after the related calendar year). MIA policy
provides that audits will begin as soon as practicable after the end of the insurer’s
subsidy year. Furthermore, MIA has advised that, although a particular subsidy
year for an insurer may have ended, the audit of the insurer for that year cannot be
started until all related financial activity, such as any final subsidy requests, for
6

--- Page 9 ---
the year has been completed. However, we question why MIA must wait until all
subsidy applications are processed for a particular insurer and subsidy year before
beginning their audit. Under these conditions, the audit of an insurer may be
delayed for an indefinite period subsequent to the end of the subsidy year since
there is no specific deadline as to when all financial activity for a subsidy year
must be completed. We believe that MIA should complete these audits on a
timely basis.
Recommendation 1
We again recommend that MIA complete audits of subsidy application
information submitted by insurers on a timely basis, and take any
appropriate follow-up action deemed necessary.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
As required by the Insurance Article, Section 19-808 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have audited the receipts and disbursements of the Maryland Health
Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund for the period beginning January 1, 2008
and ending December 31, 2008. The Fund is administered by the Commissioner
of the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA). The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
The objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s receipts and
disbursements and related records and internal control, and to evaluate
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of
documents and records, and observations of the Fund’s operations. We also
tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives.
MIA is required by law to annually audit each medical professional liability
insurer that applied for a subsidy payment from the Fund to verify application
information submitted by the insurer; accordingly, our audit did not include
procedures designed to verify the propriety of the amounts requested by medical
professional liability insurers and the disposition of such payments. As
previously mentioned, our audit disclosed that these audits were not being
completed on a timely basis.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Fund by MIA.
These support services (such as maintenance of accounting records and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of MIA.
MIA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control over the Fund. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding that we consider to be a significant deficiency in the
design and operation of internal control that could adversely affect MIA’s ability
to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. We also considered that
finding to be a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules,
or regulations.
MIA’s response to our finding and recommendation is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MIA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
9

--- Page 13 ---
MIA Response to
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
Required audits of applications submitted by insurers for subsidy payments were
not completed on a timely basis.
Recommendation 1
We again recommend that MIA complete audits of subsidy application information
submitted by insurers on a timely basis, and take any appropriate follow-up action
deemed necessary.
MIA Response:
We agree with the auditor’s recommendation that the audits be completed timely, and
that appropriate follow-up action be taken.
Section 19-805(i) of the Insurance Article requires an annual audit to verify information
submitted by a medical professional liability insurer applying for reimbursement from the
Rate Stabilization Account. However, the law does not specify that the audits be
conducted annually, or that the audits be conducted on any specific timeframe. As a
practical matter, the audits cannot be efficiently conducted until all activity for a given
subsidy year is complete. As the auditor acknowledges, the subsidy year for each insurer
will vary, and may not end for months, or in some instances, more than a year after the
end of related calendar year. It is our documented policy to start the audits of an insurer
as soon as practicable after the end of the insurer’s subsidy year. We intend to continue
to follow our policy. Regarding subsidy year 2006, it is not practicable to start the audits
for three of the insurers. As of February 10, 2009, these three insurers project that in the
aggregate, they will be requesting additional subsidy year 2006 reimbursements totaling
approximately $127,000.1
1
Auditor’s Comment: MIA acknowledges that audits should be completed timely but does not consider
its audits of medical professional liability insurers to be untimely based on its audit policy. We question
MIA’s contention that audits cannot be efficiently conducted until all activity for a given subsidy year is
complete. Since there is no specific deadline for insurers to request additional subsidies for a given year,
the audits may be delayed for an undetermined period, regardless of how significant the additional
requests might be as compared to amounts previously reimbursed. In the case cited by MIA, further 2006
subsidy reimbursement requests of $127,000 are possible as compared to reimbursements already paid
totaling $13.3 million. Given the lack of a deadline, we believe MIA should not wait to initiate audits until
all subsidy activity concludes.

--- Page 14 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Laura J. Hilbert, CFE
Senior Auditor
Jason M. Goldstein
LaTeasa R. Lomax
Staff Auditors