Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Central Region Finance Office


NOTE 1: Effective July 1, 2010, the fiscal operations of the Baltimore Region, Jessup Region, Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System, and Patuxent Institution and Women's Facilities were consolidated under the Central Region Finance Office.

NOTE 2: Effective July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization which established three regions within the State. The Central Region Finance Office activities have since been absorbed by the South Region.
Date: 08/06/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d7245606745a2
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:25:49.218470
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Central Region Finance Office
August 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410 946-5400 or 301
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Inmate Funds
* Finding 1 – CRFO’s Records of Inmate Funds Were Not Reconciled 6
With the Corresponding State Records
Finding 2 – Procedures Were Not Established to Ensure the Timely 7
Disposition of Former Inmate Accounts
Equipment
* Finding 3 – Equipment Records Were Not Adequately Maintained 8
and Certain Access to Automated Equipment Records Was Not
Proper
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Central Region Finance Office (CRFO) is a separate budgetary program
within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) –
Division of Correction Headquarters. CRFO was established by DPSCS through
a consolidation completed in May 2010 of the fiscal operations of DPSCS’s
Baltimore Region, Jessup Region, Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System,
Patuxent Institution, and Women’s Facilities. The primary purpose of the
consolidation was to improve fiscal oversight and record keeping. Specifically,
CRFO processes essentially all fiscal transactions, such as those relating to cash
receipts, disbursements, payroll, and inmate funds, and maintains the related
accounting records for those entities, which include the following maximum,
minimum, or multi-level security facilities and institutions:
Baltimore City Correctional Center
Baltimore Pre-Release Unit
Brockbridge Correctional Facility
Central Maryland Correctional Facility
Central Transport Unit
Eastern Pre-Release Unit
Jessup Correctional Institution
Jessup Pre-Release Unit
Maryland Correctional Adjustment Center
Maryland Correctional Institution – Jessup
Maryland Correctional Institution for Women
Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System General Administration
Maryland Reception, Diagnostic and Classification Center
Metropolitan Transition Center
Patuxent Institution
Southern Maryland Pre-Release Unit
Although the consolidation was completed in May 2010, a budget amendment
approved in fiscal year 2011 formally established CRFO as a separate budgetary
program within DPSCS’s Division of Correction Headquarters effective July 1,
2010. This report represents the results of our first audit of CRFO. Previously,
we conducted separate audits and issued separate reports on the Baltimore
Region, Jessup Region, Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System, and Patuxent
Institution and Women’s Facilities. Separate audits of these entities will no
longer be conducted because of the establishment of CRFO.
4

--- Page 7 ---
According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2011 expenditures for CRFO and the
aforementioned entities totaled approximately $379 million. In addition,
according to DPSCS records, those facilities and institutions housed
approximately 9,000 inmates as of June 30, 2011.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 22 findings in our
preceding audit reports for DPSCS’s Baltimore Region dated October 29, 2010
(10 findings), Jessup Region dated July 13, 2010 (4 findings), Maryland
Correctional Pre-Release System dated June 8, 2009 (5 findings), and Patuxent
Institution and Women’s Facilities dated April 9, 2009 (3 findings). As
previously mentioned, CRFO now processes the fiscal transactions and maintains
accounting records for those entities. We determined that CRFO satisfactorily
addressed 18 of the 22 findings. The remaining 4 findings are repeated as 2
findings in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Inmate Funds
Background
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Central Region
Finance Office (CRFO) maintains inmate funds, which are non-budgeted funds
initially deposited with the State Treasurer and recorded in the inmate’s personal
account on the Maryland Offender Banking System (MOBS). MOBS serves as a
record of each inmate’s account activity, including funds received and disbursed,
as well as the available balance. Inmate funds can be saved, provided directly to
inmates in certain circumstances, such as upon their release, or inmates can direct
the institutions to disburse these funds to third parties. According to CRFO’s
records, inmate fund collections and disbursements in fiscal year 2011 totaled
$4.8 million and $2.7 million, respectively.
Finding 1
CRFO had not fully reconciled its inmate fund records with the
corresponding records maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland.
Analysis
CRFO has been unable to fully reconcile the aggregate balance of inmate
accounts recorded on its records (MOBS) with the corresponding records of the
Comptroller of Maryland. Although CRFO performed monthly reconciliations
between current activity posted to MOBS and to the Comptroller’s records, CRFO
has been unable to resolve the aggregate recurring difference between the two
records, which totaled approximately $309,000 as of June 30, 2011.
Since the June 30, 2011adjusted MOBS balance of $2,862,214 exceeded the
corresponding balance of $2,553,204 in the Comptroller’s records, the difference
is of particular concern, because it implies that inmate funds on deposit with the
Comptroller may not be sufficient to cover the aggregate balance of inmate
accounts in MOBS. This condition was commented upon in our three preceding
audit reports on the Baltimore Region and in our preceding report on the Jessup
Region. CRFO believes that the difference relates to undetermined prior years
and that it may not be able to resolve the difference. Consequently, the resolution
of this difference will require the involvement of certain control agencies such as,
the Comptroller’s General Accounting Division and the Department of Budget
and Management.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CRFO
a. on a periodic basis, reconcile the aggregate balance of individual inmate
accounts in MOBS with the corresponding records of the Comptroller of
Maryland, including the investigation and resolution of all differences
(repeat); and
b. consult with the Comptroller’s General Accounting Division and the
Department of Budget and Management as to the proper disposition of
the aforementioned difference of $309,000 if the difference cannot be
resolved.
Finding 2
CRFO had not established procedures to ensure the timely disposition of
accounts of former inmates.
Analysis
CRFO had not established procedures to ensure the timely disposition of accounts
of former inmates. Specifically, CRFO did not ensure that delinquent inmate
accounts (that is, accounts with deficit balances) were submitted to the
Department of Budget and Management’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) for
collection or abatement, or the funds pertaining to unclaimed accounts were
forwarded to the Comptroller of Maryland, as required.
After we brought this matter to its attention, beginning on September 28, 2011
CRFO referred 891 delinquent accounts totaling approximately $87,000 to CCU
for collection, including 281 accounts totaling approximately $27,000 relating to
inmates that were released prior to October 2009. In addition, on September 30,
2011 CRFO transferred unclaimed accounts totaling approximately $223,000 to
the Comptroller including, for example, 40 accounts belonging to inmates from
the Baltimore Region who had been released in calendar year 2007 or earlier.
A delinquent account balance may arise when charges to an inmate account (for
example, an inmate is charged for damage he or she caused to State property)
exceed the funds available and the amount owed remains uncollected after the
inmate’s release. State regulations generally require agencies to transfer
delinquent accounts to CCU within 75 days. An unclaimed account balance may
arise when, for example, funds are received for an inmate after their release and
attempts to remit the funds to the inmate are unsuccessful. State law provides that
certain personal property that remains unclaimed for more than three years shall
be presumed abandoned and transferred to the Comptroller of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CRFO establish procedures to ensure the timely
disposition of accounts of former inmates.
Equipment
Finding 3
Equipment records were not adequately maintained, and certain individuals
had unnecessary access to adjust the records.
Analysis
Equipment records were not adequately maintained, and certain individuals had
unnecessary access to adjust the records. According to CRFO’s records, the
aggregate book value of equipment maintained by the facilities served by the
CRFO totaled approximately $13.9 million as of June 30, 2011. Specifically, we
noted the following deficiencies:
 Equipment on hand was not always recorded in the detail records. Our test of
15 items sighted at various facilities disclosed 4 items (cameras) that could not
be located in the detail equipment records. In addition, our test of 5
equipment purchases totaling $73,494 disclosed that a purchase totaling
$9,282 (commercial lawn mower) had not been posted to the detail records.
 Equipment items recorded in the detail records could not always be located.
Our test of 10 equipment items totaling $89,618 and recorded in the detail
records disclosed that 2 items (camcorder) totaling $2,143 could not be
located.
 User access to update equipment records on CRFO’s automated system was
not always removed when users no longer needed such access. We noted
three individuals with system update capabilities who no longer needed this
access for their job responsibilities. In addition, four former employees still
had update access according to CRFO’s records.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that equipment detail records be
properly maintained on a current basis. In addition, the Manual requires that all
capital equipment be recorded in the detail records. Furthermore, access to the
automated equipment records should be granted only to current employees who
require it for their job responsibilities. Similar conditions relating to the
8

--- Page 11 ---
maintenance of equipment records were commented upon in our three preceding
audit reports on the Baltimore Region and in our preceding report on the Jessup
Region.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CRFO
a. comply with the requirements of the Inventory Control Manual by
properly maintaining all equipment records on a current basis (repeat),
b. ensure that access to the equipment records is provided only to employees
who require such access for their job responsibilities, and
c. update the equipment records for unrecorded items and investigate the
disposition of the missing equipment items.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) – Central Region Finance Office (CRFO). CRFO was established to
consolidate the fiscal operations of DPSCS’s Baltimore Region, Jessup Region,
Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System, Patuxent Institution, and Women’s
Facilities. Previously, we examined those operations through separate audits of
those entities and issued separate reports on each (Patuxent Institution and
Women’s Facilities were examined in a combined audit). Separate audits of those
entities will no longer be conducted. This audit of CRFO included the activity of
those entities for the following periods:
Central Region Finance Office – July 1, 2010 to August 21, 2011
Baltimore Region – July 1, 2009 to June 30, 2010
Jessup Region – September 22, 2009 to June 30, 2010
Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System – December 24, 2008 to June 30, 2010
Patuxent Institution and Women’s Facilities – October 1, 2008 to June 30, 2010
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CRFO’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit reports for the Baltimore Region, Jessup
Region, Maryland Correctional Pre-Release System, and Patuxent Institution and
Women’s Facilities.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurement and disbursements,
equipment, materials and supplies, payroll, and inmate funds. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of CRFO’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
10

--- Page 13 ---
CRFO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect CRFO’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also
includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to CRFO that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of CRFO, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 17 ---
We agree.
a. The Region will, on a monthly basis, reconcile the aggregate balance of
individual inmate accounts in MOBS with the corresponding records of
the Comptroller of Maryland, including the investigation and resolution
of all differences.
b. The Department will consult with the Comptroller’s General Accounting
Division and the Department of Budget and Management as to the
proper disposition of the aforementioned difference of $309,000 if the
difference cannot be resolved by June 30, 2013.
Finding 2:
CRFO had not established procedures to ensure the timely disposition
of accounts of former inmates.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that CRFO establish procedures to ensure the timely
disposition of accounts of former inmates.
We agree.
Procedures have been established to ensure the timely disposition of
accounts of former inmates.
Finding 3:
Equipment records were not adequately maintained, and certain
individuals had unnecessary access to adjust the records.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that CRFO
a. comply with the requirements of the Inventory Control Manual by
properly maintaining all equipment records on a current basis
(repeat),
b. ensure that access to the equipment records is provided only to
employees who require such access for their job responsibilities, and
c. update the equipment records for unrecorded items and investigate
the disposition of the missing equipment items.
We agree. Effective immediately,
a. the Region will comply with the requirements of the Inventory Control
Manual by properly maintaining all equipment records on a current
basis;
2

--- Page 19 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Timothy S. Rice
LaTeasa R. Robertson
Ryan P. Stecher
Staff Auditors