Title: University System of Maryland - Bowie State University
Date: 02/15/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742ae
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:42:50.084345
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Bowie State University
April 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 17, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Bowie State University (BSU) for the period beginning May
1, 2020 and ending February 29, 2024. BSU is a regional university offering a
broad range of undergraduate and selected professionally oriented graduate
programs.
Our audit disclosed that BSU did not conduct timely and comprehensive reviews
of adjustments made to student accounts. For example, BSU did not review $7.5
million in adjustments to student accounts made during calendar year 2023 until
our audit commenced in February 2024. In addition, as of September 2024, BSU
had not reinstated referrals of delinquent accounts to the State’s Central
Collection Unit, which were suspended due to the COVID-19 State of
Emergency. According to BSU records, as of September 2024, BSU had 2,860
student accounts with balances of at least $1,000 totaling $13.4 million that had
been outstanding more than 265 days.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under

--- Page 4 ---
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
USM’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of BSU, is
included as an appendix to this report. Consistent with State law, we have
redacted the elements of USM’s response related to the cybersecurity audit
findings. We reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations,
and have concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address
all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by BSU.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 1 – Bowie State University (BSU) did not ensure that adjustments 7
to student accounts were proper and did not refer delinquent accounts
to the State’s Central Collection Unit as required.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 8
Finding 3 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 8
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Bowie State University (BSU) is a comprehensive public institution of the
University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of the
System’s Board of Regents. BSU is a regional university that provides a broad
range of undergraduate and selected professionally oriented graduate programs,
including doctoral level programs in educational leadership and computer science.
According to USM records, student enrollment for the fall 2023 semester totaled
6,408 students, including 5,288 undergraduate students and 1,120 graduate
students.
BSU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition, fees, and a State
general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants and
contracts. According to the State’s records, BSU’s revenues for fiscal year 2023
totaled approximately $210.1 million, including a State general fund
appropriation of approximately $58.6 million (see Figure 1).
During the period from June 30, 2020 through June 30, 2023, BSU had vacancy
rates that ranged from 15.3 percent to 27.4 percent. As of June 30, 2023,
approximately 21 percent of the total 664 positions were vacant. These vacancies
may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1
BSU Positions, Expenditures,
and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions
Filled 524
Vacant 140
Total 664
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 67,116,920
Technical and Special Fees 23,799,416
Operating Expenses 119,146,938
Total $210,063,274
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding
Unrestricted
General Fund $ 58,613,662
Tuition and Fees 48,659,745
Other University Revenues1 45,542,206
152,815,613
Restricted
Federal Grants and Contracts 55,910,270
Other Gifts, Grants, and Contracts 1,337,391
57,247,661
Total $210,063,274
Source: State financial records and BSU personnel records
1 Includes revenues from Auxiliary Services ($29.9M) and from the Historically Black Colleges
and Universities Settlement ($10.6M).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated May 12, 2021. See Figure 2 for the
results of our review.
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
BSU did not independently verify certain financial aid
Finding 1 Not repeated
awards and manual adjustments to student accounts.
BSU did not have sufficient procedures to ensure that
valid refund information was transmitted to the vendor
Finding 2 responsible for disbursing student refunds, and that the Not repeated
vendor properly issued all refunds and adequately
safeguarded sensitive student information.
BSU did not ensure that access to perform critical
Finding 3 functions on its financial management systems was Status redacted2
adequately restricted.
Sensitive personally identifiable information was
Finding 4 maintained without adequate safeguards and Status redacted2
identification.
Access to critical BSU internal network devices was
not properly restricted, and intrusion detection
Finding 5 Status redacted2
prevention system coverage was not complete or
adequate.
Remote access to the internal BSU network by
Finding 6 employees and authorized contractors used a single Status redacted2
security authentication measure.
For certain purchases, we found BSU circumvented
procurement requirements and lacked comprehensive
Finding 7 Not repeated
controls over invoice review, change order approval,
and manual overrides of automated controls.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2- 1224(i)
of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
Bowie State University (BSU) did not ensure that adjustments to student
accounts were proper and did not refer delinquent accounts to the State’s
Central Collection Unit (CCU) as required.
Analysis
BSU did not ensure that adjustments to student accounts were proper and did not
refer delinquent accounts to CCU as required. Specifically, our review disclosed
that BSU did not review $7.5 million in adjustments to student accounts made
during calendar year 2023 until our audit commenced in February 2024. In
addition, the BSU review did not always include reviewing supporting
documentation that provided assurance that the adjustments made to student
accounts were proper. Our test of 10 material adjustments made in calendar year
2023 totaling $159,000 disclosed that they were properly supported.
BSU also did not refer delinquent student accounts to CCU as required by State
regulations and its internal procedures. In response to the COVID-19 State of
Emergency, the State of Maryland suspended debt collection activities, such as
dunning letters, from April 2020 through October 2020. However, as of
September 2024, BSU was still not referring delinquent accounts to CCU.3
According to BSU records, as of September 2024, BSU had 2,860 student
accounts with balances of at least $1,000 totaling $13.4 million that had been
outstanding more than 265 days.
BSU’s approved deviation from CCU provides that accounts should be referred to
CCU approximately 265 days after an account becomes past due. We were
advised that senior BSU management decided that a full review of student
accounts should be made to ensure that the accounts were accurate prior to
sending them to CCU. Although it has been several years since the COVID-19
pandemic ended, BSU had not investigated any of the cases as of the time of our
review and could not provide a timeline for when these cases would be referred.
3 Subsequent to our fieldwork, BSU management advised us that it referred 586 delinquent
accounts with an aggregate outstanding balance of approximately $3.2 million to CCU in June
2024; however, we did not verify this assertion.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BSU
a. perform timely and comprehensive reviews of adjustments to student
accounts, at least on a test basis; and
b. refer delinquent student accounts to CCU in accordance with its
agreement with CCU.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 2 and 3 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with USM’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Bowie State University (BSU) for the period beginning May
1, 2020 and ending February 29, 2024. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine BSU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, payroll, student financial aid, corporate
purchasing cards, and information systems security and control. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to BSU by the USM
Office, such as bond financing, and by the University of Maryland, College Park
(UMCP), such as processing certain construction vendor payments and capital
project management. These support services are included within the scope of our
audits of the USM Office and UMCP, respectively. In addition, our audit did not
include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and
regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of BSU’s
compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies, including the components of the USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 1, 2020 to February 29, 2024, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of BSU’s operations. Generally,
9

--- Page 12 ---
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from various key BSU internal systems, such as the BSU’s
financial management systems for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as
procurements and disbursements. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
BSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to BSU, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
10

--- Page 13 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect BSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to BSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to BSU and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of BSU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
11

--- Page 14 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
April 16, 2025
Mr. Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – Bowie State University
Period of Audit: May 1, 2020 through February 29, 2024
Dear Mr. Tanen,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – Bowie State University. Our comments refer to the
individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Aminta Hawkins Breaux, President, BSU
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Mr. Louis M. Pope, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director, Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Mr. Manish Kumar, Vice President, Administration and Finance, BSU

--- Page 15 ---
University System of Maryland
Bowie State University
Agency Response Form
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
Bowie State University (BSU) did not ensure that adjustments to student
accounts were proper and did not refer delinquent accounts to the State’s
Central Collection Unit (CCU) as required.
We recommend that BSU
a. perform timely and comprehensive reviews of adjustments to student
accounts, at least on a test basis; and
b. refer delinquent student accounts to CCU in accordance with its
agreement with CCU.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: March 2025
Please provide details of The lack of timely reviews was primarily due to the implementation of a
corrective action or new system during the audit review period. Moving forward, we will
explain disagreement. conduct regular, comprehensive reviews of adjustments made to student
accounts on a test basis.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 2025
Please provide details of The submission of accounts to CCU was delayed during and after the
corrective action or COVID-19 pandemic due to several factors, including the
explain disagreement. implementation of a new financial aid system, the complexity of certain
academic agreements, and delays in student funding. We resumed
regular submissions of accounts to CCU in June 2024. The university is
committed to fully complying with its agreement with CCU regarding
the timely referral of delinquent accounts.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 16 ---
University System of Maryland
Bowie State University
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Systems Security and Control section, including Findings 2 and 3 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to
redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with the State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with USM’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, USM’s responses indicated agreement
with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 2
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 3
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 2 of 2

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Kevin M. Billard
Etai D. Stern
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Christopher C. Pitre
Information Systems Staff Auditors