Title: Maryland Department of Health - John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
Date: 02/14/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745d6
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:32:45.096161
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Children and Adolescents
February 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents is a
residential and day treatment center that provides mental health treatment,
education and rehabilitative services to children and adolescents and their families
from counties throughout the State of Maryland and Baltimore City. The services
provided include inpatient and outpatient treatment. In fiscal year 2016, the
Institute provided housing for an average daily population of 30 residential
students and provided treatment for an average daily population of 82 outpatient
students. In addition, the Institute is responsible for the dietary program for the
Alfred D. Noyes Children’s Center (a unit of the Department of Juvenile
Services). According to the State’s records, the Institute’s expenditures for fiscal
year 2016 totaled approximately $11.9 million.
The cost of treatment for the education program has remained relatively steady
over the past several years, averaging $52,254 per student. The annual cost for
students enrolled in the residential program, including its Evaluation Unit, totaled
approximately $154,000 in fiscal year 2016. This cost has fluctuated significantly
over the past several years, due to various factors, such as variations in the
average length of stay per child.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Admissions
Background
The Institute offers three options to admit eligible children and adolescents - a
school-only program, a full-time residential treatment program, and a short-term
Evaluation Unit. The school at the Institute is a special education program in the
Montgomery County Public School (MCPS) system. To be admitted to the
school-only program, students must be residents of Montgomery County and be
referred to the Institute through MCPS. The residential program assists youth
throughout the entire State. The Evaluation Unit accepts both children referred by
juvenile court orders as well as other agencies for 90-day evaluations and
diagnostic screening. Referring agencies for each program and unit may include
the child’s school system, the Maryland Departments of Juvenile Services,
Health, or Human Services, and other local agencies.
Finding 1
The Institute did not always maintain sufficient documentation to support
decisions made during its student prescreening process or maintain a
tracking system to ensure such decisions were made within a reasonable
period.
Analysis
The Institute did not always maintain sufficient documentation to support the
basis for decisions for the residential treatment program made during its student
prescreening process or maintain a tracking system to ensure those decisions were
made within a reasonable period. The Institute prescreens children referred to the
residential treatment program to ensure that the placement is appropriate. Based
on our review, the decision to reject a referral for a child’s admission was
generally made during the prescreening process. Once the prescreening was
completed, a formal application would be completed by the parent of any children
that were not rejected. During fiscal years 2016 and 2017, the Institute received
135 referrals for admission to its residential treatment program, of which, 106
were rejected.
 Prescreening rejection decisions were not always sufficiently documented.
Although there was no formal policy governing the prescreening process, we
were advised that prescreening decisions were made by an Admissions Team
consisting of the Clinical Director, Medical Director, Director of Nursing and
Residence, and the school principal. Our review of 10 rejected referrals
4

--- Page 7 ---
disclosed that for 6 referrals, the Admissions Team members did not
document their collective decision to reject the referral or provide specific
justification for the rejection. Instead, a notification was sent to the referring
agencies from the admission’s coordinator with a generic explanation (such as
behavioral issues) for the rejection. For the remaining 4 referrals tested, the
decisions were documented by the Admissions Team members.
 The Institute did not maintain a tracking system to document the prescreening
process to help ensure that decisions made during the process were made
within a reasonable period. For example, the Institute did not track the date
referrals were received, the date supporting documentation was requested and
received from the referring agencies, or the date of the final decision. As a
result, the Institute could not properly monitor the referral process to ensure
that such decisions were not unnecessarily delayed.
Our test of 10 referrals disclosed that for 3 referrals, the decisions appeared to
have been made from 19 to 38 business days after the referral (based on
available documentation such as emails between Institute personnel and the
referring agency). While we were advised that these instances may have been
attributable to delays in receiving necessary documentation from the referring
agency, evidence was not available to support this assertion.
Although State regulations require admission decisions to be made within 10
business days of the application being completed, there is no such requirement
for the initial process of making prescreening decisions even though rejections
primarily occur during this process. Nevertheless, the Institute should use a
tracking system to actively monitor the prescreening activities, including
follow-up efforts with referring agencies, to ensure decisions are made as soon
as possible.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Institute
a. ensure that prescreening decisions are made by the Admissions Team and
are adequately documented, and
b. establish a tracking system to document all aspects of the prescreening
process to ensure that decisions are made within a reasonable period.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 2
The Institute admitted 47 children directly to its short-term Evaluation Unit
without any formal application process established by policy or regulation.
Analysis
During our audit period, the Institute admitted 47 children directly to its 8-bed
short-term Evaluation Unit without any formal application process. These
children were typically referred by various State agencies, and the children’s
admission to the Unit was approved by an Institute clinical management
employee. Although this employee was a member of the Admissions Team, there
was no documentation that the Team was involved in the decisions.
State regulations permit the Institute to establish a separate unit for short-term
evaluation of children and adolescents referred by a juvenile court but do not
address the use of this type unit for children referred by other agencies.
According to the Institute’s records, of the 100 children admitted to the
Evaluation Unit during the audit period, 53 were referred by a juvenile court and
47 were referred by other agencies. We were advised by Institute management
that this Unit had been in place for over 30 years and has been used for both
referrals from juvenile court and other agencies.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Institute establish a formal process to admit
children referred by State agencies to the short-term Evaluation Unit
preferably through regulation.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the John L. Gildner Regional
Institute for Children and Adolescents (Institute) of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH) for the period beginning October 8, 2013 and ending May 14,
2017. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Institute’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, payroll, and
admissions.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Institute by
MDH. These support services (such as certain payroll and purchasing functions,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of MDH’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Institute’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
7

--- Page 10 ---
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Institute’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Institute’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Out report also includes a finding regarded as a significant instance
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to the Institute that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of the Institute, to our finding and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the MEA regarding the results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Agency Responses
to the
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
The Institute did not always maintain sufficient documentation to support
decisions made during its student prescreening process or maintain a
tracking system to ensure such decisions were made within a reasonable
period.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Institute
a. ensure that prescreening decisions are made by the Admissions Team and
are adequately documented, and
b. establish a tracking system to document all aspects of the prescreening
process to ensure that decisions are made within a reasonable period.
Institute’s response
a. The Institute does not concur with the recommendation because it would
impose duties related to the prescreening process that are beyond the scope of
those required by law. COMAR 10.21.06.04 only requires assembly of an
Admission Team to review completed applications. It does not require
assembly of an Admission Team during prescreening.
Generally, pre-screenings are conducted by the Clinical Director. During a
prescreening, the Clinical Director will determine whether the facility has the
bed capacity and resources to meet the youth’s needs; and whether the youth
meets the objective criteria enumerated in COMAR 10.21.06.05. Because
prescreening decisions require the Clinical Director to review objective
criteria, the Clinical Director is equipped to make prescreening decisions
absent an Admission Team. The vast majority of the referrals’ prescreening
determinations can be decided by the Clinical Director.
Conversely, in cases where there is a question as to whether the child would
benefit from placement at the Institute, an Admission Team will be
assembled. An Admission Team is assembled in those instances where
determining proper placement would require a subjective evaluation of the
youth’s circumstances.

--- Page 13 ---
As a result of the prescreening process if the Clinical Director decides that the
child meets the criteria for admission, a screening interview will be set up at
which time the youth’s parent, guardian or agent will fill out an application.
Upon the completion of an application an Admission Team will be assembled,
and the application will be accepted or rejected by the Admission Team as
required by COMAR 10.21.06.04.
Auditor’s Comment: State regulations require an Admissions Team to
determine whether the applicant meets the admission criteria established
in the regulations and to review applications. Therefore, we believe that
the sole involvement of the Clinical Director rather than the Admissions
Team to make decisions regarding adherence to admissions criteria noted
in the response is inconsistent with State regulations.
b. The Institute concurs with the recommendation. RICA-Gildner will
implement, into its current referral tracking system, procedures that will
document all aspects of the prescreening process to help ensure that
prescreening assessments are made within a reasonable period. Specifically,
RICA-Gildner will ensure that the tracking system documents the date that
referrals are received, the date that supporting documentation is requested, the
date that the supporting documentation is received, and the date the final
decision is made on the prescreening. RICA-Gildner will strive to ensure that
all prescreening decisions are made within 10 working days.
Finding 2
The Institute admitted 47 children directly to its short-term Evaluation Unit
without any formal application process established by policy or regulation.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Institute establish a formal process to admit
children referred by State agencies to the short-term Evaluation Unit
preferably through regulation.
Institute’s response
The Institute concurs with the recommendation. RICA-Gildner will revise its
existing internal policies for short-term Evaluation Unit to specifically address the
criteria for admission and the application process for children referred by other
agencies.

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Senior Auditor