Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Spring Grove Hospital Center
Date: 03/08/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746b4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:45:10.168874
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Spring Grove Hospital Center
October 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC), located in Catonsville, Maryland,
provides a wide range of comprehensive mental health services to residents of
Baltimore City, and Baltimore and Harford Counties. Furthermore, SGHC
provides inpatient competency and criminal responsibility evaluations and long-
term inpatient and domiciliary care to patients found not criminally responsible.
In addition, SGHC provides ancillary services to the Maryland Psychiatric
Research Center, a joint program between the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene and the University of Maryland, School of Medicine. SGHC is
accredited by The Joint Commission, which evaluates and monitors health care
organizations nationwide to ensure the highest quality of care is provided.
During fiscal year 2014, SGHC had a licensed capacity of 639 inpatients, a
budgeted average daily population of 377, and an actual average daily population
of 376. According to the State’s records, total SGHC expenditures were
approximately $78.8 million during fiscal year 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 2, 2012. We determined that
SGHC satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The remaining finding is
repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Controls were not established to ensure collections were properly accounted
for and deposited.
Analysis
Proper controls were not established over cash receipts. According to State
records in fiscal year 2014, collections totaled approximately $860,000, including
mail-in receipts, walk-in receipts, and $244,000 in cafeteria sales.
3

--- Page 6 ---
 As of March 2015, verifications to ensure that recorded collections were
deposited had not been performed since December 2014 because the
employee responsible for the verifications retired. Furthermore, based on
available documentation, it appeared that the verifications performed prior to
this date were not proper. Specifically, the employee who performed the
verifications used only the initial record of mail-in receipts to perform the
deposit verification and did not use the initial records of cafeteria and walk-in
receipts. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 Separate cash drawers and individual userids were not used by the four
cashiers in the cafeteria. In addition, voided transactions processed by the
cashiers, which totaled approximately $136,500 during fiscal year 2014, were
not subject to independent supervisory review and approval. Specifically, our
test of 76 voided transactions processed on three separate dates between
February 2014 and November 2014 disclosed that, while the voids appeared
reasonable, none was subject to proper approvals.
 Spring Grove Hospital Center (SGHC) did not establish accountability over
cafeteria coupons issued to medical students interning at SGHC. The
coupons, which could be redeemed for cafeteria purchases, were issued in
books containing 30 vouchers, each in $5 or $7 dollar denominations.
Records of coupons issued were not maintained and, because the coupons
were not prenumbered, the coupons could not be accounted for as to issued,
voided, or on hand. Cafeteria sales resulting from coupons totaled
approximately $51,500 during calendar year 2014.
As a result of these conditions, receipts could be lost or misappropriated without
detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires the establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections,
including an independent verification of collections to deposit using proper
documentation, supervisory review and approval of voided transactions, and
initial accountability over collections received.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SGHC
a. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions, using all initial receipt records
(repeat);
b. implement separate cash drawers and userids for the cashiers;
c. establish supervisory review and approval of all voided transactions; and
4

--- Page 7 ---
d. use prenumbered cafeteria coupons and account for the coupons as to
issued, voided, or on hand.
We advised SGHC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Equipment
Finding 2
SGHC recordkeeping procedures for equipment were not in compliance with
certain requirements.
Analysis
SGHC recordkeeping procedures were not in compliance with certain provisions
of the Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual. As the
State’s oversight unit responsible for ensuring agencies properly account for and
control State property, DGS conducted a compliance review of SGHC procedures
and the related report, dated May 14, 2015, noted the following conditions:
 The equipment control account was not reconciled with the related detail
records. As of June 30, 2014, the total value of equipment recorded in the
control account ($5.4 million) exceeded the related detail records ($5.3
million) by approximately $117,000. In addition, adjustments to the inventory
control account were not subject to supervisory review and approval.
 The value of equipment reported to DGS as of June 30, 2014 on the annual
report of fixed assets did not accurately reflect the value of SGHC equipment.
The value of equipment reported ($7.7 million) exceeded the amount recorded
in the detail records ($5.3 million) by approximately $2.4 million. SGHC
could not fully explain the difference.
The Inventory Control Manual requires that the control account be periodically
reconciled with the detail records and that all adjustments to the control account
be approved by supervisory personnel. In addition, the Manual requires State
agencies to annually report the value of fixed assets to DGS. In its response to the
DGS compliance report, SGHC stated it agreed with the findings and would
correct the noted deficiencies.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SGHC comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Spring Grove Hospital Center
(SGHC) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period
beginning January 18, 2012 and ending February 16, 2015. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SGHC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, cash receipts,
equipment, and payroll. We also determined the status of the findings included in
our preceding audit report.
In February 2015, SGHC was subject to an on-site compliance review, by the
Department of General Services (DGS), regarding SGHC’s conformity with the
policies and procedures of the DGS Inventory Control Manual. The review
included a comprehensive assessment of procedures and documentation related to
SGHC’s most recently completed inventories and addressed controls over the
receipt, custody, and disposal of equipment and maintenance of the related
records. We have relied on the work performed by DGS to provide audit
coverage of SGHC’s equipment. Our audit procedures for equipment were
generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SGHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
6

--- Page 9 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data) and the
State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part
of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
SGHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect SGHC’s ability
to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also includes
findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations. A less significant finding was communicated to SGHC that
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DHMH’s response, on behalf of SGHC, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Controls were not established to ensure collections were properly accounted
for and deposited.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SGHC
a. ensure that deposit verifications are performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions, using all initial receipt records
(repeat);
b. implement separate cash drawers and userids for the cashiers;
c. establish supervisory review and approval of all voided transactions; and
d. use prenumbered cafeteria coupons and account for the coupons as to
issued, voided, or on hand.
We advised SGHC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Administration’s Response
a. We concur with the recommendation SGHC ensure that an employee
independent of the collection and deposit functions verify that recorded
collections were deposited using initial receipt records. For a period of time
between the retirement of both the former Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and
the employee who performed the deposit verification, limited resources made
it difficult to achieve timely deposit verification and complete separation of
duties. This situation resulted in the temporary discontinuation of the deposit
verification process. However, beginning April 2015, the Center introduced a
deposit verification process using the initial recordation of cafeteria document
(Daily Cash Register ‘Z’ Report) with the bank validated deposit ticket and
the certificate of deposit processed in FMIS. An employee independent of
routine cash receipt functions enters the information into a reconciliation
worksheet, and the newly replaced Administrator II at the Finance department,
who is also independent of cash receipt functions, completes the reconciliation
of the deposit verification process. This process is currently up to date. The

--- Page 12 ---
Finance Office logs all walk-in collections into an initial recordation
document (check log), which is verified by an employee independent of
routine cash receipt and deposit functions with the bank validated deposit
tickets. Although the verifying employee recorded the deposit ticket numbers
in the initial recordation document (check log), the totals of each day’s
collections were not verified. Effective FY16, the Center denotes the total of
all daily collections entered in the initial recordation document (check log)
and verifies with the collection totals recorded in the bank validated deposit
ticket. Currently the Administrator II performs the final reconciliation of this
process.
b. We partially concur with the recommendation that we implement separate
cash drawers and userids for the cashiers. In an ideal world, we agree.
However, as a small operation, with limited staff all having multiple duties
and no “assigned” cashier, as well as “rush” periods of the operation, at this
time we have not determined how best to meet this recommendation. The
Café manager, CFO, and COO have formed a workgroup to better research
how best to proceed. We expect to have a decision by December 31, 2015.
c. We concur with the recommendation that we establish supervisory review and
approval of all voided transactions. Effective April 2015, all cashiers initial
any voids. All voids are reviewed by the Café Manager or Assistant Manager.
Unless absolutely necessary, given the small operation and limited staff, the
Café Manager will not serve as a cashier. If the Café Manager serves as
cashier, the Assistant Manager will review any voids by the Manager.
Effective FY16, a Finance Office employee, independent of cash operations,
will verify the actual reported voids off the Z Report with the supporting
documentation of voided transactions signed by the Café supervisors. In
addition, the COO will send a memo to all Café staff as to the importance of
following these procedures.
d. We concur with the recommendation that we only use pre-numbered coupons
and account for the coupons as to used, voided, or on hand. Coupons are used
by multiple departments, for different purposes, and with different values. We
are in the process of standardizing the coupons and values by developing a
standard coupon booklet with stub recordation for recording coupon holders.
All coupons will be pre-numbered. With the exception of the medical student
coupons issued through the CEO’s office, the booklets would be issued
through the COO’s office. A Finance Office employee, independent of the
CEO’s and COO’s office, will maintain the control account and perform
periodic reconciliation for all coupons. The new coupon system will be in
place by December 31, 2015.

--- Page 13 ---
Equipment
Finding 2
SGHC recordkeeping procedures for equipment were not in compliance with
certain requirements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SGHC comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual.
Administration’s Response:
We concur with the recommendation that SGHC comply with the requirements of
the DGS Inventory Control Manual.
The aggregate balance of the related detail records will be periodically reconciled
with the control account balance. Due to the unexplained discrepancies and
inconsistencies noted in the control accounts with the detailed records, the Center
is re-establishing a new control account balance from the total physical values as
indicated in the detailed records as of March 30, 2015. This will be considered as a
fresh inventory control account balance and will be reconciled quarterly, effective
October 31, 2015.
All adjustments to the control account will be approved by supervisory personnel.
The Inventory Control Account will be maintained independent of the detailed
records and that function is assigned to the newly replaced Administrator II at the
Finance department. This employee maintains the control account, performs
quarterly reconciliations with the detail records and prepares the necessary
adjustments. All adjustments to the Inventory Control Account or Detail records
will be reviewed and approved by the CFO, effective October 31, 2015.
The Center will accurately report all assets to DGS annually. Effective March 20,
2015, SGHC started a full inventory of all sensitive & non-sensitive capital
equipment items for FY 15, as mandated by the DGS Inventory Control Manual.
Due to the nature of the campus and staff turnovers, the Center experienced a delay
from the inventory expected completion date of June 30, 2015. The Center is
expected to complete the full inventory, its reconciliations, and final adjustments
as of October 31, 2015. The Center will accurately report the final value of its
assets to DGS annually.

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Phillip C. Funkhouser
Kathryn A. Jones
Staff Auditors