Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Regulatory Services


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2009, Regulatory Services was created as a separate budgetary unit within DHMH consisting of the Health Professional Boards and Commission - State Board of Physicians - State Board of Nursing and the Office of Health Care Quality (previously included within the scope of our audits of DHMH - Office of the Secretary).
Date: 11/07/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d19cc9d72456067467e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:41:00.290245
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Regulatory Services
November 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Organizational Change and Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 4
Findings and Recommendations 6
Licensing Controls and Cash Receipts
* Finding 1 – Certain Boards Had Not Established Sufficient Controls Over 6
the Accounting for Professional Licenses and Related Collections
Health Care Facility Inspections
* Finding 2 – The Office of Health Care Quality Had Not Conducted Annual 7
Inspections of Certain Health Care Facilities as Required
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – An Information Technology Contract of the Board of Nursing Did 9
Not Contain Specific Provisions Obligating the Vendor to Address Certain
Risks
* Finding 4 – The Board of Nursing Did Not Have a Complete Disaster 10
Recovery Plan and Certain Licensing Database Controls Were Not
Sufficient
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Organizational Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 484, Laws of Maryland, effective July 1, 2009 (Budget Bill) created
Regulatory Services as a separate budgetary unit within the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) consisting of
 Health Professional Boards and Commission (comprised of 16 separate
boards and one commission),
 Board of Nursing,
 Board of Physicians, and
 Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ).
Prior to this organizational change, these entities were budgeted within DHMH –
Office of the Secretary.
The various boards and commission are responsible for licensing and regulating
health professionals (such as physicians, nurses, and pharmacists) in the State.
OHCQ is responsible for regulating health care facilities. According to the
State’s records, fiscal year 2010 expenditures for the Unit totaled approximately
$40.8 million.
The results of our most recent audit of the Health Professional Boards and
Commission, the Board of Nursing, and the Board of Physicians were commented
upon in our report dated January 21, 2009 and covered the period from June 1,
2005 through January 31, 2008. Accordingly, our current audit of the Unit
included these entities for the period from February 1, 2008 through August 2,
2010.
Prior to July 1, 2009, OHCQ was included within the scope of our audits of
DHMH – Office of the Secretary. Our current audit of the Unit included OHCQ
for the period from July 1, 2009 through August 2, 2010.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report on the Health Professional Boards and Commission,
the Board of Nursing, and the Board of Physicians dated January 21, 2009. We
have determined that the applicable boards satisfactorily addressed six of the
findings. The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of one of the findings in
our preceding audit report, dated August 8, 2007, on DHMH – Office of the
Secretary related to the Office of Health Care Quality. The finding was not
satisfactorily addressed and is repeated in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Licensing Controls and Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Certain boards had not established sufficient controls over the accounting for
professional licenses and related collections.
Analysis
Adequate accountability and control over professional licenses and related
collections had not been established at two of the three boards reviewed.
According to Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) records, during
fiscal year 2010, cash receipts for the two boards (that is, the Boards of Nursing
and Pharmacy) totaled approximately $9 million. In addition, during fiscal year
2010 the two boards issued and renewed approximately 288,000 licenses. Our
review disclosed the following conditions:
 The Board of Nursing employee who performed the deposit verification was
not independent, as this employee also prepared and made the deposit. In
addition, this same employee recorded bank deposits in the State’s accounting
records, and processed charge backs resulting from checks that were
dishonored by the bank. Due to the lack of adequate controls, this employee
could misappropriate cash receipts without detection. According to the
Board’s records, during fiscal year 2010, the Board’s cash receipts totaled
approximately $6.8 million. The lack of adequate deposit verifications by
certain boards has been commented upon in our audit reports dating back to
2002.
 Both boards had not reconciled the value of licenses issued with the related
collections. The lack of such reconciliations by certain boards has been
commented upon in our audit reports dating back to 1983, including the Board
of Nursing since 1987. This control deficiency contributed to the failure to
detect in a timely manner the alleged fraudulent sale and distribution of
certain nursing certificates at the Board of Nursing. Specifically, in May
2009, the Board received an allegation related to the possible fraudulent sale
and distribution of certificates by one of its employees. The Board referred
the allegation to DHMH’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG) for further
review. Based on the preliminary results of the OIG’s investigation, on June
5, 2009, the Board terminated the employee for misconduct. The OIG issued
a report in August 2009 and concluded that the employee in question had
erroneously issued at least 19 certificates using names of persons who either
had not applied for certification and/or did not meet the minimum
6

--- Page 9 ---
qualifications required for certification. No funds were deposited for the
licenses issued. The OIG further reported that the employee may have
personally profited in the amount of $11,400 from the sale of the 19
certificates over several years. The OIG referred this matter to the Office of
the Attorney General – Criminal Division in August 2009 for further
investigation. A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a
criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed. In
addition, the OIG recommended that the Board improve controls over license
issuance and related collections and continue its investigation to ensure the
legitimacy of issued certificates. While the Board instituted some corrective
actions, at the time of our review, it still had not established procedures to
reconcile licenses issued with collections received. As of November 1, 2011,
the investigation was ongoing.
 The Board of Pharmacy did not periodically account for the pre-numbered
licenses as to issued, voided, or on hand. The lack of periodic accountings for
pre-numbered licenses by certain boards has been commented upon in our
audit reports dating back to 1991.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the applicable Boards
a. establish procedures to ensure that an employee independent of the
collections verifies that all amounts received are deposited and recorded
in the State’s accounting records (repeat);
b. verify that all licenses issued were paid for and were proper (repeat); and
c. periodically account for all licenses as being issued, voided and/or on-
hand (repeat).
Health Care Facility Inspections
Finding 2
The Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) had not conducted annual
inspections of certain health care facilities as required.
Analysis
OHCQ had not inspected certain heath care facilities as required. OHCQ is
required to conduct inspections of these facilities at least annually to ensure
facility compliance with State and federal regulations regarding patient care and
safety.
7

--- Page 10 ---
According to its records, which we determined to be reliable, for fiscal year 2010,
OHCQ had not performed inspections for 725 of the 1,367 (53 percent) licensed
assisted living facilities nor inspected 154 of the 201 (76 percent) facilities for the
developmentally disabled. In addition, OHCQ had not inspected any of the 15
related resource coordination agencies (which are primarily county health
departments) responsible for developing appropriate individualized plans for
developmentally disabled individuals. DHMH inspections would include reviews
of the adequacy of these plans.
Similar situations were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports of
DHMH – Office of the Secretary. DHMH management again indicated that an
increasing workload, combined with reductions in staff, have caused the delays in
performing required inspections and they are continuing efforts to improve
inspection processes to gain efficiencies.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OHCQ complete inspections of the various health care
facilities, as required by law (repeat).
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
Thirteen boards and one commission have licensing systems maintained by the
Unit’s information technology staff on a consolidated licensing application
database system. The remaining five boards maintain licensing systems residing
on servers located at each board’s office and principally utilize application
security to provide system security. Additionally, several boards provide an
online license verification service to the general public and numerous boards offer
online license renewals.
Our audit of these systems was limited to the review of select database system
controls for the Board of Physicians, the Board of Nursing, and the Unit’s
consolidated licensing database. Our audit also included the review of certain
other general controls (such as file backup procedures and disaster recovery
planning) for the Board of Nursing.
In addition, the Board of Nursing has contracted with an information technology
vendor for a document imaging system and an online web-based application
required for nursing license renewals and related application processing. The
vendor provides support for the Board’s system and computer applications along
with maintenance of data records residing on the Board’s in-house databases.
These databases contain certain sensitive personal information such as social
8

--- Page 11 ---
security numbers of licensees. The vendor was awarded a sole source five-year
contract from July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2014 for an amount not to exceed
$2,337,479.
Finding 3
The Board of Nursing’s contract with its licensing service vendor did not
include provisions obligating the vendor to address certain significant
information technology security and operational risks.
Analysis
The contract between the Board and its licensing services vendor did not contain
specific provisions obligating the vendor to address certain significant
information technology security and operational risks, including risks over
sensitive client data (such as social security numbers). Furthermore, the Board
did not ensure that the vendor had established proper controls to ensure security
over the related data. Typically, such assurance is obtained through an
independent examination of controls by an audit firm engaged by the vendor.
The contract did not establish expectations relative to significant risks in order to
reduce the risks associated with outsourcing information technology operations as
outlined in guidance issued by the Cloud Security Alliance. For example, we
noted that the aforementioned contract lacked specific provisions addressing the
following issues:
Data Security
 Migration of data both within the vendor’s operating environment and
to alternate service provider organizations
 Controls to prevent impermissible copying and/or removal of the
Board’s data
Data Segregation
 The segregation of the Board’s data from data of other vendor clients
when systems for multiple clients are hosted on the same server
 Periodic monitoring to ensure that vendor data segregation policies are
not violated
Contract Termination and Service Exit Plan
 Upon contract termination, the process for the safe return of the
Board’s data
9

--- Page 12 ---
The Cloud Security Alliance, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to
promote the use of best practices for providing security assurance within cloud
computing, has issued Security Guidance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud
Computing, dated December 2009, which addresses security best practices when
using services of this nature and has been widely adopted. Cloud computing
refers to the use of Internet-based services and resources to provide computing
services, such as data processing and storage, to customers. These services are
typically performed by vendors (service organizations). This guidance outlines
the operational and security risks associated with these services and the related
recommendations to mitigate these risks. Furthermore, the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants has provided detailed guidance for performing an
examination to report on a service organization’s controls (SOC) over its system
relevant to security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy.
Such a report on management’s description of a service organization’s system and
the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the controls is referred
to as a SOC 2, type 2 report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Board
a. obtain assurances from the vendor that it has addressed critical data
security and operational risks, including safeguards for sensitive data;
b. request that the vendor periodically provide sufficient evidence that
controls pertaining to such risks are effective; and
c. include in future IT contracts, involving cloud computing services with
significant risks, provisions that require the vendor to address critical
security and operational risks and to periodically obtain an examination
of its system controls (for example by requiring the vendor to periodically
obtain a SOC 2, type 2 report).
Finding 4
The Board of Nursing did not have a complete disaster recovery plan and
controls over the licensing database were not sufficient.
Analysis
The Board did not have a complete disaster recovery plan and controls over its in-
house licensing database were not sufficient. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
 The Board did not have a complete information technology disaster recovery
plan (DRP) for recovering from disaster scenarios (for example, a fire). For
example, the DRP did not address alternate site processing arrangements,
prioritization of systems for recovery, restoration of network connectivity, and
10

--- Page 13 ---
plan testing. Without a complete DRP, a disaster could cause significant
delays (for an undetermined period of time) in restoring information systems
operations above and beyond the expected delays that would exist in a
planned recovery scenario.
 Auditing capabilities were not enabled for the licensing database.
Accordingly, critical security data were not collected and analyzed. Examples
of database activities which should be logged and analyzed include direct
changes to critical data tables and use of certain critical privileges. Therefore,
unauthorized or inappropriate activities, affecting the integrity of the
production database information, could occur and not be detected by
management. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
 Database account and password controls were not in compliance with the
Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy.
In particular, password aging, complexity and history, and account lockout
settings were not established for certain critical database accounts.
 Procedures to store backups of this database offsite did not exist. As a result
of this condition, in the event of a disaster, the Board could lose a significant
amount of data that it could not readily recreate.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Board
a. develop a complete DRP that, at a minimum, addresses the basic elements
needed for a comprehensive disaster recovery plan;
b. log all significant database security and audit events (repeat);
c. verify that database password and account controls are in compliance
with the requirements of the DoIT Information Security Policy; and
d. ensure that the licensing database backups are stored at a secure off-site
location.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Regulatory Services Unit of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period beginning February 1, 2008 and ending
August 2, 2010. The Unit consists of the Health Professionals Boards and
Commission (comprised of 16 separate boards and one commission), the Board of
Nursing, the Board of Physicians, and the Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ).
The Unit was created as a result of certain organizational changes made within
DHMH. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Unit’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings included in our preceding audit reports.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included health professionals licensing, cash receipts, and
information systems. Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate
personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of the Unit’s
operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this
report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but
were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Unit by DHMH
– Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of DHMH’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
The Unit’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Unit’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also
includes findings regarding significant instances of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to the Unit that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DHMH’s response, on behalf of the Unit, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 18 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
Certain boards had not established sufficient controls over the accounting for
professional licenses and related collections.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the applicable Boards
a. establish procedures to ensure that an employee independent of the
collections verifies that all amounts received are deposited and recorded
in the State’s accounting records (repeat);
b. verify that all licenses issued were paid for and were proper (repeat); and
c. periodically account for all licenses as being issued, voided and/or on-
hand (repeat).
Board of Pharmacy Response:
a. This recommendation does not apply to the Board of Pharmacy.
b. The Board concurs and has reinstated procedures for verifying that all licenses
are paid for and are proper. The Board had followed a process to verify
payment for all licenses issued, in response to a previous audit report.
However, most of the involved tasks were to be performed by the Licensing
Manager. The Licensing Unit Manager position had been vacant for a
significant period of time before and during the audit period (recently filled
March 2011). The below summarized procedures are now reinstituted:
To reconcile the licenses for any one month, the “Printed Licenses
Report” is printed out the first of every month. This reports allows the
Licensing Manager to verify: Control Number, Account Name (License
type) ,Check Amount, Comments (usually Confirmation numbers issued
for Online payment), Check Received Date, Name of applicant, Check or
Credit Card Transaction Number, License Number, Date Printed, Verified
By (Name of staff person who verified license). The Licensing Manager
reviews the complete reports to ensure that no licenses were issued that
did not have a related payment, signs and dates the report. She also
reviews with staff why any applicant who paid within any 30 day period
has not receive a license, as necessary.
c. The Board concurs and updated its process for periodically accounting for all
licenses as being issued, voided, and or on-hand following the exit conference
with the auditors. The below procedures, in addition to those noted above in
“b” should account for all licenses. These accounting tasks had not been
performed previously or had been neglected as a consequence of the
Licensing Unit Manager vacancy.

--- Page 19 ---
1. Upon receipt of ordered licenses, the Executive Director stores them in a
locked cabinet.
2. Sealed bulk licenses are subsequently provided to the Licensing
Manager.
3. The receiving staff member must initial a log next to the date of receipt
and the Executive Director’s initials.
4. The receiving Unit Manager then distributes individual license types to
various unit staff, who are required to initial a second log next to the
date and initials of the person from whom they are received.
5. The Executive Director tracks the number of sealed packs of licenses
held in the locked cabinet and the person who issues the licenses
periodically checks to ensure that the licenses maintained in their locked
cabinet are accounted for.
6. Upon ordering additional documents the Fiscal Officer ensures that the
last Control number is consistent with the new set of control numbers
ordered.
7. The Unit Supervisor (or Executive Director if a vacancy exists) must
review the log book maintained in the Unit at least monthly in order to
ensure an accurate count. Dates of the Supervisory review must be
recorded on a third log.
8. To track this accounting for all pre-numbered licenses, a database will
be developed no later than September 30, 2011, that accounts for all pre-
numbered licenses, including: the control numbers issued for each
category, the control numbers for those voided and each category, and
the control numbers for those that have not been issued (as well as where
they are located).
MBON Response:
a. The Board of Nursing concurs with this recommendation and has separated
the different components among different staff so that there are checks and
balances. Although all functions have been separated, there is the possibility
that with an employee’s prolonged absence, tasks could again overlap.
Therefore, as a precaution the Board has initiated the personnel processes to
secure additional positions.
b. The MBON concurs with this recommendation. The Board now tracks the
appropriate data to verify that monies are received to match each
license/certificate number issued. The Office of Inspector General (OIG) has
worked with the Board and the OIG agrees that the Board tracks necessary
information, including license/certificate number, issue/renewal date, name,
payment amount, payment date, and license type. The Board continues to
work with the Inspector General to refine this tracking system. The OIG has
sent your office the format used for reconciliation, and the OIG and the Board
would like to review this format with your office to assure that it fully meets
the concerns expressed in the audit.
c. This does not apply to MBON.

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 2
The Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) had not conducted annual
inspections of certain health care facilities as required.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that OHCQ complete inspections of the various health care
facilities, as required by law (repeat).
OHCQ Response:
OHCQ concurs with the finding and recommendation.
OHCQ’s capacity to complete inspections of the various health care facilities as
required by law continues to be challenged by the ongoing surveyor shortage.
According to OHCQ’s FY 2010 Staffing Analysis, the surveyor deficit in the
Assisted Living unit was seven positions; the deficit was 28 surveyor positions in
the Developmental Disabilities (DD) unit. In operational terms, the deficit means
that in order to complete the mandated surveys, OHCQ will need an additional 35
surveyors. The number of completed surveys is clearly influenced by the
surveyor staffing deficit. It’s important to point out that OHCQ the number of
positions has been 194 to 183, and that the agency staffing deficit for all units is
92. These staff reductions, coupled with furloughs and administrative salary
reduction days, and the lack of administrative support positions, affects the
number of completed surveys.
In an effort to address the oversight concern, OHCQ implemented a number of
initiatives aimed at better utilizing our limited resources; they include:
 DD unit began utilizing provider self-surveys to document mandated
policy and procedure compliance and personnel training requirements,
which resulted in an average savings of two days survey time per agency
surveyed.
 DD unit allocated staff resources to develop a small division with the
primary focus on children’s issues, which includes initial and re-licensure
surveys, complaint and incident investigations, and partnerships with
other State and county agencies involved in supporting the needs of
children. The creation of the children’s unit should increase OHCQ’s
ability to complete mandatory annual visits to each of the 24 agencies. .
 DD unit recently began the practice of referring non-health and non-safety
complaints to the four (4) DDA regional offices. Administrative
investigations, rather than those performed on site, are conducted, when
appropriate. Furthermore, the DD unit incorporates incident and
complaint investigations into re-licensure visits whenever possible.

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 3
The Board of Nursing’s contract with its licensing service vendor did not
include provisions obligating the vendor to address certain significant
information technology security and operational risks.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Board
a. obtain assurances from the vendor that it has addressed critical data
security and operational risks, including safeguards for sensitive data;
b. request that the vendor periodically provide sufficient evidence that
controls pertaining to such risks are effective; and
c. include in future IT contracts, involving cloud computing services with
significant risks, provisions that require the vendor to address critical
security and operational risks and to periodically obtain an examination
of its system controls (for example by requiring the vendor to periodically
obtain a SOC 2, type 2 report).
MBON Response:
The Board of Nursing concurs with this recommendation. Comments are below.
a) In the yearly compliance audit preformed by the contractor on April 11, 2011,
for the MBON, the vendor was able to provide assurances that it had
addressed the data security and operational risks to include safeguards for
sensitive data by various system upgrades to the firewall, including spam
detectors, intrusion agents and scripts.
b) MBON concurs with this recommendation and has requested quarterly reports
from the vendor providing risk management reports detailing the controls that
have been put into place to ensure MBON sensitive data is protected during
the short amount of time that it resides on their server. All transactions are
collected daily and sent to MBON the following morning and do not reside on
their servers once they are transmitted to MBON. The vendor also provides
daily backups that are stored in a fire and water proof safe before being picked
up and delivered to an off-site provider.
c) The Board concurs with this recommendation and believes that we were
compliant at time of signature. MBON will ensure that any further IT
contracts involving Cloud Computing services with significant risk, will
require the vendor to address critical security and operational risk and require
a SOC2, type 2 report.

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 4
The Board of Nursing did not have a complete disaster recovery plan and
controls over the licensing database were not sufficient.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Board
a. develop a complete DRP that, at a minimum, addresses the basic elements
needed for a comprehensive disaster recovery plan;
b. log all significant database security and audit events (repeat);
c. verify that database password and account controls are in compliance
with the requirements of the DoIT Information Security Policy; and
d. ensure that the licensing database backups are stored at a secure off-site
location.
MBON Response:
The Board of Nursing is in agreement with this recommendation. Comments are
below.
a) The Board is currently working to acquire an independent company to assist
with completion of our DRP and plan to have them participate in scheduling
all testing. It is anticipated that this will be resolved by January 1, 2012.
b. In response to a previous audit, the Board has enabled the necessary database
security and audit events. It was through this second audit that the Board
found out there was actually a second parameter that needed to be enabled.
The Board believes this has been enabled.
c. The Board is currently working with our database vendor to ensure that all
database passwords and account controls are in compliance with DoIT
Information Security Policy. We are also working with them to change any
accounts that access between and among component subsystems in order to
meet DoIT Information Security Policy. It is anticipated that this will be
resolved by January 1, 2012.
d. The Board is continuing to find off-site storage for our backups. We are
hopeful that the company assisting in our DRP will help with this. It is
anticipated that this will be resolved by January 1, 2012.

--- Page 23 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Peter J. Klemans, CPA
Audit Manager
Steven P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
A’knea K. Smith
Jennifer L. Thompson
Staff Auditors
Michael K. Bliss
Information Systems Senior Auditor