Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration

NOTE: Effective July 23, 2009, the Community Health Administration was merged with the AIDS Administration to form the newly created Infectious Disease and Health Environmental Administration.
Date: 12/17/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d724560674566
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:17:58.589734
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Infectious Disease and
Environmental Health Administration
December 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
December 17, 2010
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the following administrations of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the periods noted:
Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration (IDEHA) –
July 23, 2009 to January 4, 2010
Community Health Administration – November 1, 2007 to July 22, 2009
AIDS Administration – March 21, 2007 to July 22, 2009
Certain organizational changes that occurred within DHMH are explained on page
7 of this audit report.
IDEHA is responsible for improving the health of Marylanders through
partnerships with local health departments and public and private sector agencies
through efforts focusing on the prevention and control of infectious diseases,
investigation of disease outbreaks, protection from food related and
environmental health hazards, and helping impacted persons live longer, healthier
lives.
Our audit disclosed that IDEHA did not ensure that required health inspections of
certain food and milk processing facilities were being conducted, and had not
adequately restricted user access to its food protection licensing and inspection
information system. In addition, the required program reviews to ensure the
consistency of local health departments’ food program manuals, procedures, and
files for the inspections at regulated facilities (such as restaurants) had not been
conducted.
IDEHA had not established adequate procedures to independently verify that
pharmacy claims paid by its Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (MADAP)
were supported by authorized physician prescriptions. We also noted monitoring
and internal control deficiencies relating to grants, bank accounts, and cash
receipts.

--- Page 4 ---
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page 5. The response
from DHMH, on behalf of IDEHA, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us by IDEHA during the course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Organizational Change 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Food Protection
Finding 1 – IDEHA Did Not Ensure That Inspections of Certain Food and 9
Milk Processing Plants and Distribution Centers Were Adequately
Performed
Finding 2 – User Access to IDEHA’s Food Protection and Consumer Health 10
Services Licensing and Inspection System Was Not Adequately Restricted
Finding 3 –IDEHA Had Not Performed the Required Program Reviews of 11
Local Health Departments
Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
* Finding 4 – IDEHA Had Not Established Adequate Procedures to 12
Independently Verify the Propriety of Pharmacy Claims Submitted and
Paid
Core Public Health Services Program
Finding 5 – Grant Proposals Were Not Reviewed in a Timely Manner and 13
Did Not Always Contain all Required Information
Bank Accounts
Finding 6 – IDEHA Did Not Monitor State Funds Held in Bank Accounts 14
Maintained By a Private Contractor to Ensure That the Aggregate Monthly
Balance Did Not Exceed the Value of the Fidelity Bond
Cash Receipts
Finding 7 – Control Had Not Been Established Over IDEHA’s Collections 15
and Deposits Were Not Made Timely
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration (IDEHA)
December 2010
 IDEHA did not adequately ensure that the inspectors performed the required
inspections, sampling, and equipment tests of certain food and milk processing
plants and distribution stations. Specifically, documented supervisory reviews
were not performed to ensure that inspections were conducted at the required
frequencies and that violations were followed up on in a timely manner.
IDEHA should adequately monitor food and milk processing plants and
distribution stations by periodically performing documented reviews to ensure that
the required sampling, inspections, and follow-up inspections were performed.
 User access to IDEHA’s food protection licensing and inspection information
system was not adequately restricted. In addition, licenses issued were not
properly approved.
IDEHA should segregate incompatible licensing and inspection processing
capabilities and periodically assess user access based on current job
responsibilities. IDEHA should also ensure that licenses issued are independently
approved.
 Formal program reviews had not been conducted of each local health
department’s program manuals, procedures, and files of regulated facility
inspections, such as restaurants, as required.
IDEHA should conduct program reviews of each local health department.
 IDEHA had not established adequate procedures to independently verify the
propriety of pharmacy claims submitted and paid by the Maryland AIDS
Drug Assistance Program (MADAP). As a result, a pharmacy could
inappropriately bill IDEHA for unauthorized medications without detection.
MADAP expenditures totaled $29.1 million during fiscal year 2009.
IDEHA should establish procedures to help ensure that only valid pharmacy claims
were submitted and paid, such as by performing periodic audits to ensure that
pharmacies have physician prescriptions to support claims paid.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Internal control deficiencies were noted with respect to grants, bank accounts,
and cash receipts.
IDEHA should take the recommended actions to improve controls in these areas.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration (IDEHA) is
responsible for improving the health of Marylanders through partnerships with
local health departments and public and private sector agencies. IDEHA’s efforts
focus on the prevention and control of infectious diseases, the investigation of
disease outbreaks, protection from food-related and environmental health hazards,
and helping impacted persons live longer, healthier lives. IDEHA also funds
public health services in local health departments on a matching basis with all 24
local jurisdictions. According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year
2009, expenditures for IDEHA totaled approximately $150.1 million.
Organizational Change
Certain duties and responsibilities within the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene (DHMH) were reorganized effective July 23, 2009. Specifically, the
Community Health Administration was merged with the AIDS Administration to
form the newly created IDEHA. The local health departments, which previously
reported to the Community Health Administration, now report to the DHMH
Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services. Our audit included the former
Community Health Administration for the period November 1, 2007 to July 22,
2009 and the former AIDS Administration for the period March 21, 2007 to July
22, 2009.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report on the DHMH-AIDS Administration, dated October
24, 2007, and the two findings contained in our preceding audit report on the
DHMH-Community Health Administration, dated May 2, 2008. We determined
that IDEHA satisfactorily addressed five of these findings. The remaining finding
is repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Food Protection
Background Information
The Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration’s (IDEHA)
Office of Food Protection and Consumer Health Services (OFPCHS) is composed
of four divisions: the Center for Food Processing, the Center for Food Retail, the
Center for Milk Control, and the Center for Community Health Services.
OFPCHS is responsible for protecting and promoting public health and safety
through the licensing and regulation of mandated programs. In this regard, it has
inspection and enforcement responsibilities over a wide range of facilities (such
as food and milk processing plants).
Each Center maintains its own database to record and monitor inspection and
enforcement responsibilities and uses the OFPCHS licensing and inspection
system to issue new and renewal licenses and permits. During fiscal year 2009,
the four Centers issued 3,071 licenses and permits and performed 9,353 field
inspections, follow-up reviews, and product sampling reviews.
Finding 1
IDEHA did not adequately ensure that the inspectors performed the
required inspections, sampling, and equipment tests at food and milk
processing plants and distribution stations.
Analysis
IDEHA did not adequately monitor inspectors to ensure that the inspections,
sampling, and equipment tests at food and milk processing plants and distribution
stations were being conducted at the required frequencies and whether the follow-
up of previously identified violations were being performed, as required by State
regulations. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 In the Center for Food Processing, there were no supervisory reviews
conducted to ensure that each inspector performed the inspections, sampling,
and equipment tests of food processing plants at the required frequencies
(such as quarterly or semi-annually), and to ensure the proper follow-up of
previously identified violations. We were advised by IDEHA that each
inspector was responsible to monitor his or her assigned facility inspections
and related follow-up requirements. Our test of 10 food processing plants that
were licensed during fiscal year 2009 disclosed that the required sampling was
not performed at the required intervals at two of the plants. Furthermore, at
9

--- Page 12 ---
one of these plants, test samples did not meet the bacteriological standards
established in the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR); however,
subsequent follow-up was not performed for five months to determine if the
noted violations had been corrected. In addition, the violations related to one
of these samples had not been recorded in the inspection database. As a
result, there is an increased risk of adulterated food not being detected.
 Although we were advised by the Center for Milk Control that supervisors
performed a monthly review of its database system to ensure that the required
inspections and follow-up of previously identified violations of milk
processing plants were completed, these monthly reviews were not
documented. Consequently, there is a lack of assurance that the required
inspections were completed and violations were addressed. Our test of 10
processing plants for milk, milk-related, and frozen dessert products that had
licenses during fiscal year 2009 disclosed that one licensee had not had an
annual inspection since 2005 and the facility’s license continued to be
renewed each year. According to the inspectors, the plant was inactive at the
time of the attempted inspections.
COMAR, Title 10, Subtitle 15 outlines many of the specific frequency of
inspections and sampling of related product, as well as the related requirements
for obtaining each specific license.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that IDEHA
a. adequately monitor food and milk processing plants and distribution
stations by periodically performing supervisory reviews to ensure that the
required sampling, inspections, and follow-up inspections were
performed;
b. document the aforementioned reviews; and
c. accurately record all inspection activity in the applicable database
systems.
Finding 2
User access to IDEHA’s food protection licensing and inspection information
system was not adequately restricted. In addition, licenses issued were not
properly approved.
Analysis
User access to IDEHA’s licensing and inspection information system used to
issue new and renewal facility licenses and permits was not adequately restricted.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Specifically, the system requires new licenses and permits to be approved, but
does not require electronic approval for license and permit renewals. Our review
disclosed that 12 employees could initiate license and permit renewals and 8 of
these employees did not require this capability as part of their job responsibility.
In addition, 7 of these 8 employees could both initiate and approve new licenses
and permits.
Our review of 20 licenses and permits issued or renewed during fiscal year 2009
disclosed that 7 were issued or renewed without supervisory review and approval,
and 5 were initiated and approved by the same employee.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that IDEHA
a. periodically review employee access capabilities for the licensing and
inspection system;
b. grant user access only to those employees who require such access to
perform their assigned job duties;
c. ensure that an independent, supervisory review and approval is required
for all licenses issued (new and renewal); and
d. investigate the aforementioned 12 licenses and permits to ensure that they
were properly approved and issued.
Finding 3
IDEHA had not performed the required program reviews of local health
departments.
Analysis
IDEHA had not conducted program reviews, as required, of the 24 local health
departments’ (LHD) program manuals, procedures, and files to help ensure that
certain regulated facilities were inspected consistently and uniformly. IDEHA
has delegated the inspection of certain facilities (such as restaurants) to the LHDs.
Although IDEHA developed policies to perform these program reviews, we were
advised that these reviews have not been conducted since the 1980s due to a lack
of resources. The LHDs are responsible for the ongoing inspection of these
regulated facilities, under standards and policies established by IDEHA.
IDEHA’s policies require that a program review be conducted of each LHD’s
program manuals, procedures, and inspection files every three years. The reviews
are to be conducted, in part, to help ensure that inspections are performed
consistently, inspection reports are prepared properly and completely, and that
facility and follow-up inspections are performed timely. A written report
11

--- Page 14 ---
summarizing the results of the program review is also to be prepared by the
IDEHA employee performing the review.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that IDEHA conduct formal reviews of each LHD, as
required. At a minimum, IDEHA should obtain and review the program
manuals, procedures, and inspection files from the LHDs to ensure consistent
application of established standards and policies.
Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
Finding 4
IDEHA had not established adequate procedures to independently verify the
propriety of pharmacy claims submitted and paid.
Analysis
IDEHA had not established adequate procedures to independently verify the
propriety of pharmacy claims submitted and paid by the Maryland AIDS Drug
Assistance Program (MADAP). MADAP helps low to moderate income
Maryland residents pay for certain drugs prescribed to treat HIV/AIDS. Using a
point-of-sale (POS) computer system, participating pharmacies must obtain
authorizations from IDEHA prior to dispensing medications to clients and then
submit the related claims to IDEHA for reimbursement. However, IDEHA did
not match claims that had been authorized through the POS system with valid
physician prescriptions that had been filled and provided to clients. As a result, a
pharmacy could inappropriately bill IDEHA for unauthorized medications without
detection. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report
of the AIDS Administration.
Following our prior audit, we were advised that IDEHA unsuccessfully explored
several options to help ensure that only valid pharmacy claims were paid,
including participating in the Medical Care Programs Administration periodic
pharmacy audits, using contractual staff, and hiring a third-party vendor to
conduct pharmacy audits. However, as of April 2010, no procedures were in
place to ensure that only valid pharmacy claims were submitted and paid.
According to the State’s records, during calendar year 2009, expenditures for
medications totaled approximately $29.1 million, serving an average of 3,100
clients per month.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that IDEHA
a. establish procedures to help ensure that only valid pharmacy claims were
submitted and paid, such as by performing periodic audits to ensure that
pharmacies have physicians’ prescriptions to support claims paid
(repeat); and
b. take necessary follow-up actions, in the event the procedures performed
disclose instances in which IDEHA had paid inappropriate claims
(repeat).
Core Public Health Services Program
Finding 5
Core Public Health Services grant proposals were not reviewed in a timely
manner and did not always contain all required information.
Analysis
Core Public Health Services grant proposals were not reviewed in a timely
manner and did not always contain all required information. Under the
Core Public Health Services Program, State funds are matched with funds from
each of Maryland’s 24 local jurisdictions, in support of public health
services. Public health services provided through this program include infectious
disease prevention and treatment services, environmental health services, family
planning services, maternal and child health services, wellness promotion
services, and adult health and geriatric services. The total amount of these grant
funds are annually appropriated and IDEHA allocates these funds to the LDHs
based on various factors, such as inflation and population. However, State
regulations and Department policy require each LHD to submit a grant proposal
to the Department that includes, among other things, a budget plan, goals and
objectives, and performance measures. Grant proposals are due prior to the
beginning of the fiscal year. According to the State’s accounting records,
IDEHA’s fiscal year 2009 expenditures for this program totaled approximately
$61.9 million. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 IDEHA did not review and approve the grant proposals submitted by the
LHDs for Core funds in a timely manner. Specifically, the grant proposals
were not reviewed by IDEHA until after the related fiscal year had started,
and grant funds were distributed to the LHDs without ensuring the adequacy
of the grant proposals. Our review of 15 fiscal year 2009 grant proposals,
totaling $28.2 million, submitted by five LHDs, disclosed that 13 of the 15
proposals were not reviewed and approved until four to nine months after the
13

--- Page 16 ---
beginning of the applicable fiscal year. There was no documentation that the
other 2 proposals were ever reviewed and approved. Our review also
disclosed that 7 of the proposals that IDEHA reviewed, totaling approximately
$18.7 million, were missing critical required information. For example, the
grant proposal for one program, totaling $1.6 million, did not contain any of
the required information (such as goals and objectives, budget plan, and
performance measures).
 IDEHA did not have adequate procedures in place to determine if the
proposed performance measures (such as number of home visits to prenatal
clients, infants, and postpartum clients) were met. IDEHA receives the
final performance measures reports from the LHDs at fiscal year end and
records receipt. However, IDEHA did not compare these reported results with
the performance measures included in their original proposals to see if they
had been met.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that IDEHA
a. ensure the LHDs are submitting all required information with the grant
proposals;
b. review the grant proposals in a timely manner; and
c. compare the performance measures reported by the LHDs, at least on a
test basis, to the original grant proposals, and take appropriate follow-up
action.
Bank Accounts
Finding 6
IDEHA did not monitor State funds held in bank accounts maintained by a
private contractor to ensure that the aggregate monthly balance did not
exceed the value of the fidelity bond.
Analysis
IDEHA did not monitor State funds held in bank accounts maintained by a private
contractor to ensure that the aggregate monthly balance did not exceed the value
of the fidelity bond ($4 million) and to ensure that funds exceeding the bond value
were returned, as required by the contract. IDEHA advances funds to the
contractor, who deposits the funds in its bank accounts. At the direction of
MADAP and a related program (MADAP Plus), the contractor provides a check-
writing service to reimburse pharmacies and insurance carriers for program costs.
14

--- Page 17 ---
The contractor also processes and mails checks, and provides IDEHA with a
record of paid invoices.
Our test of the aggregate average daily bank account balances for a six-month
period (July through December 2009) disclosed that, for three of the six months
tested, the average aggregate monthly balance of the accounts was between
approximately $600,000 and $1.6 million higher than the value of the fidelity
bond. During this period no funds were returned to IDEHA. Due to the constant
fluctuations in the monthly account balances, IDEHA is considering an increase
in the total value of the fidelity bond.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that IDEHA periodically monitor the bank balances and
ensure that funds in excess of the fidelity bond are returned by the
contractor, as required by the contract.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
Controls were not adequate over IDEHA’s collections, and deposits were not
always made timely.
Analysis
Control had not been established over the vast majority of IDEHA’s collections.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions related to drug manufacturer’s
rebates and insurance premium refunds, which totaled approximately $19.6
million during calendar year 2009:
 Collections received by IDEHA were initially recorded prior to subsequent
transfer by interoffice courier to the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene (DHMH) - General Accounting for deposit preparation. However,
the transfer of these receipts was not documented to establish accountability
over the funds. In this regard, there was no documentation of the transfer of
the receipts to the courier or to DHMH-General Accounting.
 Based on the dates of the interoffice memos accompanying deposits to
DHMH -General Accounting, cash receipts were not forwarded for deposit in
a timely manner. Our test of 15 cash receipts transactions from February 2009
through January 2010, totaling approximately $14.8 million, disclosed that 12
transactions, totaling approximately $9.1 million, were not forwarded for
deposit for periods ranging from two to four business days after receipt. The
15

--- Page 18 ---
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual generally requires
that cash receipts be deposited no later than the first working day after receipt.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that IDEHA
a. establish accountability over collections by documenting the transfer of
receipts to the courier and to DHMH - General Accounting, and
b. timely forward all cash receipts for deposit.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration
(IDEHA) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) which was
created in July 23, 2009 through the merging of DHMH’s AIDS Administration
and Community Health Administration (CHA). As a result, we audited the
following Administrations of DHMH for the periods noted:
IDEHA – July 23, 2009 to January 4, 2010
CHA – November 1, 2007 to July 22, 2009
AIDS Administration – March 21, 2007 to July 22, 2009
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine IDEHA’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status
of the four findings contained in our preceding audit report of the DHMH-AIDS
Administration, dated October 24, 2007 and the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report of the DHMH- CHA, dated May 2, 2008.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included contracts and grants, inspections and licensing of
regulated facilities (such as food and milk processing plants), pharmacy claims,
and cash receipts. Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate
personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of IDEHA’s
operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this
report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but
were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to IDEHA by DHMH.
These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting
records and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audit of
DHMH’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units. In addition, our audit did not
17

--- Page 20 ---
include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial assistance programs
and an assessment of IDEHA’s compliance with federal laws and regulations
pertaining to those programs because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including IDEHA.
IDEHA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect IDEHA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to IDEHA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Department’s response, on behalf of IDEHA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 22 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Food Protection
Finding 1
IDEHA did not adequately ensure that the inspectors performed the
required inspections, sampling, and equipment tests at food and milk
processing plants and distribution stations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that IDEHA
a. adequately monitor food and milk processing plants and distribution
stations by periodically performing supervisory reviews to ensure that the
required sampling, inspections, and follow-up inspections were
performed;
b. document the aforementioned reviews; and
c. accurately record all inspection activity in the applicable database
systems.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. The procedure for conducting supervisory
reviews is undergoing revision at this time. The revised procedure will be
implemented in the first quarter of 2011 in conjunction with implementation
of the new inspections module database. Meeting all required inspection
frequencies will be an ongoing challenge given the staff and budget
reductions for these functions.
b. The Administration concurs. The revised procedure for conducting
supervisory reviews will require documentation of each review performed.
c. The Administration concurs. The Administration and the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration identified the need for an improved data system to
manage the Office of Food Protection and Consumer Health Service’s
licensing and permitting, inspection, and enforcement activities several years
ago. The DHMH Office of Information Technology has been developing a
new electronic data management system to address these needs,
and the completion and implementation of this new data system is a top
priority of the Infectious Disease and Environmental Health Administration.
Currently, the licensing and permitting database module is operational
(although undergoing additional modifications). Also, the inspections
module is in development with a tentative completion date in the first quarter
of 2011. The final plan review module will be developed after the

--- Page 23 ---
Food Protection (cont.)
inspections module has been completed and successfully implemented.
Initially, data will be entered manually into the electronic inspections module
database until funding is made available to purchase data collection
equipment to enable electronic recording of inspection data in the field.

--- Page 24 ---
Food Protection (cont.)
Finding 2
User access to IDEHA’s food protection licensing and inspection information
system was not adequately restricted. In addition, licenses issued were not
properly approved.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that IDEHA
a. periodically review employee access capabilities for the licensing and
inspection system;
b. grant user access only to those employees who require such access to
perform their assigned job duties;
c. ensure that an independent, supervisory review and approval is required
for all licenses issued (new and renewal); and
d. investigate the aforementioned 12 licenses and permits to ensure that they
were properly approved and issued.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs and has received its initial quarterly report from
the DHMH Office of Information Technology (OIT), developer and manager
of the new electronic data management system, listing Administration
personnel with database permissions and authorizations. Management will
review each quarterly report to ensure that employee access capabilities are
consistent with assigned job duties.
b. The Administration concurs. Within 30 days following receipt of a quarterly
report, the Administration will send a request to OIT to update database
permissions and authorizations as necessary to ensure access to the electronic
data management system is limited to employees who require access to
perform their assigned job duties.
c. The Administration concurs and working with OIT, has put appropriate
controls in place to ensure that supervisory review and approval is obtained
before issuance of all licenses and permits (new and renewal).
d. The Administration concurs and has verified that all 12 licenses and permits
in question were appropriately issued as each regulated entity was in
compliance at time of renewal.

--- Page 25 ---
Food Protection (cont.)
Finding 3
IDEHA had not performed the required program reviews of local health
departments.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that IDEHA conduct formal reviews of each LHD, as
required. At a minimum, IDEHA should obtain and review the program
manuals, procedures, and inspection files from the LHDs to ensure consistent
application of established standards and policies.
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs, although formal reviews of LHD food programs are
not mandated by State statute or COMAR regulations. The program review
process referenced above is contained in an internal procedures manual developed
by the Administration’s Office of Food Protection and Consumer Health Services
in 1998. This manual is currently under revision. Recently, the Administration
initiated “standardization” of LHD food program staff consistent with the U. S.
Food and Drug Administration’s Voluntary National Retail Food Regulatory
Program Standards. This process will continue on an ongoing basis. In addition,
the Administration is developing a LHD program review process which will be
implemented by the last quarter of 2011 once the initial “standardization” of LHD
staff has been completed and revisions to the Administration’s internal procedures
manual are finalized. The Administration plans to review 4 to 6 LHDs annually
to assure that LHDs’ regulatory activities are carried out consistent with the
Administration’s internal procedures manual and are not in conflict with
applicable State COMAR regulations.

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
Finding 4
IDEHA had not established adequate procedures to independently verify the
propriety of pharmacy claims submitted and paid.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that IDEHA
a. establish procedures to help ensure that only valid pharmacy claims were
submitted and paid, such as by performing periodic audits to ensure that
pharmacies have physicians’ prescriptions to support claims paid
(repeat); and
b. take necessary follow-up actions, in the event the procedures performed
disclose instances in which IDEHA had paid inappropriate claims
(repeat).
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs. As noted by the auditor, the Administration
explored a number of options following the previous audit to address this
finding, without success. Recently, with the approval of the Board of Public
Works, a private contractor has been hired to perform audits of pharmacies
participating in the MADAP program.
b. The Administration concurs and will follow-up on any audit findings that
indicate inappropriate claims were paid and will consult with the Office of the
Attorney General before seeking recovery of any payments.

--- Page 27 ---
Core Public Health Services Program
Finding 5
Core Public Health Services grant proposals were not reviewed in a timely
manner and did not always contain all required information.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that IDEHA
a. ensure the LHDs are submitting all required information with the grant
proposals;
b. review the grant proposals in a timely manner; and
c. compare the performance measures reported by the LHDs, at least on a
test basis, to the original grant proposals, and take appropriate follow-up
action.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs with the finding and partially concurs with the
recommendation. LHDs receive written instructions annually from DHMH
that specify the format, content and due date for submission of proposed
expenditures. Submissions are typically due 50 days prior to the start of each
fiscal year, and are transmitted electronically to the CORE Public Health
Services program administrator who records the date each submission is
received. The Administration will follow-up with the LHDs as necessary and
make every effort to obtain full compliance with the written instructions. Our
partial concurrence is based on the fact that the Administration is not
empowered to enforce consequences in the event of non-compliance.
b. The Administration concurs. The Administration will work through the
Office of the Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services to assure that grant
proposals are reviewed in a timely manner. Currently, LHD grant proposals
are separated by program area by the program administrator and distributed to
the subject matter expert for a detailed review prior to the beginning of the
fiscal year. In an effort to improve the timeliness of these reviews, a “due
date” will be added to the existing review form used by each subject matter
expert to record comments and provide feedback to the LHDs. “Due dates”
will be closely monitored by the program administrator.
c. The Administration concurs with the finding but not the recommendation.
Core Funds represent a small percentage of total funding for LHD programs.
It has been DHMH practice for DHMH subject matter experts to monitor
LHD achievement of performance measures overall, as it is impractical to
isolate performance measures directly attributable to Core Funds since
performance measures relate to activities to be accomplished utilizing all
available LHD funding sources. DHMH will be working on an overall
Continuous Quality Improvement project funded through the federal Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, and will be reviewing the administrative
aspects of the Core Public Health Services program as part of that project.

--- Page 28 ---
Bank Accounts
Finding 6
IDEHA did not monitor State funds held in bank accounts maintained by a
private contractor to ensure that the aggregate monthly balance did not
exceed the value of the fidelity bond.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that IDEHA periodically monitor the bank balances and
ensure that funds in excess of the fidelity bond are returned by the
contractor, as required by the contract.
Administration’s Response
The Administration concurs with the finding and partially concurs with the
recommendation. The current agreement with the private contractor has been
modified to increase the fidelity bond to $7million. In addition, the
Administration will review bank account balances on a quarterly basis and will
adjust the amount of the fidelity bond, as necessary, to protect the State’s
financial interests.

--- Page 29 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
Controls were not adequate over IDEHA’s collections, and deposits were not
always made timely.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that IDEHA
a. establish accountability over collections by documenting the transfer of
receipts to the courier and to DHMH - General Accounting, and
b. timely forward all cash receipts for deposit.
Administration’s Response
a. The Administration concurs with the finding but chose another approach
to resolve the control weakness. To address this situation, the
Administration initiated the direct deposit of collections in August 2010
following approval by DHMH – General Accounting. Consequently, the
transfer of receipts to the courier and DHMH – General Accounting is no
longer necessary.
b. The Administration concurs and is now timely depositing all cash receipts
in accordance with State guidelines.

--- Page 30 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Terry S. Gibson
Senior Auditor
Timothy S. Rice
LaTeasa R. Robertson
Staff Auditors