Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
Date: 01/28/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745d8
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:32:59.305313
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
John L. Gildner Regional Institute for
Children and Adolescents
January 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents is a
residential and day treatment center that provides mental health treatment,
education and rehabilitative services to children and adolescents and their families
from counties throughout the State of Maryland and Baltimore City. The services
provided include inpatient and outpatient treatment. In fiscal year 2013, the
Institute provided housing for an average daily population of 29 residential
students and provided treatment for an average daily population of 74 outpatient
students. In addition, the Institute is responsible for the dietary program for the
Alfred D. Noyes Children’s Center (a unit of the Department of Juvenile
Services). According to the State’s records, the Institute’s expenditures for fiscal
year 2013 totaled approximately $10.9 million.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Institute’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less
significant finding was communicated to the Institute that did not warrant mention
in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Institute. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and
Adolescents for the period beginning July 14, 2010 and ending October 7, 2013.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
3

--- Page 6 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Institute’s
financial transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, materials and
supplies, and payroll.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Institute’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as expenditure data) and the State’s Central Payroll
Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering the State’s
Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
The Institute’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
Kortue C. Sammy
Staff Auditor