Title: Maryland Food Center Authority
Date: 04/08/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d72456067441a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:47:07.508673
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Food Center Authority
October 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Food Center Authority (MFCA) is an instrumentality of the State
of Maryland and a public corporation. The primary purpose of MFCA is to
establish, maintain, operate, and promote consolidated food markets within the
State. MFCA owns and operates regional food service facilities, including the
Maryland Wholesale Produce and Seafood Markets located in Jessup, Maryland.
MFCA’s Board of Directors comprises 12 members including the Comptroller of
Maryland, the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture, the Secretary of the
Department of General Services, the Director of Agricultural Extension for the
State, and private citizens appointed by the Governor.
MFCA receives no State general funds. Its operations are primarily funded
through entrance and registration fees, service fees, and rental income that are
generated from the operation of the produce and seafood markets. According to
its audited financial statements, MFCA’s operating revenues and expenses totaled
$4.9 million and $4.8 million, respectively, for the fiscal year ended June 30,
2016.
Financial Statement Audits
MFCA engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2014, 2015, and 2016. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that MFCA’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of MFCA, and the respective
changes in financial position and cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 8, 2014. We determined that MFCA
satisfactorily addressed both of these findings.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Monitoring – Maryland Market Center
Background
The Maryland Food Center Authority (MFCA) plans to expand its Maryland
Wholesale Produce and Seafood Markets in Jessup to include a new market site
called the Maryland Market Center (Center), at an estimated total cost of $42
million. The Center will include additional wholesale sites, a farmer’s market,
and a restaurant that will focus on local agriculture.
In December 2013, MFCA entered into an agreement to sell 6.43 acres of its land
adjacent to the parcel of land to be used for the Center to a company for
approximately $1.5 million. According to its minutes, the MFCA’s Board of
Directors discussed the agreement to sell this parcel of land, and we were advised
that the Board subsequently approved the agreement. The Board of Public Works
also approved the agreement. In October 2014, MFCA and the company entered
into a second agreement. This second agreement authorized the company to hire
a construction contractor to perform site development work concurrently on both
the company’s 6.43 acres and MFCA’s new Center location. Because the sites
were adjacent, the expectation was that economies and efficiencies would be
realized by this arrangement. At its April 2014 meeting, MFCA’s Board of
Directors approved the use of this contractor for the site development work, with
the understanding that this arrangement deviated from MFCA’s procurement
procedures, which specify that all contracts for project development and
construction shall be made through competitive solicitation. This development
contract was not required to be approved by the Board of Public Works.
Under the terms of this second agreement, MFCA is responsible for payment of
all development costs associated with its property, as well as a portion of certain
costs shared with the company. According to the agreement, MFCA’s
development costs were budgeted to total $4.3 million, and were to be offset by
the $1.5 million purchase price of the land.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 1
MFCA did not ensure it obtained monthly payment requests from the site
development contractor as required, and payments totaling $217,671 were
made without receiving certification from MFCA’s independent engineer of
the work performed. Additionally, MFCA overpaid certain fees.
Analysis
MFCA did not ensure that it obtained monthly payment requests for work
performed and charges incurred, as required under the agreement, and two
requests were paid even though MFCA’s independent engineer had not approved
them for payment. Furthermore, MFCA overpaid certain fees by approximately
$60,000. As of April 2017, MFCA had received six payment requests totaling
approximately $3.6 million. MFCA paid these requests either directly or by
applying the purchase price for the land. MFCA hired an engineer to review and
approve these requests based on an independent assessment of work performed.
MFCA did not contact the site development contractor when it failed to receive
timely payment requests. MFCA did not receive the first payment request, which
totaled approximately $1.9 million, until April 2015, even though the
development and site work for MFCA’s property began in November 2014.
Consequently, the work performed and the applicable charges incurred during this
period were not reviewed and evaluated by MFCA’s independent engineer on a
timely basis. Furthermore, our review of the six payment requests that had been
submitted and paid by MFCA through April 20, 2017, disclosed that MFCA
received approval for payment from its engineer for only four of the six.
Specifically, there was no documented authorization from MFCA’s engineer for
the requests dated January 12, 2016 and June 8, 2016 totaling $150,097 and
$67,574, respectively. We contacted MFCA’s engineer and were advised that, as
of April 2017, his review of these requests remained incomplete, and the requests
had not been approved for payment. However, the related payments were made
by MFCA in July 2016.
Finally, our review disclosed that the development agreement allowed for a four
percent construction/development fee to be assessed to MFCA; however, the
actual payment requests billed this fee at a rate of seven percent. MFCA was
unaware of this discrepancy until we brought it to its attention, at which time
MFCA agreed to recover overpayments of approximately $60,000.
Under the terms of the development agreement, the company was required to
submit to MFCA monthly payment requests, with supporting invoices and
documentation. Prior to payment, MFCA’s engineer was responsible for
reviewing and approving these requests based on the reasonableness of the costs
5

--- Page 8 ---
charged and certification of the work completed. MFCA’s contract with the
engineer required the engineer to review each request and provide MFCA with
comments and opinions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MFCA
a. obtain payment requests when required by current and future
construction contracts to monitor and evaluate work performed and
charges incurred on a timely basis,
b. make contractual payments only after established review and approval
procedures have been completed,
c. obtain review comments from its engineer for the two aforementioned
payment requests and take appropriate action based on those comments,
and
d. recover all overcharges resulting from the noted rate discrepancy.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Food Center
Authority (MFCA) for the period beginning August 7, 2013 and ending January
29, 2017. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MFCA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included accounts receivable, cash receipts, payroll,
procurement, and disbursements. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MFCA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from MFCA’s financial systems for the purpose of testing certain areas, such
as accounts receivable and cash receipts. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
7

--- Page 10 ---
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MFCA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MFCA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MFCA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MFCA to our finding and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MFCA regarding the
results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor