Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Revenue Administration Division
Date: 08/23/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1acc9d724560674690
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:42:23.810500
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Revenue Administration Division
September 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Court Ruling on Taxes Paid to Other States 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Local Income Tax Revenue Distribution
Finding 1 – RAD had not determined the underlying causes(s) for 9
erroneous subdivision codes recorded in SMART for numerous
taxpayers in one county, which resulted in $8.7 million in local
income taxes being incorrectly distributed.
Finding 2 – RAD lacked sufficient policies and procedures to ensure 12
that all subdivision codes assigned to taxpayers in SMART were
proper.
Out-of-State Tax Credits
* Finding 3 – Required documentation was not always on file to 14
support out-of-state tax credits claimed on paper tax returns filed
by individual taxpayers.
Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts
* Finding 4 – Significant financial adjustments to corporate taxpayer 15
accounts were not always independently reviewed as required.
Finding 5 – Controls were not in place to ensure adjustments to 16
critical taxpayer account information were properly reviewed,
and supporting documentation was not always on file.
Information Systems Security and Control
* Finding 6 – Certain critical database security and audit events were 18
either not logged or not reviewed for propriety.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7 – RAD had not established sufficient controls over remotely 19
deposited checks, and employees with access to collections had the
capability to adjust taxpayer accounts.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Replacement Checks
Finding 8 – RAD lacked documentation that replacement refund checks 21
were independently reviewed as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Exhibit 1 – Comptroller of Maryland Determined Net Local Income 24
Tax Under/Over Distributions Tax Years 2010 - 2014
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Revenue Administration Division’s (RAD) primary responsibilities include
receiving and depositing various tax remittances, processing tax returns,
maintaining taxpayer records, distributing taxes in accordance with applicable
State laws, issuing income tax refunds, and providing assistance to taxpayers.
RAD uses the Comptroller of Maryland’s automated State of Maryland Tax
(SMART) system to record and process tax return information and issue refunds
for individual income taxes, as well as for certain other taxes, such as corporate
income taxes, employer withholding taxes, and sales and use taxes. RAD also
administers laws and regulations pertaining to the manufacture, storage,
transportation, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and motor
fuel, and collects the related excise taxes. The significant taxes collected by RAD
(sources greater than $100 million annually), according to RAD’s records, for
fiscal years 2013 through 2015, are listed in Table 1.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Table 1
Selected Tax Collections and Distributions
Applicable to Fiscal Years 2013 – 2015
(sources greater than $100 million annually)
Fiscal Year
2013 2014 2015
(dollars stated in millions)
Gross income taxes collected $15,884 $16,238 $17,152
Less:
Refunds 2,527 2,578 2,601
Administrative expenses 14 14 14
Total refunds and expenses 2,541 2,592 2,615
Balance available for distribution $13,343 $13,646 $14,537
Distribution of remaining balance:
To State’s General Fund $8,255 $8,535 $9,124
To local subdivisions 4,698 4,888 5,185
To other Funds as provided by 390 223 228
State Law (such as the
Transportation Trust Fund)
Total distributions $13,343 $13,646 $14,537
Gross sales and use tax collections
which are primarily credited to the State’s
General Fund $4,128 $4,211 $4,426
Gross motor fuel tax collections
which are primarily credited to the
Transportation Trust Fund $775 $879 $961
Gross tobacco tax collections
which are primarily credited to the State’s
General Fund $416 $405 $392
Gross estate tax collections
which are primarily credited to the State’s
General Fund $196 $182 $210
Source: RAD Records
Note: Distributions shown in this table relate to the stated fiscal year, but were not necessarily
distributed in that year.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Court Ruling on Income Taxes Paid to Other States
Maryland’s individual income taxes collected from State residents include a State
income tax due to the State and a local income tax due to the State’s local
jurisdictions. Residents who earn income in another State are generally required
to report that income on their Maryland income tax returns, but are allowed a
credit against their State tax liability for taxes paid to the other state on that
income. Previously, taxpayers were not allowed a corresponding credit against
their local income tax liability.
On May 18, 2015, the United States Supreme Court ruled (Comptroller of the
Treasury of Maryland v. Wynne) that not permitting the credit against the local
tax liability was unconstitutional. As a result, residents of Maryland who have
paid income taxes to another state on income earned in that state are now allowed
a credit against Maryland’s local income taxes. Residents may file amended
income tax returns in Maryland for refunds of these taxes previously paid,
generally subject to statutory time limits for amended returns. According to the
Comptroller of Maryland’s records, as of November 27, 2015, RAD had issued
refunds totaling $87.8 million, including $4.8 million in interest, relating to
10,054 tax returns, as a result of this court ruling.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 10 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated August 23, 2013. We determined that RAD
satisfactorily addressed 7 of these findings. The remaining 3 findings are
repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Local Income Tax Revenue Distribution
Background
The Revenue Administration Division (RAD) of the Comptroller of Maryland is
responsible for processing individual income tax returns and collecting and
distributing the related income tax revenue on behalf of the State and its 24
jurisdictions (23 counties and Baltimore City). The State’s income tax revenue is
primarily distributed to the General Fund. Each jurisdiction’s local income tax
revenue is distributed in accordance with the local income tax rates established by
ordinance or resolution, within parameters specified in State law. Taxpayers use
those rates to determine the amount of their local income tax liability when
preparing their tax returns.
RAD is also required by law to distribute a portion of the local income tax
revenue collected to the municipal corporations and special taxing districts
(collectively referred to as special taxing areas) established within most
jurisdictions. There are 172 special taxing areas located within 21 counties in the
State. Two counties and Baltimore City have no special taxing areas within their
boundaries. The amount distributed to a special taxing area is generally equal to
17 percent of the local income tax collected from each taxpayer living within the
boundaries of that special taxing area. Local income tax collected from taxpayers
who do not live within a special taxing area is distributed entirely to the
jurisdiction in which the taxpayer resided during the tax year, as is the remaining
83 percent of the local income tax collected from taxpayers residing in special
taxing areas. During fiscal year 2015, RAD distributed approximately $4.9
billion in local income taxes, of which $111.1 million was distributed to special
taxing areas.
Within the Comptroller of Maryland’s automated State of Maryland Tax
(SMART) system, each taxpayer is assigned a numeric subdivision code, based
on the taxpayer’s address at the end of the tax year. The subdivision code
identifies the jurisdiction, as well as any applicable special taxing area. RAD uses
subdivision codes to distribute local income taxes associated with the tax returns
to the applicable subdivisions.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 1
RAD had not determined the underlying cause(s) for erroneous subdivision
codes recorded in SMART for numerous taxpayers in one county. The
erroneous codes resulted in $8.7 million in local income taxes being
incorrectly distributed among the county and its special taxing areas for tax
years 2010 through 2014.
Analysis
A review conducted by the Comptroller of Maryland disclosed that incorrect
subdivision codes and related special taxing areas had been recorded in SMART
for certain taxpayers in Montgomery County. The erroneous coding resulted in
$8.7 million in local income taxes being incorrectly distributed among the special
taxing areas within the County and the County at large (not within a special taxing
area) for tax years 2010 through 2014. Although steps have been taken to correct
the incorrect distribution of local income taxes in Montgomery County for those
tax years, RAD had not conducted a detailed analysis to determine the underlying
cause(s) of the erroneous subdivision coding which impacts the local income tax
distribution. Also, the applicable taxpayer records had not been corrected in
SMART. During fiscal year 2014, RAD distributed approximately $39.4 million
in local income taxes to special taxing areas within the County, and $1.3 billion to
the County at large.
Based on concerns raised by certain State and local government officials, RAD
became aware that some local income tax revenue collected from Montgomery
County taxpayers may not have been properly distributed. In response, the
Comptroller of Maryland’s Bureau of Revenue Estimates (BRE) reviewed the
propriety of taxing areas recorded in SMART for essentially all taxpayers within
Montgomery County’s 22 special taxing areas and the County at large using data
from tax years 2010 through 2014. The review included a series of computer
matches of address data recorded on tax returns in SMART with corresponding
data available from selected sources, including certain State and local entities.
BRE’s review resulted in the following conclusions:
• Individual income tax returns filed for 14,861 of approximately 500,000 tax
returns filed by Montgomery County taxpayers for tax year 2014 were
assigned an incorrect subdivision code within SMART, and similar
discrepancies were noted for tax years 2010 to 2013. As a result, local
income taxes totaling approximately $8.7 million had been incorrectly
distributed to certain special taxing areas within the County for tax years 2010
through 2014 (as detailed in Exhibit 1). Specifically, over-distributions
ranging from approximately $5,000 to $4.9 million were made to 8 special
taxing areas. Those taxes should instead have been distributed to the
9

--- Page 12 ---
County’s other 14 special taxing areas or to the County at large. The under-
distributions for these 15 subdivisions ranged from approximately $10,000 to
$6.1 million.
• For an additional 1,393 income tax returns filed for tax year 2014, the
taxpayer addresses as recorded in SMART could not be identified as
legitimate addresses within Montgomery County, and no further investigation
was conducted by reviewing the actual tax returns. Consequently, the extent
to which distribution errors occurred for these returns was not determined.
These returns included approximately $2.2 million in local income taxes due
for tax year 2014, a portion of which may be due to special taxing areas. The
inability of BRE’s computer matches to identify the legitimacy of these
addresses may have occurred, for example, if address information on a tax
return was not completely recorded in SMART. In such cases, the incomplete
information would not allow BRE’s automated process to identify the actual
correct address and corresponding subdivision code.
The Comptroller’s Office contracted with a public accounting firm to perform
certain agreed-upon procedures for tax year 2014 relating to the results of BRE’s
review. The Office has stated in written testimony (during the fiscal year 2017
legislative budget hearings) that the firm’s review found that BRE’s identification
of misallocated receipts and the proposed reallocations were proper. In this
regard, the firm’s February 2016 report indicates that based on its statistical
approach, the errors identified by the firm with respect to BRE’s proposed
reallocations for the 14,861 returns were within the five percent tolerable error
rate established by the firm.
Our judgmental selection of 60 Montgomery County tax returns filed for tax year
2014 disclosed 31 returns were assigned to an incorrect taxing area in SMART,
resulting in the incorrect distribution of $63,571 in local income taxes. For
example, our comparison of address information on 20 returns for one taxing area
with address data that RAD had received from that area disclosed 9 incorrectly
assigned returns. As a result, local income taxes associated with these returns
totaling $32,596 had been incorrectly distributed. We determined that in all but
one case the returns we found to be incorrectly assigned were also identified and
appropriately addressed by BRE in its review. We determined that the one case
not identified by BRE was included in the aforementioned 1,393 returns for which
BRE could not identify the proper taxing area.
As of March 16, 2016, RAD had paid the aforementioned 14 special taxing areas
and Montgomery County $8.7 million for the amounts that were owed them as a
result of these improper distributions. Funding for these payments came from the
10

--- Page 13 ---
Local Income Tax Reserve Fund, which is a fund maintained by RAD for the
collection and distribution of local income taxes. In February 2016, BRE advised
the 8 taxing areas that received an over-distribution for tax years 2010 to 2014
that they would be required to repay those funds, in equal amounts, over a 10-year
period through a reduction in their regular tax distributions beginning in February
2019, and no interest would be assessed. The repayment of these funds over an
extended period seems reasonable since it could have a significant impact on
certain special taxing areas’ financial circumstances. For example, the $4.9
million overpayment to one special taxing area exceeds its total annual operating
budget. We estimated, based on fiscal year 2016 interest rates, that the erroneous
local tax distributions made, coupled with the extended repayment period, will
cost the State approximately $685,000 in interest over the repayment period.
The Office also stated in its written testimony to the budget committees that the
scope of this issue is likely specific to Montgomery County and is likely the result
of the automated processing system used by the Comptroller (SMART) being
unable to properly accommodate taxing jurisdictions that share zip codes.
However, without a more detailed analysis of the cause or causes, it is uncertain if
other jurisdictions in the State also experienced this problem and what actions are
needed to resolve the matter.
The information in Exhibit 1, which shows the details of the $8.7 million that was
incorrectly distributed, also shows certain significant fluctuations from year-to-
year in the amounts of incorrect distributions that occurred within the same taxing
area, raising questions as to whether there could be multiple causes. For example,
according to the data, one taxing area with a net over-distribution received
$10,712 less than it was due for tax year 2013, but $590,908 more than it was due
for tax year 2014. We were advised that the Comptroller’s Office is considering
reviewing the propriety of taxing areas assigned in jurisdictions other than
Montgomery County. However, as of June 23, 2016 no additional action had
been taken.
As of June 23, 2016, RAD had not made any adjustments to subdivision codes
recorded in SMART for discrepancies identified by BRE’s review. We were
advised that, because no adjustments had been made, it would be necessary to
identify and correct any misallocation of local income taxes for tax year 2015,
similar to the reallocation performed for tax years 2010 through 2014.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that RAD, in conjunction with the Comptroller’s Office,
a. analyze the reasons the coding errors occurred, and implement process
changes and correct tax data errors as needed to address the reasons
identified;
b. determine whether such coding problems could be affecting distributions
in other jurisdictions and, if so, expand the review of subdivision codes
and special taxing areas to all relevant jurisdictions and take appropriate
action with respect to any local income taxes that were incorrectly
distributed; and
c. manually review the aforementioned 1,393 returns to ensure that special
taxing areas are properly assigned and local income taxes are correctly
distributed for these returns.
Finding 2
RAD lacked sufficient policies and procedures to ensure that all subdivision
codes assigned to taxpayers in SMART were proper. In particular, adequate
guidance was not provided to employees responsible for identifying special
taxing areas for tax returns that suspended from processing, and source data
used by these employees were outdated and incomplete.
Analysis
RAD did not have sufficient policies and procedures to ensure that all subdivision
codes and related special taxing areas assigned to taxpayers in SMART were
proper. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that all local income taxes
were accurately distributed. As commented upon in Finding 1, RAD recently
determined that local income taxes for one County had been improperly
distributed due to the improper coding of numerous taxpayers.
SMART automatically assigns the same subdivision code from the prior tax year
for taxpayers who previously filed a Maryland return, if there has been no change
of address. When individuals file a Maryland return for the first time or file a
return with a different address from the previous year, RAD has certain automated
procedures in place to help identify, assign, and record the proper subdivision
code for the taxpayer. If these automated procedures are not successful in
identifying a subdivision code, the return will suspend from processing, and RAD
employees will manually investigate and determine the proper code. The number
of returns suspended and manually investigated for coding issues during a filing
season was not readily available. Our review identified the following conditions
which may have contributed to the assignment of erroneous subdivision codes to
taxpayers.
12

--- Page 15 ---
• Comprehensive written guidance was not provided to the 26 employees
responsible for identifying the proper special taxing areas and corresponding
subdivision codes for tax returns suspended from processing. Although RAD
maintained a written manual that described certain procedures to be performed
by these employees, the manual did not instruct employees on how to address
certain common situations including (1) a taxpayer’s failure to disclose his or
her taxing area on the tax return; (2) a tax return with a stated taxing area that
conflicted with the taxpayer’s stated mailing address; and (3) a non-standard
address, such as a post office box number.
• Sources of information used by these employees to identify special taxing
areas for suspended returns, based on the taxpayer addresses, were not always
current or complete. Address listings within each special taxing area were
generally received directly from the taxing areas; however, RAD did not
routinely inquire about or request updated listings. For example, we noted
that listings used by employees for seven taxing areas in Montgomery and
Allegany counties were published in 1995. We also found that certain address
listings being used were incomplete, as they excluded all addresses for several
known special taxing areas. The aforementioned BRE review, as well as our
own review (both mentioned in Finding 1), disclosed errors in the assignment
of taxing areas in Montgomery County for some of the same areas for which
outdated address information existed.
• RAD lacked procedures to ensure that subdivision codes that were currently
recorded in SMART, based on prior year returns, were accurate. As
previously stated, returns that were received with the same address as the prior
year were generally assigned by SMART to the same taxing area as the prior
year. Without a procedure to periodically verify existing subdivision codes,
any incorrect codes, such as codes for which the initial assignment was
incorrect, would be allowed to continue for these taxpayers who submit
returns with the same address in subsequent years.
• Current tax forms do not facilitate identification of a taxpayer’s correct taxing
area, which should correspond to the taxpayer’s address on the last day of the
tax year. For example, Maryland Form 502 (Resident Income Tax Return)
requires the taxpayer to record his or her current mailing address (at the time
of filing the return), and the county and the special taxing area, if any, in
which the taxpayer resided on the last day of the year. However, the taxpayer
is not required to provide his or her address as of the last day of the tax year, if
different. Without knowing the taxpayer’s address as of the last day of the tax
year, RAD cannot verify the taxing area reported by the taxpayer. RAD
13

--- Page 16 ---
advised us that it is considering modifying future tax forms to require the
taxpayer’s full address as of the last day of the tax year.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that RAD
a. establish comprehensive written policies and procedures for employees to
follow when identifying special taxing areas and assigning subdivision
codes for suspended returns,
b. ensure that current and complete address data are obtained on a routine
basis from all special taxing areas,
c. take the necessary steps to ensure that correct subdivision codes have
been assigned to all addresses recorded in SMART, and
d. consider revising tax forms so that taxpayers are required to submit
sufficient address information to facilitate the proper assignment of
taxing area subdivision codes.
Out-of-State Tax Credits
Finding 3
Required documentation was not always on file to support out-of-state tax
credits claimed on paper tax returns filed by individual taxpayers.
Analysis
Required documentation was not always on file to support out-of-state tax credits
claimed on paper tax returns filed by individual taxpayers. We examined 20 tax
returns submitted in paper format for tax year 2013 that claimed out-of-state tax
credits of approximately $35.0 million. Our test included the 9 largest out-of-
state tax credits claimed on paper returns that year. We noted 6 returns for which
credits totaling $27.2 million were allowed, even though required supporting
documentation for these credits was not on file. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Generally, Maryland residents must report income earned in another State on their
Maryland income tax return, but are entitled to a credit against their Maryland tax
liability for taxes paid to these other states. Individual taxpayers who submit a
Maryland paper income tax return claiming an out-of-state tax credit are required
by RAD to submit supporting documentation (for example, a copy of the tax
return filed with the other state) with their return. RAD’s procedures stipulate
that credits be disallowed if the required documentation is not received.
According to RAD’s records, out-of-state tax credits totaling $111.9 million were
14

--- Page 17 ---
claimed by taxpayers on approximately 14,300 paper tax returns for tax year
2013.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that RAD
a. ensure that all required documentation is submitted and retained to
support out-of-state tax credits claimed (repeat);
b. take appropriate action, such as disallowing the claimed credit when the
required documentation is not submitted (repeat); and
c. investigate the aforementioned six returns and recover any amounts due
(repeat).
Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts
Finding 4
Significant financial adjustments to corporate taxpayer accounts were not
always independently reviewed, as required, and procedures did not provide
assurance that all adjustments were identified for possible review.
Analysis
Significant financial adjustments to corporate taxpayer accounts processed by one
RAD unit were not always reviewed by supervisory personnel in accordance with
RAD’s procedures. Such adjustments may, for example, reduce a corporation’s
tax liability in SMART due to information from an amended return. Our test of
10 financial adjustments processed by the unit during our audit period, which
reduced taxpayer liabilities by $157.2 million, disclosed that there was no
documented supervisory review for 3 of these adjustments which totaled $23.4
million. Furthermore, the unit did not use automated reports of adjustments
processed to identify adjustments for review. Rather, the unit used documentation
prepared by employees who processed the adjustments. Consequently, there was
no assurance that all adjustments processed by the unit were identified for review.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
RAD’s written procedures for the unit require supervisory review of all
significant adjustments. Additionally, the procedures require that automated
reports of adjustments processed are to be used to identify adjustments for review.
RAD advised us that problems relating to use of the automated reports have been
corrected, and that since October 2015 the reports have been used for reviewing
and approving adjustments. According to RAD’s records, during the period from
July 2012 through June 2015, this unit processed adjustments that reduced
corporate tax liabilities by $696.5 million.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that RAD
a. ensure that significant financial adjustments to corporate taxpayer
accounts are reviewed by supervisory personnel in accordance with its
procedures, and that these reviews are documented (repeat); and
b. use automated reports of adjustments processed to identify adjustments
for review (repeat).
Finding 5
Controls were not in place to ensure adjustments to critical taxpayer account
information were properly reviewed, and supporting documentation was not
always on file.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not in place over adjustments to critical taxpayer account
information on SMART, such as a change to a taxpayer’s address or identification
number, and RAD did not always retain documentation to support these
adjustments. According to RAD’s records, approximately 40,000 nonfinancial
adjustments to taxpayer account information were recorded on SMART during
fiscal year 2015.
Our review of procedures and controls in place at the three RAD units responsible
for processing approximately 34,000 of these adjustments disclosed that none of
the units had adequate procedures in place to ensure the propriety of the
adjustments. Supervisory personnel responsible for reviewing adjustments in two
of the units used documentation prepared by the employees who processed the
adjustments to identify transactions for review, rather than using available
automated output reports of adjustments processed. Although output reports were
generated by the third unit, certain adjustments were not subject to the
supervisory review process and employees approved other adjustments without a
review of source documentation.
In addition, our test of 40 adjustments (primarily address changes) processed by
these three units during fiscal year 2015 disclosed that documentation was not on
file to support the propriety of 10 of the adjustments, all of which were processed
by the same unit.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Adequate control over taxpayer information recorded in SMART is critical to
ensure that all transactions are accurately recorded and accounted for. For
example, inaccurate or improper address changes in SMART could result in
refund checks being diverted or inaccurate distributions of local income taxes.
RAD’s written procedures require use of automated reports of all adjustments to
taxpayer account information for supervisory review. In addition, these
procedures require that documentation supporting these adjustments be retained
for audit purposes.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that RAD
a. ensure that adjustments to critical taxpayer account information are
reviewed by supervisory personnel for propriety by verifying output
reports of adjustments processed to supporting documentation, at least
on a test basis;
b. ensure that these reviews are documented; and
c. retain supporting documentation for adjustments processed.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
RAD supports processing for several key tax systems. The most significant tax
systems supported include the system for the individual and corporate income
taxes and the sales and use taxes (SMART), and the motor fuel tax system.
RAD’s centralized automated support for these systems includes processing tax
remittances, tax returns, and tax refunds. The automated applications for these
systems operate on the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology
Division’s (ITD) Annapolis Data Center mainframe computer, with security
software used as the primary means to protect the applications and related tax
data.
Additionally, the SMART system interfaces with the iFile, bFile, and Bill Pay
systems. RAD operates these systems that allow individuals to file individual
income tax returns (iFile), businesses to file returns for employer withholding
taxes and sales and use taxes (bFile), and individuals and businesses to pay taxes
(Bill Pay) over the Internet.
The iFile, bFile, and Bill Pay systems are three-tiered, consisting of a website tier,
an application software tier, and the back-end database tier. The physical servers
supporting these systems reside in the ITD’s Annapolis Data Center computer
room.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 6
Critical SMART, Bill Pay, and iFile database security and audit events were
either not logged or not reviewed for propriety.
Analysis
Critical SMART, Bill Pay, and iFile database security and audit events were
either not logged or not reviewed for propriety.
• Bill Pay and iFile database security and audit events such as adding and
configuring roles of system users and turning off the audit function were not
logged even though the capability to perform such logging existed. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• Detailed change reports supporting the items identified on a critical security
system software report for the SMART database, such as changes in tax rates
or tax liabilities, were not reviewed to ensure that the changes were proper. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• SMART system database security reports of grants and revokes of users’
privileges and the assignment of changes to a userid were not reviewed for
propriety.
These conditions could result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities (affecting
the integrity of the production database information) going undetected by
management.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that information
systems generate audit records to ensure accountability for security-relevant
events, that the audit records be routinely reviewed by appropriate officials for
suspicious activities or suspected violations, and that findings be reported for
prompt resolution.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that RAD implement appropriate database monitoring
controls over the SMART, Bill Pay, and iFile tax systems. Specifically, we
recommend that RAD
a. log all critical Bill Pay and iFile database security and audit events
(repeat);
b. ensure that reviews of the propriety of the critical security system
software reports for the SMART system include a review of the
supporting detail change reports (repeat); and
18

--- Page 21 ---
c. review all significant database (including SMART, Bill Pay, and iFile)
security reports for propriety on a timely basis, document these reviews
and retain the reviews for future reference.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
RAD did not establish sufficient controls over checks for payment of income
taxes which were received in the mail and remotely deposited. Additionally,
several employees were assigned incompatible functions, and certain
adjustments to payments recorded in SMART were not independently
reviewed.
Analysis
Controls were not sufficient over checks for payment of income taxes which were
received in the mail and were processed using the remote deposit system. Remote
deposit is a process whereby checks are scanned and the images of the checks are
sent electronically to the bank for deposit. In addition, several employees had
access to collections and the ability to record adjustments in taxpayer accounts,
and certain adjustments to check payment amounts recorded in taxpayer accounts
in SMART were not reviewed as required. Most checks received by RAD for
income tax payments are received through the mail. According to RAD’s records,
mail collections totaled approximately $4 billion during fiscal year 2015 of which
at least $3.4 billion was deposited remotely.
• RAD did not reconcile its record of checks that had been remotely deposited
and were subsequently destroyed with its initial record of checks received.
This reconciliation is required by the Office of the State Treasurer to ensure
that all checks were destroyed, reducing the possibility that the checks could
be misappropriated.
• Fifteen employees with access to mail collections, of which 11 were
responsible for processing the collections, also had the capability to record
critical financial adjustments to taxpayer accounts in SMART, such as to
reduce a tax liability. Although RAD had a process to review financial
adjustments in SMART, only selected transactions were reviewed and, as
previously mentioned (Finding 4), the reviews for certain transactions were
not adequate. According to RAD’s records, these 15 employees processed
adjustments totaling approximately $2.5 million during our audit period.
19

--- Page 22 ---
• Supervisory personnel did not consistently review certain adjustments to
check payments automatically recorded in SMART, in accordance with its
procedures. In a process separate from the remote deposit function, checks
received in the mail for income tax payments were scanned to record the
related payments in taxpayer accounts in SMART. Certain RAD employees
manually adjusted the check amounts in SMART when necessary to correct
the automated postings. RAD’s procedures called for output reports to be
generated weekly, for supervisory review purposes, of all manual adjustments
that reduced a recorded payment to zero. These adjustments were deemed to
be the highest risk, since they could indicate that the corresponding check had
been misappropriated. However, we noted that, during the period from
February 19, 2012 through June 27, 2015 (175 weeks), no reports were
retained and no adjustments had been reviewed for 105 of those 175 weeks.
In addition, 6 of the 70 weekly reports that were available were not signed as
evidence that they were reviewed.
As a result of these conditions, receipts could be lost or misappropriated without
detection. The Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote
Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies requires that agencies
independently reconcile destroyed checks to the record of incoming checks. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including adequate
separation of cash receipt processing duties.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that RAD
a. reconcile records of remotely deposited checks that have been destroyed
with the record of checks received,
b. ensure that employees who have access to collections do not have the
capability to record critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts in SMART,
c. ensure that all adjustments recorded in SMART to reduce check
payments to zero are subject to the required supervisory review, and
d. conduct a review of adjustments to check payments recorded in SMART
during the aforementioned weeks that the review was not performed.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Replacement Checks
Finding 8
RAD lacked documentation that checks, which were issued to replace refund
checks that were returned to RAD, were reviewed as required by RAD’s
policy.
Analysis
RAD lacked documentation that replacement refund checks, which totaled
approximately $125 million during our audit period, were reviewed for propriety
in accordance with RAD’s policy. Replacement checks may be generated, for
example, when an original refund check is returned by a taxpayer due to an error
or death of the taxpayer.
The output reports that were used by supervisory personnel to select replacement
checks for review were not complete, and the required number of checks was not
reviewed for propriety. We compared the replacement checks listed on four
weekly output reports generated during the period from February 2013 through
May 2015 with data that we obtained separately from RAD of all replacement
checks processed. We noted that three of the weekly reports did not include a
total of 750 checks in the aggregate amount of $721,044. As a result, these
checks were not subject to the independent supervisory review process.
Furthermore, RAD’s policy requires that one check from each page of the output
reports be selected for supervisory review of supporting documentation to ensure
the propriety of these payments; however, our review of 15 output reports
generated during this period disclosed that, of the 13,084 replacement checks
listed on 256 pages, there was documentation of an independent supervisory
review for only 29 of these checks.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that RAD
a. ensure that output reports used to select replacement checks for review
include all replacement checks generated;
b. ensure that replacement checks on output reports are reviewed according
to its policy; and
c. review for propriety, at least on a test basis, the aforementioned 750
checks not included in output reports.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland –
Revenue Administration Division (RAD) for the period beginning February 15,
2012 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine RAD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the processing, evaluating, verifying, and
recording of tax data as reported by taxpayers and other parties; the collection of
tax receipts; and the distribution of tax refunds. We also determined the status of
the findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services (such as processing of invoices,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided to RAD
by the Office of the Comptroller. These support services are included within the
scope of our audit of the Office of the Comptroller. In addition, our audit did not
include certain support services provided to RAD by the Comptroller of Maryland
– Information Technology Division related to the procurement and monitoring of
information technology equipment and services and the operation of the
Annapolis Data Center. The operation of the Annapolis Data Center includes the
development and maintenance of RAD applications and maintenance of the
operating system and security software environment. These support services are
included in the scope of our audits of the Information Technology Division.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
RAD’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
22

--- Page 25 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the
Comptroller’s SMART system for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as tax
credits and refunds. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
RAD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect RAD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to RAD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from the Comptroller of Maryland, on behalf of RAD, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Comptroller of Maryland regarding the
results of our review of its response.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Exhibit 1
Net Local Income Tax Under/Over Distributions
Tax Years 2010 – 2014 as Determined by the Comptroller of Maryland
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Total
Subdivisions with Net Under-Distributions
Montgomery County $ 1,837,583 $ 1,853,638 $ 1,357,034 $ 768,339 $ 266,827 $ 6,083,421
Chevy Chase Section 3 (13,201) 4,728 16,909 (4,614) 63,305 67,127
Chevy Chase Section 5 (22,651) 18,832 22,313 6,153 188,848 213,495
Chevy Chase View (6,439) 2,434 32,718 47,446 57,009 133,168
Chevy Chase Village (55,638) 14,055 49,109 149,957 694,258 851,741
Drummond 596 (18,138) (2,796) 21,229 33,856 34,747
Friendship Heights 9,115 (54,462) 2,145 (23,671) 82,951 16,078
Garrett Park 3,917 8,452 (2,509) (1,792) 2,373 10,441
Martin’s Additions (283) 15,019 16,620 43,633 182,030 257,019
North Chevy Chase 2,612 12,695 19,743 18,982 12,253 66,285
Oakmont 2,557 4,402 9,513 9,282 21,203 46,957
Poolesville (33,104) 9,679 29,845 69,783 85,016 161,219
Somerset (39,858) (4,728) 21,268 39,039 196,143 211,864
Takoma Park 8,572 51,407 79,905 120,740 192,686 453,310
Washington Grove 4,056 13,712 15,366 2,630 13,170 48,934
Total $ 8,655,806
Subdivisions with Net Over-Distributions
Barnesville $ (4,293) $ (8,730) $ (11,768) $ (9,008) $ (8,059) $ (41,858)
Brookeville (30,728) (41,690) (38,549) (63,185) (99,877) (274,029)
Chevy Chase (1,172,426) (1,461,346) (1,324,717) (630,569) (330,017) (4,919,075)
Gaithersburg (357,511) (390,040) (316,649) (453,123) (958,790) (2,476,113)
Glen Echo (2,967) (12) 1,438 (7,601) 4,124 (5,018)
Kensington 22,532 12,653 18,393 (36,567) (22,339) (5,328)
Laytonsville (67,305) (67,480) (61,698) (77,795) (86,063) (360,341)
Rockville (85,136) 24,921 66,366 10,712 (590,908) (574,045)
Total ($ 8,655,806)
Source: Bureau of Revenue Estimates Records
Note: Totals may not add up due to rounding
24

--- Page 29 ---
COMPTROLLER OF MARYLAND
REVENUE ADMINISTRATION DIVISION
RESPONSES TO OLA FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Local Income Tax Revenue Distribution
RAD Response to OLA Analysis
After internal reviews by RAD management revealed inconsistencies in the distribution of tax
revenue to Montgomery County municipalities, the Comptroller took swift action to address this
matter to provide proper recourse for jurisdictions affected and to prevent such errors from
recurring in the future. The Comptroller took immediate steps to ensure that municipalities that
did not receive the accurate revenue distribution were credited and worked closely with
municipal leaders and other stakeholders to develop a remittance plan and timeline that is
satisfactory to the jurisdictions that received more funds than they were owed.
The internal reviews and subsequent audit by an independent, third-party auditor found that
RAD’s distribution model contained coding errors and process opportunities that resulted in the
misallocation of revenue to several Montgomery County jurisdictions. It should be noted that this
distribution model was in place for many years, long before the incumbent Comptroller took
office. However, the Comptroller is committed to ensuring that these incidents are prevented in
the future and welcomes the opportunity to adopt a series of changes that would ensure greater
accuracy moving forward.
The Comptroller will also conduct an internal statewide audit to ensure that all municipalities’
and counties’ accounts are properly accounted for and are accurately reconciled. This proactive
action by the Comptroller seeks to confirm that the modifications to the distribution process will
significantly improve the accuracy in which RAD distributes the local income tax revenue to the
various taxing jurisdictions throughout the state.
The distribution of local income tax funds is a very complex component of tax administration
that relies very heavily on information provided by the taxpayer and cooperation from local
government entities. Prior to the OLA audit, and as stated in the analysis, RAD had identified
several contributing factors for the coding errors.
To address this issue, RAD contracted with an independent auditor to examine the review
process with the goal of confirming the root cause of the errors and assess the overall effect and
impact these coding errors had on the business process. The initial analysis by the Bureau of
Revenue Estimates (BRE) represented approximately 3.6% of the tax returns filed. Accordingly,
the distributions were initially determined to be 96.4% accurate. RAD modified its processes
and improved its accuracy, per the independent auditor’s findings, to a rate of 99.7%.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 1 of 13

--- Page 30 ---
We do acknowledge that during the start of the OLA audit, the actual underlying causes of the
misallocation error were not yet determined; however, RAD management had identified potential
inconsistencies and began its review before the commencement of the audit. RAD has completed
its review and determined the reasons the coding errors occurred, has developed appropriate
process enhancements to increase the accuracy of future local income tax distributions, and has
reconciled the previous distributions. RAD provided information to the OLA auditors on the
timely actions that the Comptroller took to immediately address this issue.
Furthermore, it is worth noting that the OLA analysis included inconsistent data that could be
misinterpreted and requires further clarification. For example, OLA indicates that $8.7 million
was incorrectly distributed for five tax years: 2010 through 2014; however, OLA only noted the
total distributions for fiscal year 2014: $39.4 million to the special taxing areas and $1.3 billion
to Montgomery County. For tax years 2010 through 2014, more than $6 billion was distributed.
The reallocation represented less than 0.2% of the total distribution during this period.
OLA Recommendation 1
We recommend that RAD, in conjunction with the Comptroller’s Office,
a. Analyze the reasons the coding errors occurred, and implement process changes and
correct tax data errors as needed to address the reasons identified;
b. Determine whether such coding problems could be affecting distributions in other
jurisdictions and, if so, expand the review of subdivision codes and special taxing areas
to all relevant jurisdictions and take appropriate action with respect to any local
income taxes that were incorrectly distributed; and
c. Manually review the aforementioned 1,393 returns to ensure that special taxing areas
are properly assigned and local income taxes are correctly distributed for these returns.
RAD Responses to the Recommendations
Recommendation A: Analyze the reasons the coding errors occurred, and implement
process changes and correct tax data errors as needed to address the reasons identified.
RAD concurs with the recommendation.
RAD has analyzed and determined the reasons the coding errors occurred. As a result of this
analysis, RAD has developed appropriate process enhancements to increase the accuracy of
future local income tax distributions. It should be noted that the recommended actions have
either already been completed or are ongoing. Since the reallocation errors were discovered, the
Comptroller and RAD management have taken proactive and immediate steps to address this
matter. These improved processes and procedures will be implemented by January 2017 and
audited on an annual basis.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 2 of 13

--- Page 31 ---
Recommendation B: Determine whether such coding problems could be affecting
distributions in other jurisdictions and, if so, expand the review of subdivision codes and
special taxing areas to all relevant jurisdictions and take appropriate action with respect to
any local income taxes that were incorrectly distributed.
RAD concurs with the recommendation.
As previously stated, the Comptroller will conduct a statewide audit to determine if coding errors
have resulted in reallocation errors in other jurisdictions. Additionally, in conjunction with the
BRE, RAD will continue to analyze the accuracy of the coding process with the purpose of
distributing the local income to its respective taxing jurisdictions with a high rate of accuracy. If
it is determined that coding errors have affected distributions in other jurisdictions, the agency
will determine the appropriate action to take to address the distribution accordingly.
Recommendation C: Manually review the aforementioned 1,393 returns to ensure that
special taxing areas are properly assigned and local income taxes are correctly distributed
for these returns
Respectfully, RAD concurs with the recommendation with minor modification.
As stated previously, reasons for the coding errors were identified, corrections were made to the
returns processing work flow, and additional process improvements have been documented to
minimize the risk of making coding errors in the future. RAD believes that the implementation
of this recommendation should not occur until RAD has completed the following OLA
recommendations: analyze the reasons the coding errors occurred; determine whether such
coding problems could be affecting distributions in other jurisdictions; ensure that current and
complete address data are obtained on a routine basis from all special taxing areas; and consider
revising tax forms so that taxpayers are required to submit sufficient address information to
facilitate the proper assignment of taxing area subdivision codes.
Since the independent review determined that the revised process was 99.7% accurate for the
addresses that met the postal standardization requirements, RAD believes the initial use of
resources is better allocated to increase the accuracy of future local income tax distributions and
identifying potential fraudulent tax return activity.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 3 of 13

--- Page 32 ---
OLA Recommendation 2
We recommend that RAD
a. Establish comprehensive written policies and procedures for employees to follow when
identifying special taxing areas and assigning subdivision codes for suspended returns,
b. Ensure that current and complete address data are obtained on a routine basis from all
special taxing areas,
c. Take the necessary steps to ensure that correct subdivision codes have been assigned to
all addresses in SMART, and
d. Consider revising tax forms so that taxpayers are required to submit sufficient address
information to facilitate the proper assignment of taxing area subdivision codes.
RAD Responses to the Recommendations
Recommendation A: Establish comprehensive written policies and procedures for
employees to follow when identifying special taxing areas and assigning subdivision codes
for suspended returns.
RAD concurs with the recommendation.
RAD has updated its procedures to address the exceptions to the local income tax business rules.
Additional training has been provided to applicable staff. These actions will assist in increasing
the accuracy rate in the future.
Recommendation B: Ensure that current and complete address data are obtained on a
routine basis from all special taxing areas.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
RAD concurs with OLA and understands the need for the taxing jurisdictions to assist the
Comptroller of Maryland (“COM”) with executing a viable solution to this complicated issue by
requiring that the taxing jurisdictions provide current data on a consistent basis. RAD has and
will continue to request yearly updated address information for each taxing jurisdiction in the
state.
It is important to note that RAD has no recourse to compel local governments to comply with the
request, and many of them fail to do so. Until they are compelled to provide this information
each year in a timely fashion, the probability of error may increase.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 4 of 13

--- Page 33 ---
Recommendation C: Take the necessary steps to ensure that correct subdivision codes have
been assigned to all addresses in SMART.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
The agency is committed to taking all necessary steps to prevent this error from occurring in the
future. We have either implemented or are in the process of implementing a series of changes
resulting from our internal review and a third-party independent audit. Efforts to update and
correct coding errors are in progress, and we look forward to strong cooperation from local
government entities to ensure that COM has the most up-to-date addresses for taxpayers.
As previously stated in our response to Recommendation B, RAD heavily relies on addresses
provided by the taxpayer and makes concerted efforts to obtain updated address records from
local government entities to keep our databases accurate. However, RAD and COM do not have
legal authority to compel government entities to produce these records, which may increase the
probability of error in the future.
Recommendation D: Consider revising tax forms so that taxpayers are required to submit
sufficient address information to facilitate the proper assignment of taxing area subdivision
codes
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
As noted by OLA, RAD is already in the process of implementing this recommended action and
the agency will be revising the tax forms to include the address where the taxpayer resided as of
the last day of the tax year. This will provide additional information to assist in the proper
jurisdictional coding. RAD anticipates this data will be collected beginning with tax year 2016.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 5 of 13

--- Page 34 ---
Out-of-State Tax Credits
RAD Response to OLA Analysis
RAD wishes to note that in OLA’s comprehensive review on this issue, there was no evidence of
loss of revenue to the state attributable to this finding.
OLA Recommendation 3
We recommend that RAD
a. Ensure that all required documentation is submitted and retained to support out-of-
state tax credits claimed (repeat);
b. Take appropriate action, such as disallowing the claimed credit when the required
documentation is not submitted (repeat); and
c. Investigate the aforementioned six returns and recover any amounts due (repeat).
RAD Responses to the Recommendations
Recommendation A: Ensure that all required documentation is submitted and retained to
support out-of-state tax credits claimed (repeat).
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
This recommendation is consistent with existing procedure within RAD. We will reinforce the
use of this procedure and provide additional training to appropriate staff as needed. RAD will
also ensure that necessary documents are retained for subsequent verification.
Recommendation B: Take appropriate action, such as disallowing the claimed credit when
the required documentation is not submitted (repeat).
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
In accordance with existing RAD policy, out of state credits claimed are disallowed when
required documentation is not submitted. RAD will review the specific returns noted by OLA
for appropriate action as necessary.
Recommendation C: Investigate the aforementioned six returns and recover any amounts
due (repeat).
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
The agency has initiated the review of the out-of-state credits claimed for the six returns
mentioned above and will take the appropriate action to recover any credits claimed that are
disallowed as a result of the subsequent review. The anticipated completion date for the review
and implementation of Recommendation 3 is December 31, 2016.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 6 of 13

--- Page 35 ---
Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts
RAD Response to OLA Analysis
In response to OLA’s analysis on this finding, RAD wishes to emphasize that there was no
evidence or indication of impropriety pertaining to this finding. All adjustments reviewed by
OLA were determined to be proper, and there was no loss of revenue to the state. RAD had
already identified this internal weakness in 2015 and initiated corrective action. Since October
2015, the automated reports of adjustments were utilized for reviewing and approving respective
adjustments. The supervisor uses the adjustment report to identify those adjustments requiring
review and/or approval based upon the written procedures.
OLA Recommendation 4
We recommend that RAD
a. Ensure that significant financial adjustments to corporate taxpayer accounts are
reviewed by supervisory personnel in accordance with its procedures, and that these
reviews are documented (repeat); and
b. Use automated reports of adjustments processed to identify adjustments for review
(repeat).
RAD Responses to the Recommendations
Recommendation A: Ensure that significant financial adjustments to corporate taxpayer
accounts are reviewed by supervisory personnel in accordance with its procedures, and
that these reviews are documented (repeat).
RAD concurs with the recommendation.
The recommended action is already part of RAD’s existing procedures, and RAD will continue
to ensure that significant financial adjustments are reviewed and documented by supervisory
personnel.
Recommendation B: Use automated reports of adjustments processed to identify
adjustments for review (repeat).
RAD concurs with the recommendation.
As previously stated, this recommended action is already in place and RAD will continue to
utilize the automated reports of adjustments processed to identify and select adjustments for
review.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 7 of 13

--- Page 36 ---
OLA Recommendation 5
We recommend that RAD
a. Ensure that adjustments to critical taxpayer account information are reviewed by
supervisory personnel for propriety by verifying output reports of adjustments
processed to supporting documentation, at least on a test basis;
b. Ensure that these reviews are documented; and
c. Retain supporting documentation for adjustments processed.
RAD Responses to the Recommendations
Recommendation A: Ensure that adjustments to critical taxpayer account information are
reviewed by supervisory personnel for propriety by verifying output reports of
adjustments processed to supporting documentation, at least on a test basis
RAD concurs with the recommendation.
The recommended action is an existing procedure within RAD. Critical non-financial
adjustments will continue to be reviewed by supervisory personnel utilizing automated reports of
applicable adjustments in accordance with current RAD procedures.
Recommendation B: Ensure that these reviews are documented.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
The recommended action is an existing procedure within RAD, and division management will
continue to ensure that supervisory reviews are documented.
Recommendation C: Retain supporting documentation for adjustments processed.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
Supporting documentation for non-financial adjustments will be retained for audit purposes.
Due to the volume of account adjustments, RAD will identify the appropriate content
management solution to satisfy the document retention requirements established by OLA in this
finding.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 8 of 13

--- Page 37 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
RAD Response to OLA Analysis
The Comptroller takes pride in the agency’s strong commitment to ensuring that its databases
and networks are secure, which was reinforced by the fact that OLA found no security breaches
within the agency’s IT system. Our IT division continues to prioritize the modernization of our
network of firewalls, security appliances, intrusion detection and prevention programs, and
Internet access control procedures. Protecting taxpayer data and combatting taxpayer identity
fraud are two major goals for the agency. As such, the agency is committed to ensuring that its
IT systems are compliant with all federal and state requirements and continues to audit and
manage risks associated with threats to its core systems and processes.
OLA Recommendation 6
We recommend that RAD implement appropriate database monitoring controls over the
SMART, Bill Pay, and iFile tax systems. Specifically, we recommend that RAD
a. Log all critical Bill Pay and iFile database security and audit events (repeat);
b. Ensure that reviews of the propriety of the critical security system software reports for
the SMART system include a review of the supporting detail change reports (repeat);
c. Review all significant database (including SMART, Bill Pay, and iFile) security reports
for propriety on a timely basis, document these reviews and retain the reviews for
future reference.
RAD Responses to the Recommendations
Recommendation A: Log all critical Bill Pay and iFile database security and audit events
(repeat).
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
As part of our continued commitment to protecting our networks and security systems, the
Comptroller’s database security and audit event logging systems will be enhanced to ensure all
critical events will be properly logged.
Recommendation B: Ensure that reviews of the propriety of the critical security system
software reports for the SMART system include a review of the supporting detail change
reports (repeat).
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
Reviews of the propriety of critical security system software reports will include a review of
supporting detail change reports.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 9 of 13

--- Page 38 ---
Recommendation C: Review all significant database (including SMART, Bill Pay, and
iFile) security reports for propriety on a timely basis, document these reviews and retain
the reviews for future reference.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
All significant database security reports will be reviewed for propriety in a timely manner and
documentation of these reviews will be retained for audit purposes. The anticipated completion
date for implementation of the recommendation is December 31, 2016.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 10 of 13

--- Page 39 ---
Cash Receipts
RAD Response to OLA Analysis
RAD wishes to note that in OLA’s comprehensive review on this issue, there was no evidence of
impropriety or loss of revenue associated with this finding.
OLA Recommendation 7
We recommend that RAD
a. Reconcile records of remotely deposited checks that have been destroyed with the
record of checks received,
b. Ensure that employees who have access to collections do not have the capability to
record critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts in SMART,
c. Ensure that all adjustments recorded in SMART to reduce check payments to zero are
subject to the required supervisory review, and
d. Conduct a review of adjustments to check payments recorded in SMART during the
aforementioned weeks that the review was not performed.
RAD Responses to the Recommendations
Recommendation A: Reconcile records of remotely deposited checks that have been
destroyed with the record of checks received.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
The agency will ensure that destroyed checks are reconciled with the scanning batch reports.
Recommendation B: Ensure that employees who have access to collections do not have the
capability to record critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts in SMART.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
In concurrence with this recommendation, RAD will limit access where practical. It must be
noted that in order to process tax forms, certain employees may have access to collections, as
well as the ability to post critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts. However, these employees
do not have access to taxpayer addresses. Therefore, they do not have the ability to alter the
delivery of a refund check.
In addition, RAD policy requires supervisory review of financial adjustments recorded in
SMART which therefore limits the exposure to potential misappropriation and corresponding
adjustment to a taxpayer’s account. Accordingly, we believe that there is adequate control.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 11 of 13

--- Page 40 ---
In order to strengthen our processing and adherence to this recommendation, RAD will limit the
access of certain employees to actual collections. A payment voucher form is being designed so
that upon mail opening, the payment will be routed for immediate deposit while the tax form will
be processed via the current process. This will further limit access to ensure proper segregation
of duties.
Recommendation C: Ensure that all adjustments recorded in SMART to reduce check
payments to zero are subject to the required supervisory review.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
RAD believes the agency is already in compliance with the recommendation. Additional
information that supports our position appears below.
Annually, the Payment Processing (PP) section adjusts less than 100 checks (of a total of
approximately 1.3 million checks received) to a zero dollar status; we consider this immaterial
and a true and proper exception to the normal processing. OLA noted only 39 such adjustments
during the major filing season, and these exceptions are generally a result of the foreign checks,
damaged checks, or improper formatting or sizing or checks.
The Returns Processing (RP) section receives the zero dollar report identifying the checks to be
removed (not to use to reconcile or otherwise balance to) for manual deposit. Additionally, all
zero dollar adjustment checks remain in the automated TRIP21 check queue until such time as
the zero dollar adjustment has been manually deposited. A supervisor reviews the applicable
queue. Procedures will be implemented to ensure the propriety of these transactions utilizing the
respective weekly output report which will be retained as documentation of review.
Recommendation D: Conduct a review of adjustments to check payments recorded in
SMART during the aforementioned weeks that the review was not performed.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
While we concur with the recommended action, RAD will comply by using alternative
procedures. As noted by OLA, RAD was unable to recreate certain applicable SMART reports
dated prior to August 2014; however, all reports from August 17, 2014 through June 27, 2015
were available for review. As described in the comment for recommendation, RAD also utilizes
reports to review these adjustments. A review of the applicable adjustments during the period
for which the SMART reports were not available will be completed by December 31, 2016.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 12 of 13

--- Page 41 ---
Replacement Checks
RAD Response to OLA Analysis
RAD wishes to note that in OLA’s comprehensive review on this issue, there was no evidence of
impropriety or loss of revenue associated with this finding.
OLA Recommendation 8
We recommend that RAD
a. Ensure that output reports used to select replacement checks for review include all
replacement checks generated;
b. Ensure that replacement checks on output reports are reviewed according to its policy;
and
c. Review for propriety, at least on a test basis, the aforementioned 750 checks not
included in output reports.
RAD Responses to the Recommendations
Recommendation A: Ensure that output reports used to select replacement checks for
review include all replacement checks generated.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
RAD will ensure that the output reports are complete. RAD, in consultation with the
Comptroller’s Information Technology Division, is identifying the root cause of the
incompleteness of the replacement check output reports noted by OLA.
Recommendation B: Ensure that replacement checks on output reports are reviewed
according to its policy.
RAD concurs with this recommendation.
As OLA noted, a supervisory review was performed to ensure the propriety of replacement
checks; however, documentation of the review was not indicated on the respective automated
report. RAD will ensure the written policy regarding replacement checks is adhered to utilizing
the aforementioned report.
Recommendation C: Review for propriety, at least on a test basis, the aforementioned 750
checks not included in output reports.
RAD concurs with this recommendation. RAD will review those checks noted for propriety. The
anticipated completion date of the review will be December 31, 2016.
Comptroller of Maryland • Revenue Administration Division • OLA Audit Responses Page 13 of 13

--- Page 42 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Thomas L. Allen, III
Lindsay M. Fertig, CPA
Maryia Kuzina
Lauren E. McLain, CPA
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA
Staff Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditors