Title: Maryland Health Insurance Plan


NOTE: MHIP closed effective July 1, 2016.
Date: 03/23/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d724560674502
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:24:25.153820
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Health Insurance Plan
March 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFIcE OF LEGISLATIVE AuDITs
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ. BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor
March 23, 2017
Senator Craig I. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Maryland Health Insurance
Plan (MHIP) for the period beginning January 13, 2015 and ending July 1,2016,
the effective date ofthe lawthat terminated MHIP. MHIP was an independent
unit ofState government primarily responsible for providing comprehensive
health benefits to medically uninsurable residents ofthe State. MHIP also
oversawthe Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program (SPDAP). SPDAP
provided subsidies to reduce the out-of-pocket costs for low and moderate income
Medicare recipients enrolled in the Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage.
MHIP medical plans closed to new enrollment effective December 31, 2013 and
coverage for all enrollees ended as ofDecember 31, 2014. Claim payments for
services incurred prior to the termination ofcoverage continued to be processed.
Effective July 1, 2016, MHIP’s employees, property, assets, liabilities,
obligations, and credits were transferred to the Maryland Health Benefits
Exchange (MHBE). Similarly, employees, property, assets, liabilities,
obligations, and credits directly related to SPDAP were transferred to the
Department ofHealth and Mental Hygiene (DHMH). Specifically, remaining
funds totaling $61.4 million were transferred to MHBE and funds totaling $125.1
million (including $7.1 million related to SPDAP) were transferred to DHMH to
complete the termination ofMHIP.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Ivlaiyland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hothne 877-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis
audit by MHBE and DHMH.
Respectfully submitted,
72) 6
ThomdJ. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Health Insurance Plan (MHIP) was an independent unit of State
government until its closure, effective July 1, 2016. Through its medical plans,
MHIP’s goal was to provide access to affordable, comprehensive health benefits
to medically uninsurable residents of the State. MHIP also oversaw the
administration of State pharmaceutical assistance through the Senior Prescription
Drug Assistance Program (SPDAP). SPDAP provides subsidies to reduce the
out-of-pocket costs for low and moderate income Medicare recipients enrolled in
the Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage.
Chapter 159, Laws of Maryland, 2013 closed MHIP medical plans to new
enrollment as of December 31, 2013 because of the implementation of the
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange. Coverage for all enrollees ended as of
December 31, 2014, and claim payments for services incurred prior to the
termination of coverage continued to be processed. Chapter 321, Laws of
Maryland, 2016 terminated MHIP effective July 1, 2016. At that time, its
remaining employees, property, assets, liabilities, obligations, and credits were
transferred to the Maryland Health Benefits Exchange (MHBE). Similarly,
employees, property, assets, liabilities, obligations, and credits directly related to
SPDAP were transferred to the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(DHMH). Specifically, remaining funds totaling $61.4 million were transferred
to MHBE and funds totaling $125.1 million (including $7.1 million related to
SPDAP) were transferred to DHMH to complete the termination of MHIP.
According to its audited financial statements, MHIP’s fiscal year 2016 receipts
totaled $19.5 million and disbursements totaled $14.9 million. The receipts
primarily related to premium taxes received by electronic funds transfer from a
non-profit health services company for SPDAP and disbursements primarily
related to subsidies for SPDAP.
Financial Statement Audits
MHIP engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its statutory
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2016 and 2015. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that MHIP’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the admitted assets, liabilities, and net assets as of
June 30, 2016 and 2015 and the results of its operations and cash flows for the
years then ended, on the basis of accounting practices prescribed or permitted by
the Maryland Insurance Administration.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 16, 2016. We determined that MHIP
satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining finding related to
obtaining an independent review of the claims management system used by the
administrative service organization operating the MHIP medical plans. We noted
that, although efforts were made to address this issue, these efforts were
unsuccessful. Considering MHIP closed on July 1, 2016, no further action for this
finding appears warranted.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MHIP’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less
significant finding that did not warrant inclusion in this report was communicated
to the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH), which is currently
responsible for the Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program.
A draft copy of this report was provided to DHMH. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Health Insurance
Plan (MHIP) for the period beginning January 13, 2015 and ending June 30, 2016.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MHIP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
4

--- Page 7 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program,
fund balance transfers, and equipment. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
MHIP engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its statutory
financial statements. In the related audit reports for the fiscal years ended June
30, 2016, and 2015, the firm stated that MHIP’s financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, its admitted assets, liabilities, and net assets as of
June 30, 2016, and 2015 and the results of its operations and cash flows for the
years then ended on the basis of accounting practices prescribed or permitted by
the Maryland Insurance Administration.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and tests of
transactions. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select
the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be used to project
those results to the entire population from which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MHIP’s management was responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Mindy R. Garrett
Staff Auditor