Title: Department of General Services - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 01/06/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d724560674430
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:49:31.933333
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
January 2022
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Trent M. Kittleman
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Elizabeth G. Proctor
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 27, 2022
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary and
other units of the Department of General Services (DGS) for the period beginning
May 31, 2016 and ending August 31, 2020. The Office of the Secretary and other
units provide professional and technical services for the planning, design,
construction, and maintenance of most State facilities; manage and maintain
multi-agency State facilities; and coordinate the State’s real estate activities.
Our audit disclosed that DGS did not adequately account for funds in a non-
budgeted account and could not determine the proper disposition of $1.74 million
at the end of fiscal year 2020. As such, it could not be readily determined
whether the funds should be reverted to the State General Fund, as would be
required under normal circumstances with a clearing account. We also noted that
due to untimely deposits, DGS improperly retained approximately $465,000 in
real estate commission rebates instead of reverting these funds to the State’s
General Fund, as required by State law.
We found that DGS did not use available automated controls within the State’s
Financial Management Information System to ensure that critical transactions,
such as, disbursement transactions, were proper and did not document that it
verified the propriety of employees user access.
Our audit also disclosed that DGS did not verify that the Statewide fuel vendor
performed accurate and valid fuel usage reconciliations. Such verifications could
be performed by reviewing supporting documentation such as records of fuel
deliveries and inventories on hand. In addition, DGS did not ensure that the fuel

--- Page 4 ---
vendor performed all required environmental compliance testing. These tests
include assessing that the fuel equipment was properly pressurized and had proper
vapor recovery. Failed tests could have a harmful environmental impact and
require the contractor to incur remediation and repair costs, or in the event of
equipment failure, the contractor may be responsible for immediate environmental
clean-up. The related contract was for nine years and was valued at $576 million.
Further, our audit found that DGS did not ensure that it received all administrative
fees and the related supporting documentation due from vendors resulting in the
failure to collect $227,300 in fees. The administrative fee was established in State
law for DGS to cover the cost of administering contracts through the use of
electronic transactions.
In addition, our audit disclosed that DGS lacked adequate controls over cash
receipts, payroll, and State agencies’ property and equipment. For example, DGS
did not sufficiently monitor State agencies to ensure they complied with State
property and equipment requirements. According to DGS records as of January
2021, inventory audits were not conducted for 55 of the 76 State agencies during our
audit period.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of eight findings that
were contained in certain preceding audit reports. Specifically, our audit included
a review to determine the status of six findings contained in our preceding audit
report of the Office of the Secretary and other units of DGS, dated August 3,
2017, and two findings from our DGS – Office of Procurement and Logistics
audit report, dated December 7, 2016. We determined that five of these eight
findings were satisfactorily addressed. The remaining three findings are repeated
in this report.
DGS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of DGS’ response which will
require further clarification, we do not anticipate that these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. We have also edited
DGS’ response to remove certain vendor names, as allowed by our policy.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by DGS
2

--- Page 5 ---
and its willingness to address the audit issues and implement appropriate
corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Organizational and Operational Changes 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 8
Findings and Recommendations 10
Non-Budgeted Clearing Account
Finding 1 – The Department of General Services (DGS) did not 10
adequately account for funds in a non-budgeted clearing account
and could not determine the proper disposition of $1.74 million of
the remaining amount in the fund as the end of fiscal year 2020.
Real Estate Commissions
Finding 2 – DGS did not timely deposit approximately $465,000 in 11
commission rebates, which resulted in the retention of certain funds
that should have been reverted to the State’s General Fund, at June 30,
2020 fiscal year-end.
Procurements and Disbursements
* Finding 3 – DGS did not use available online controls to ensure that 12
critical transactions were independently approved and were proper,
and could not document that it verified the propriety of user access
granted to its employees.
Statewide Fuel Contract
Finding 4 – DGS did not verify that the Statewide fuel vendor performed 14
accurate and valid fuel usage reconciliations, and conducted all
environmental testing required by State regulations.
Vendor Administrative Fees
* Finding 5 – DGS did not ensure that it received all administrative fees 15
due from vendors providing goods and services to State agencies
under Statewide contracts, and our review of selected contracts
disclosed uncollected fees of approximately $227,300.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Cash Receipts and Non-Cash Credits
* Finding 6 – DGS did not have sufficient controls over cash receipts and 17
non-cash credits posted to the accounts receivable records.
Payroll and Leave Adjustments
Finding 7 – DGS had not established adequate controls to ensure the 19
propriety of certain overtime payments and leave adjustments.
Monitoring of State Property and Equipment
Finding 8 – DGS did not adequately monitor State agencies to ensure 20
they complied with State property and equipment requirements.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of General Services (DGS) consists of seven units, including the
Office of the Secretary. This audit included the operations of the following six
units:
 Office of the Secretary
 Office of Facilities Security
 Office of Facilities Operation and Maintenance
 Office of Real Estate
 Office of Facilities, Planning, Design, and Construction
 Business Enterprise Administration
These six DGS units provide professional and technical services for the planning,
design, construction, and maintenance of most State facilities; manage and
maintain multi-agency State facilities; and coordinate the State’s real estate
activities. The remaining DGS unit, the Office of State Procurement (previously,
named the Office of Procurement and Logistics) is audited and reported upon
separately. According to the State’s records, the operating expenditures
(excluding statewide capital project expenditures) for the six DGS units included
in this audit totaled approximately $117.1 million during fiscal year 2020.
Organizational and Operational Changes
Chapter 590, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective on various dates beginning
October 1, 2018 and culminating with the final implementation date of October 1,
2019, required, among other changes, the consolidation of most state procurement
activities under DGS’s authority. In addition, the law established the position of a
Chief Procurement Officer to oversee newly centralized procurement activity
within the Executive Branch of the State. The consolidation created the new
Office of State Procurement with certain procurement personnel from the
Departments of Budget and Management, Information Technology, and Public
Safety and Correctional Services (capital construction) transferred to the new
procurement unit within DGS. Effective October 1, 2019, the Office of
Procurement and Logistics became the Office of State Procurement.
In accordance with the aforementioned law, DGS also developed a procurement-
related work plan on October 1, 2018. This DGS plan included acquisition and
implementation of a new eProcurement system, a new State Procurement web
7

--- Page 10 ---
portal and procurement manual, new procurement employment position class
descriptions, a renewed focus on delegation of procurement authority, and the
oversight of that delegation by DGS through establishment of a training and
certification program known as the Maryland Procurement Academy.
In addition, effective July 1, 2018, DGS transferred the Inventory Standards and
Support Services Division (ISSSD) from the Office of Procurement and Logistics
(OPL) to its newly created Business Enterprise Administration. ISSSD
administers the State’s Automated Fuel Management Program and manages
inventories and surplus property. Accordingly, those functions are now included
as part of this audit.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 3, 2017. In addition, we reviewed two
findings that were previously included in our December 7, 2016 report on OPL,
for which responsibility had been transferred to the Office of the Secretary during
our audit period.
As disclosed in Figure 1, we determined that five of these eight findings were
satisfactorily addressed. The remaining three findings are repeated in this report.
The status of the remaining findings from the OPL report were previously
determined during our separate audit of OPL dated December 5, 2019.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Finding Description Status
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Finding 1 Controls over cash receipts and non-cash credits were not Repeated
sufficient. (Current Finding 6)
DGS improperly recorded transactions totaling $968,000 and
Finding 2 $425,000 during its closeout process for fiscal years 2016 Not repeated
and 2014, respectively, and failed to revert these funds to the
General Fund.
DGS lacked sufficient controls to ensure that all
Finding 3 Repeated
disbursement transactions were independently approved and
(Current Finding 3)
that all commodities purchased were received.
DGS awarded multiple contracts for roof repair and
Finding 4 Not repeated
replacement services to a roofing contractor without
soliciting bids as required.
DGS lacked independent records and monitoring procedures
Finding 5 Not repeated
to ensure that all commission rebates due for certain real
estate transactions were received.
Finding 6 Adjustments to employee pay and leave balances were not
Not repeated
subject to independent supervisory review and approval.
Office of Procurement and Logistics – December 2016
OPL did not verify the accuracy of periodic fuel usage
Finding 1 reconciliations, sufficiently address failed fuel quality tests, Not repeated
and ensure State agencies were reviewing monthly fuel
variance reports.
OPL did not ensure that it received all administrative fees
due from vendors providing goods and services to State Repeated
Finding 5
agencies under Statewide contracts, and our review of (Current Finding 5)
selected contracts disclosed uncollected fees of
approximately $222,000.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Non-Budgeted Clearing Account
Finding 1
The Department of General Services (DGS) did not adequately account for
funds in a non-budgeted clearing account and could not determine the
proper disposition of $1.74 million of the remaining amount in the fund at
the end of fiscal year 2020.
Analysis
DGS did not adequately account for funds in a non-budgeted clearing account and
could not determine the proper disposition of $1.74 million of the remaining
amount in the fund at the end of fiscal year 2020. The clearing account was used
for two unrelated purposes: (1) to receive and spend capital funds for construction
projects funded by other agencies’ budgets, and (2) to account for renewable
energy reimbursements and using those revenues to pay for DGS’ purchases of
renewable power. According to State accounting records, the clearing account
had a balance of $10.5 million as of June 30, 2020.
Our review disclosed that DGS did not prepare periodic fund compositions to
determine the disposition of the funds jointly maintained in the clearing account.
At our request, DGS prepared a fund composition as of June 30, 2020, but was
unable to account for $1.74 million of the funds. As such, it could not be readily
determined whether the funds should be reverted to the State General Fund, as
would be required under normal circumstances with a clearing account. In
addition, DGS did not accurately report the June 30, 2020 clearing account
balance to the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD).
Specifically, DGS reported $1.75 million to GAD rather than the actual $10.5
million balance recorded in the State’s accounting records.
GAD’s budgetary closing instructions require agencies to report any clearing
account that has a positive balance at year-end to GAD. Furthermore, if the
balance exceeds $100,000, after formal reporting the agency is further required to
analyze the account and adjust the balance to zero (for example, after accounting
for payables or encumbrances), which may include reverting the funds to the State
General Fund.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DGS
a. prepare periodic compositions of the funds maintained in the clearing
account to ensure all funds are properly accounted for;
10

--- Page 13 ---
b. determine the proper disposition of the aforementioned $1.74 million and
take appropriate corrective action (such as reverting the funds); and
c. accurately report the clearing account balance to the GAD, including the
balance as of June 30, 2020.
Real Estate Commissions
Finding 2
DGS did not timely deposit approximately $465,000 in commission rebates,
which resulted in the retention of certain funds that should have been
reverted to the State’s General Fund, at June 30, 2020 fiscal year-end.
Analysis
Due to untimely deposits, DGS improperly retained approximately $465,000 in
commission rebates instead of reverting these funds to the State’s General Fund,
as required. DGS’ contract with its real estate broker provides for the broker to
collect a commission from each landlord leasing property to State agencies and
remit a percentage of the commission to DGS as a rebate. During fiscal years
2017 through 2020, DGS recorded commission rebates totaling $2.2 million,
which were used to fund DGS’ Office of Real Estate Special Fund appropriation.
Our review disclosed that four rebate checks totaling $465,000 were received in
fiscal year 2020, but not deposited by DGS until fiscal year 2021, which was
between seven and eight months after they were received. As a result, these funds
were not reflected on the State’s accounting records and were not reverted at the
end of the 2020 fiscal year as required. We were advised by DGS management
that the deposit delay permitted DGS to avoid General Fund reversions, and
possibly permit it to use the funds in the next fiscal year as Special Funds
dedicated to DGS’ Office of Real Estate. However, DGS could not provide us
with legal justification for retaining these funds.
DGS management advised us that all funds were used in fiscal year 2021 as the
result of an amendment to its budget for the related special funds. In this regard,
DGS improperly reported to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM)
that the $465,000 was received in 2021 (when, as noted above, it was actually
received in 2020). Based on this incorrect information, DGS was granted
authorization to utilize the funds for purpose unrelated to the Office of Real
Estate.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires
collections to be deposited and recorded within one business day of receipt. In
11

--- Page 14 ---
addition, State law generally requires State agencies to revert unexpended funds
to the State General Fund at year-end.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DGS
a. ensure all rebate checks are deposited and recorded timely;
b. provide accurate information to DBM when requesting future budget
amendments; and
c. consult with DBM regarding the appropriate action, if any, in response to
the authorization to use the $465,000 based on incorrect information
submitted to DBM.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
DGS did not use available online controls to ensure that critical transactions
were independently approved and were proper, and could not document that
it verified the propriety of user access granted to its employees.
Analysis
DGS had not established sufficient controls to ensure that all disbursements and
change orders processed on the State’s Financial Management Information
System (FMIS) were subject to independent approvals and that commodity items
purchased were received. According to State records, DGS processed
disbursements totaling $1.9 billion (which included $474 million for
commodities) during our audit period.
 DGS did not use available automated FMIS controls to ensure critical
transactions, such as direct vouchers1, vouchers, and change orders, were
subject to independent review and approval. For example, nine employees
were able to process direct vouchers without an independent online approval
including two that could also add vendors to the system. These employees,
and one additional employee who could only process vouchers, processed
$423 million of disbursements during our audit period without an independent
online approval.
Although DGS advised us that it had established a manual, independent
review of transactions prior to payment, two of the aforementioned employees
1 Direct vouchers, unlike vouchers, are payments made without a correlating purchase order,
invoice, or receiving report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
had system capabilities that could bypass this process and our testing
disclosed that performance of the manual review was not always documented.
Our testing disclosed that for five payment batches processed between August
2019 and January 2020 totaling $25.5 million, there was no documentation
that the manual review was performed for 131 of the 132 invoices submitted
for payment. In our opinion, even if a manual review was performed and
documented, we believe that given DGS’ role as a control agency and the high
number of disbursements processed each year (7,594 disbursements in fiscal
year 2020) an independent online approval process would provide greater
assurance as to the propriety of transactions and accountability.
 According to the State’s accounting records, DGS processed disbursements
for commodities totaling $451 million during our audit period using a method
in which vendor invoices were paid without being automatically matched to
the related purchase order and receiving report. Although DGS advised us
that it manually verified invoices through a comparison with the purchase
orders and receiving reports, our testing disclosed that this was not always
documented. Specifically, our test of 10 invoices totaling approximately
$213,000 from fiscal year 2020 disclosed that 5 invoices totaling $133,000,
for such commodities as laptops and fuel, were paid without a documented
verification.
 DGS did not document its periodic review of FMIS access for its 65 FMIS
users as required by the Department of Information Technology’s (DOIT’s)
Internal Control and Security Policy and Procedures Manual. Although we
were advised that DGS reviewed monthly FMIS access reports that were
provided by DoIT for such a purpose, no documentation of these reviews was
retained by DGS.
Similar conditions regarding DGS not using online approvals and invoice
matching capabilities were noted in our preceding audit report. DoIT’s Internal
Control and Security Policy and Procedures Manual requires that critical
transactions should be subject to independent review and approval. In addition,
the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires agencies
to document that prices have been verified and that goods/services have been
received.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DGS
a. establish online independent approval requirements for all critical
transactions, or at a minimum, modify the manual review process to
13

--- Page 16 ---
ensure it is consistently performed and documented for all disbursements
(repeat);
b. use the appropriate FMIS payment method to ensure that invoices are
matched to the corresponding purchase order and receiving reports prior
to payment (repeat); and
c. document its monthly review of employee FMIS access and take action as
appropriate.
Statewide Fuel Contract
Finding 4
DGS did not verify that the Statewide fuel vendor performed accurate and
valid fuel usage reconciliations, and conducted all environmental testing
required by State regulations.
Analysis
DGS did not verify that the Statewide fuel vendor performed accurate and valid
fuel usage reconciliations, and conducted all environmental testing required by
State regulations. DGS procured a Statewide fuel contract effective August 1,
2012 for a total of nine years (including exercised contract options through July
31, 20212), valued at $576 million. According to State records, payments to this
vendor totaled approximately $147 million during fiscal years 2017 through 2020.
 DGS did not verify the accuracy of reconciliations of fuel usage completed by
the fuel vendor or ensure the cause(s) for any variances identified were
corrected by the vendor. DGS’ contract requires the vendor to periodically
reconcile the quantity of fuel dispensed by each fuel pump, based on records
of fuel deliveries and fuel inventories, with the quantity of fuel dispensed
according to the fuel pump card readers used to bill State agencies. Any
variances identified by the reconciliation are to be billed or credited by the
vendor to the respective State agencies.
Our review disclosed that DGS did not verify the accuracy of the
reconciliations, even on a test basis, by reviewing supporting documentation,
such as records of fuel deliveries and inventories on hand. Therefore, there
was a lack of assurance that the reconciliations were accurate and that the
cause(s) of any variance was identified and corrected. During the period from
2 A five-month extension was processed for this contract through December 31, 2021, and a new
vendor will be responsible for all fuel management duties beginning in January 2022.
14

--- Page 17 ---
July 2017 through June 2020, the vendor’s reconciliations resulted in
additional billings of $388,000 and credits of $92,000 to State agencies.
 DGS did not ensure that the vendor performed all required environmental
compliance testing. The contract states that the vendor shall perform
environmental tests on the fuel tanks and equipment in accordance with
Maryland Department of the Environment regulations. These tests include
assessing at different frequencies whether the equipment both above and
below ground had functional leak detectors, were appropriately pressurized,
and had proper vapor recovery. However, DGS did not obtain documentation
that these tests were performed.
Although DGS had documentation that the vendor performed an overall
annual inspection and calibration of equipment, this documentation did not
state whether any of the aforementioned environmental tests were performed.
Failed tests could have a harmful environmental impact and require the
contractor to incur remediation and repair costs; or in the event of equipment
failure, the contractor may be responsible for immediate environmental clean-
up.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DGS
a. verify and document, at least on a test basis, the accuracy of the vendor’s
fuel reconciliation reports by reviewing supporting documentation,
including evidence of fuel deliveries and fuel inventories, and ensure that
these verifications are documented and retained; and
b. ensure that the contractor performs and reports the results of all
required environmental compliance tests, and that any corrective actions
are taken.
Vendor Administrative Fees
Finding 5
DGS did not ensure that it received all administrative fees due from vendors
providing goods and services to State agencies under Statewide contracts;
and our review of selected contracts disclosed uncollected fees of at least
$227,300.
Analysis
DGS did not ensure that it received all administrative fees and the related
supporting documentation due from vendors resulting in the failure to collect
15

--- Page 18 ---
$227,300 in fees. The administrative fee was established in State law for DGS to
cover the cost of administering contracts through the use of electronic transactions
and is to be deposited in a special non-lapsing fund. State law further provides
that DGS may assess administrative fees on vendors using Statewide contracts
based on the vendor’s sales revenue or volume. For example, DGS’ fuel vendor
contract assessed an administrative fee of one percent of vendor sales and an
additional fee because it was procured using eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
(eMMA). Vendors were required to periodically remit the fees to DGS along with
supporting sales reports. According to State accounting records, administrative
fees collected in fiscal year 2020 totaled $1.2 million.
Our review disclosed that for agencies that use the State’s automated accounting
system (FMIS), DGS verified the accuracy of the vendors’ self-reported sales
revenue reports to determine whether the administrative fees remitted were
accurate on a limited basis. However, our testing disclosed that the verification
process was insufficient to ensure that all fees owed were collected because it did
not require the submission of all vendor sales reports and did not include a
periodic monitoring of State records of relevant contract expenditures. In
addition, for agencies that did not utilize FMIS3, such as the Maryland
Department of Transportation (MDOT) and State universities, no process was in
place to verify the appropriate administrative fees were remitted to DGS for those
agencies’ vendor payments made for Statewide contracts.
Our review of DGS records that listed 550 active Statewide contracts during fiscal
years 2018 through 2020 disclosed that for 64 contracts, DGS did not receive
sales reports or associated fees from the vendors. Based on our review of the
statewide payments made on these contracts recorded in FMIS, we estimated that
DGS should have collected $227,300 from these vendors for the 64 contracts
during fiscal years 2018 to 2020. For example, we identified one vendor
providing disposable food service products that was paid $3.5 million during
fiscal years 2018 through 2020 by State agencies that did not submit
administrative fees estimated to total approximately $35,000.
Similar conditions were noted in our prior audit report of the Department of
General Services – Office of Procurement and Logistics, dated December 7, 2016.
Furthermore, as of November 2020, DGS had not yet investigated or otherwise
taken action to collect the $222,000 in unpaid vendor administrative fees, which
we identified in our prior audit report.
3 MDOT uses its own version of FMIS, and USM’s accounting system interfaces with the State’s
FMIS.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Since DGS lacked a similar tracking process for State agencies that did not utilize
FMIS, such as the MDOT business units and the State universities (such as the
University System of Maryland or USM), DGS had no knowledge whether the
appropriate administrative fees were remitted by vendors. We were not readily
able to calculate or estimate the amount of administrative fees that were not
collected for State agencies that did not use the State’s main accounting system,
as we did not obtain access to any alternate accounting systems as part of this
audit.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DGS
a. ensure that all required sales reports and related contract fees, including
those noted above, are received and collected (repeat); and
b. verify reported sales to supporting documentation (repeat).
Cash Receipts and Non-Cash Credits
Finding 6
DGS did not have sufficient controls over cash receipts and non-cash credits
posted to the accounts receivable records.
Analysis
DGS had not established sufficient controls over cash receipts and non-cash
credits posted to the accounts receivable records. DGS’ collections related
primarily to renewable energy reimbursements and rental payments for which
accounts receivable records were maintained. According to State records, DGS’
deposits related to such collections totaled $20.6 million in fiscal year 2020. The
majority of checks were initially received by DGS finance office employees, who
restrictively endorsed and recorded them on a manually maintained log, and
deposited them using remote deposit (a process that scans the images of checks
and electronically transmits those images to the bank for deposit).
 The DGS deposit verifications performed were not adequate since the
employee who initially recorded collections on the check log did not provide a
copy of the log directly to the employee responsible for verifying recorded
collections to deposit. Instead, the check log and the related checks were first
forwarded by the preparer to a second employee who was responsible for
remotely depositing the checks. As a result, unauthorized changes could be
made to the check log that would not be detected by the third employee who
was responsible for verifying the recorded checks from the log to validated
bank deposit documentation.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 DGS did not maintain a log of destroyed checks deposited remotely, as
required. The State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services
by Maryland State Agencies requires that agencies maintain a log tracking
dates of destruction to verify that all remotely deposited checks were
destroyed.
 Non-cash credits recorded in the accounts receivable records were not subject
to independent on-line approval, nor were output reports generated for
subsequent review by supervisory personnel. In addition, eight employees
including the two aforementioned employees with access to collections during
the deposit process, had online access capability to record non-cash credits on
the accounts receivable records. As a result, errors or other discrepancies
could occur without timely detection. DGS processed one non-cash credit
transaction in fiscal year 2020 totaling $10.3 million (plus several smaller
dollar transactions) and 47 non-cash credit transactions in fiscal year 2019
totaling $677,000.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. The Comptroller of
Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that a reconciliation of
recorded collections from the initial point of recordation to amounts deposited be
performed by an employee independent of the cash receipts function. To
accomplish this would require the employee reconciling the deposit to have
access to a copy of the check log maintained in the custody of its preparer. The
Manual also requires supervisory review and approval of non-cash credits to
accounts receivable records and the segregation of cash receipts handling duties
from the accounts receivable record keeping duties.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DGS
a. ensure that the initial record of checks received, or a copy thereof, is
given directly by its preparer to the independent employee responsible for
verifying that all recorded collections were deposited (repeat);
b. maintain a log of all destroyed checks and reconcile this log to the initial
recordation of the deposits (repeat);
c. ensure that non-cash credits to accounts receivable are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval (repeat); and
d. segregate the cash receipts and accounts receivable functions, as
required.
We advised DGS how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Payroll and Leave Adjustments
Finding 7
DGS had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of certain
overtime payments and leave adjustments.
Analysis
DGS had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of certain
overtime payments and leave adjustments. We reviewed procedures and controls
over overtime at DGS’ Facilities Operations and Maintenance unit (FOM), which
had overtime payments totaling approximately $1.9 million from calendar year
2017 through 2020 (this accounts for 48 percent of all DGS overtime paid during
that period4). In addition, we reviewed procedures and controls over online leave
adjustments processed on the Statewide Personnel System (SPS).
 Our test of five FOM timesheets between January 2019 and March 2020 with
a total of 366.5 overtime hours valued at approximately $19,700, disclosed
that DGS lacked documentation that the overtime was preauthorized or
justified. Although not required, FOM advised that certain overtime would
have been preauthorized. However, advance written overtime justification
forms signed by the employee’s supervisor and explaining why the employee
needed to work, were not maintained. We were advised by DGS that such
documentation was prepared, but mistakenly discarded. While FOM did not
specifically require that overtime be preauthorized or justified, we noted that
the DGS State Capital Police required preauthorization of overtime.
Furthermore, we were advised by DGS that an informal procedure was in
place for the FOM which would provide justification that employees needed
overtime hours to complete emergency tasks that could not be performed
during a normal schedule.
 Adjustments to employee leave balances on SPS were not subject to
independent review and approval. During calendar year 2020, DGS processed
92 leave adjustments that changed employee leave balances by 6,555 hours
(increase of 4,199 hours and decrease of 2,356 hours). Our review of the SPS
access for 18 employees who could process critical changes to leave balances,
disclosed that 9 could manually adjust leave balances in SPS without
independent review or approval. Furthermore, DGS did not use available
system output reports to verify the propriety of these leave adjustments. As a
result, there was a lack of assurance that leave adjustments were proper.
4 The remaining 52 percent of all DGS overtime paid during the period was incurred primarily by
State Capital Police.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DGS ensure that
a. overtime preauthorization and justification be required, documented,
and retained; and
b. leave adjustments are subject to independent review and approval.
Monitoring of State Property and Equipment
Finding 8
DGS did not adequately monitor State agencies to ensure they complied with
State property and equipment requirements.
Analysis
DGS did not adequately monitor State agencies to ensure they complied with
State property and equipment requirements. According to DGS records as of
January 2021, inventory audits had been performed for 21 of the 76 State agencies
during our audit period. Although not required by State statute, it is DGS policy
to perform such audits periodically.
The audits that DGS did perform noted significant findings. For example, in one
audit from March 2017, DGS noted that the agency did not always properly tag
and add capital equipment to the detailed equipment records, lacked proper
segregation of duties, and had not generated internal inventory control procedures.
Furthermore, these audits take on added importance as OLA’s own audits have
historically identified deficiencies, such as, State agencies not performing
required physical inventories.
State law provides that DGS is responsible for State property and equipment for
all State agencies and units, with certain exceptions5. DGS’ Inventory Control
Manual established under this authority provides guidance, procedures, and
controls to State agencies for maintaining State property and provides that DGS
will conduct unannounced spot audits of inventory procedures to ensure
compliance with the Manual. Although DGS management advised us that it
lacked sufficient personnel to perform audits of all State agencies, it had not
developed a formal process to select or prioritize those agencies for audit.
5 State law provides that DGS has oversight authority for all units subject to the State procurement
laws. DGS does not have oversight authority over other units such as, public institutions of
higher education, Department of Commerce, Maryland State Archives, and the Maryland
Judiciary.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DGS monitor State agency compliance with State
inventory standards to ensure that they comply with State property and
equipment requirements. If personnel issues impact the completion of
audits, consideration should be given to developing a policy to prioritize
audits consistent with available resources.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Department of General Services (DGS) for the period beginning May 31, 2016
and ending August 31, 2020:
 Office of the Secretary
 Office of Facilities Security
 Office of Facilities Operation and Maintenance
 Office of Real Estate
 Office of Facilities, Planning, Design, and Construction
 Business Enterprise Administration
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DGS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included capital projects, disbursements, real estate, cash
receipts, payroll, and accounts receivable. Our audit also included support
services (such as invoice processing and maintenance of accounting records)
provided by DGS – Office of the Secretary to DGS – Office of State Procurement
(formerly Office of Procurement and Logistics). We also determined the status of
the findings included in our preceding audit report and two findings included in
our preceding audit report on the Office of Procurement and Logistics.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by DGS – Office of
State Procurement to the other DGS units. These support services (such as
procurement) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office of State
Procurement. Our audit also did not include activities related to the operation and
maintenance of Government House. Although DGS receives an appropriation for
these activities, these activities are audited as part of the Executive Department –
Governor. Finally, our audit did not include services provided by DGS for certain
22

--- Page 25 ---
capital projects authorized by law under the State’s operating budget (that is, the
Board of Public Works – Capital Appropriations) and the capital project budget
(for example, Maryland Consolidated Capital Bond Loans). This activity was the
subject of a separate special audit of Statewide grant activity recently completed
by the Office of Legislative Audits.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of compliance with those laws and regulations by DGS because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DGS.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of, May 31, 2016 to August 31, 2020, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DGS’ operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
23

--- Page 26 ---
DGS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DGS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DGS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DGS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DGS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DGS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
24

--- Page 27 ---
APPENDIX
January 20, 2022
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Please find enclosed, the Agency Response Form containing the Department of General Services’
responses to the various recommendations provided by the Office of Legislative Audits in their
draft report covering the fiscal compliance audit of the Department of General Services – Office
of the Secretary covering the period from May 31, 2016, through August 31, 2020.
Please do not hesitate to contact my Chief of Staff, Eric T. Lomboy at 410-591-0441 or at
eric.lomboy@maryland.gov if you require anything further on this matter.
Sincerely,
Ellington E. Churchill, Jr.,
Secretary
Enclosure
c: Nelson Reichart, Deputy Secretary, DGS
Eric T. Lomboy, Chief of Staff, DGS
Wyllie Tchanchou, Chief Financial Officer, DGS

--- Page 28 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Non-Budgeted Clearing Account
Finding 1
The Department of General Services (DGS) did not adequately account for funds in a non-
budgeted clearing account and could not determine the proper disposition of $1.74 million
of the remaining amount in the fund at the end of fiscal year 2020.
We recommend that DGS
a. prepare periodic compositions of the funds maintained in the clearing account to ensure
all funds are properly accounted for;
b. determine the proper disposition of the aforementioned $1.74 million and take
appropriate corrective action (such as reverting the funds); and
c. accurately report the clearing account balance to the GAD, including the balance as of
June 30, 2020.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of Going forward the process will include ensuring the expenditures report is used
corrective action or to track and input all transactions affecting the clearing account into the two
explain disagreement. spreadsheets for both related purposes is done on a monthly basis: (1) to receive
and spend capital funds for construction projects funded by other agencies’
budgets, and (2) to account for power purchases on behalf of the University
System and other agencies.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of The funds for construction projects sitting in this account are projects that are
corrective action or brought to us by outside agencies requesting DGS assistance, because their
explain disagreement. procurement authority is not high enough to complete the project. There is a
formal process in place where the agency sends a request, and a written
response is provided back by DGS either accepting or denying that request. If
accepted, they transfer the funds to DGS to complete the project, and we hold
those funds in the clearing account while the project is completed. This state
construction file is shared annually with the construction unit for their review,
and to advise the fiscal unit on the status of the projects.
To ensure all funds on the state construction file are properly accounted for, we
propose creating a purchase order for each project to track these funds more
Page 1 of 11

--- Page 29 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
closely. Currently, once DGS approves the project, the funds are transferred
from the requesting agency, and we manage them from the clearing account.
We propose that going forward in fiscal year 2022, we wait for the bid process
to be completed before the funds are transferred to DGS. We can then
immediately issue a purchase order and work can begin on the project. Once
the project is complete, the purchase order can be closed, and any remaining
funds will be reverted to the state to eliminate the need to do a mass cleanup at
year end.
DGS does not record energy revenues in the clearing account. Back in 2010,
the state entered into three separate power purchase agreements with renewable
energy vendors. The power from these facilities is allocated to the university
system, and DGS, on behalf of the rest of state agencies. The power is split at
the ratio of ⅓ to USM, and ⅔ to DGS. DGS is the buyer of the power under
these agreements from the vendors. These invoices are paid monthly by DGS
on behalf of the individual agencies. DGS has a separate contract with a billing
vendor to bill the individual agencies, and then pass through those payments to
DGS as reimbursement for having paid the initial invoices from the vendors.
DGS charges an administrative fee, which is billed to agencies and collected
by the billing vendor for providing this service. These administrative fees are
remitted to us in a separate check from the billing vendor, which are recorded
as revenue to PCA / OBJ 77159-9051, outside of the clearing account.
DGS will work with DBM to create a new revenue funding source to move the
power purchases transactions from the clearing account to a reimbursable
pass-through account. Our preference would be to then pay the invoices
monthly and bill the billing vendor to establish a receivable and have the
transactions offset, eliminating any timing difference. This will be contingent
on reviewing our contract with the billing vendor to see if we would be
able to do this within the framework of the existing agreement.
The power purchase transactions will always result in timing differences, just
based on the nature of the reimbursement process. They will all net to zero, but
since the agreements are ongoing, there will always be purchases and
reimbursements flowing in and out of the account.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of DGS has implemented the recommended corrective action by providing a
corrective action or revised report showing the accurate balance for June 30, 2020 and will continue
explain disagreement. to provide accurate balances going forward.
Real Estate Commissions
Finding 2
Page 2 of 11

--- Page 30 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
DGS did not timely deposit approximately $465,000 in commission rebates, which resulted
in the retention of certain funds that should have been reverted to the State’s General
Fund, at June 30, 2020 fiscal year-end.
We recommend that DGS
a. ensure all rebate checks are deposited and recorded timely;
b. provide accurate information to DBM when requesting future budget amendments; and
c. consult with DBM regarding the appropriate action, if any, in response to the
authorization to use the $465,000 based on incorrect information submitted to DBM.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of DGS has implemented an enhanced procedure to ensure that all rebate checks
corrective action or are recorded and deposited timely by providing a written process for DGS
explain disagreement. employees that would be responsible for receipt and handling of rebate checks.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of Implementation of the enhanced procedure noted in Recommendation 2a will
corrective action or by default allow DGS to provide accurate information for any budget
explain disagreement. amendment submissions that include real estate broker rebate fees.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of DBM and the Comptroller’s General Accounting Division (GAD) were both
corrective action or apprised of the audit finding and the accompanying circumstances by DGS’
explain disagreement. Chief of Staff. After explaining the measures put in place to ensure this
situation does not repeat itself, it was agreed that while both DBM and GAD
recognized that DGS had not followed proper accounting procedures, that DGS
would not be required to revert the funds in question because the budget
amendment was properly processed in order access and use the funds.
Procurements and Disbursements
Finding 3
Page 3 of 11

--- Page 31 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
DGS did not use available online controls to ensure that critical transactions were
independently approved and were proper, and could not document that it verified the
propriety of user access granted to its employees.
We recommend that DGS
a. establish online independent approval requirements for all critical transactions, or at a
minimum, modify the manual review process to ensure it is consistently performed and
documented for all disbursements (repeat);
b. use the appropriate FMIS payment method to ensure that invoices are matched to the
corresponding purchase order and receiving reports prior to payment (repeat); and
c. document its monthly review of employee FMIS access and take action as appropriate.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of All accounts payable vouchers created in FMIS are reviewed and approved on
corrective action or the 9210 screen in ADPICS and then transmitted to GAD. The transmittal page
explain disagreement. is printed from the 32 screen and signed by a reviewer before being scanned
and sent with all the soft copy backup to GAD for release. The review is
completed by the general accounting team, the deputy director or director of
fiscal services. The soft copy of each ARN transmittal as well as the individual
vouchers are all saved and housed on the fiscal shared drive. DGS has
documented this manual review process but wish to note that the term “critical
transactions” has not been defined anywhere in guidance which makes it
difficult to develop a process specifically to address them.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 7/1/2022
Please provide details of DGS agrees that additional training is necessary to ensure that agency buyers
corrective action or are fully aware of the proper match type to be used when initiating a
explain disagreement. commodity PO and establish receivers to complete receive reports. The DGS
Fiscal Office will work with the Office of State Procurement’s training
academy to ensure that proper coding instructions are included in the training
for state procurement professionals.
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of This review has not been conducted regularly. DGS has established and
corrective action or documented a monthly review process which will be initiated by the FMIS
explain disagreement. coordinator and reviewed in conjunction with the Fiscal Division and the HR
Office. Reviews are expected to commence under the new process Oct. 1,
Page 4 of 11

--- Page 32 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
2021, and completed reviews will be kept on file with the Fiscal Services
Office.
Page 5 of 11

--- Page 33 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Statewide Fuel Contract
Finding 4
DGS did not verify that the Statewide fuel vendor performed accurate and valid fuel usage
reconciliations, and conducted all environmental testing required by State regulations.
We recommend that DGS
a. verify and document, at least on a test basis, the accuracy of the vendor’s fuel
reconciliation reports by reviewing supporting documentation, including evidence of fuel
deliveries and fuel inventories, and ensure that these verifications are documented and
retained; and
b. ensure that the contractor performs and reports the results of all required
environmental compliance tests, and that any corrective actions are taken.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 5/1/2022
Please provide details of The Inventory Standards and Support Services Division will document a
corrective action or process and accompanying guidance for ensuring that the various concerns
explain disagreement. raised in the discussion notes are being addressed including documenting the
verifications and maintaining them in the files. DGS is hiring a Fuel
Administrator who will be responsible for ensuring all the areas of concern
will be monitored and will ensure that the vendor and our client agencies
adhere to the documented process. The Fuel Administrator will report directly
to the Statewide Fuel Manager and will help in monitoring the Statewide Fuel
Contract.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: n/a
Please provide details of See answer above in 4(a).
corrective action or
explain disagreement.
Page 6 of 11

--- Page 34 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Vendor Administrative Fees
Finding 5
DGS did not ensure that it received all administrative fees due from vendors providing
goods and services to State agencies under Statewide contracts; and our review of selected
contracts disclosed uncollected fees of at least $227,300.
We recommend that DGS
a. ensure that all required sales reports and related contract fees, including those noted
above, are received and collected (repeat); and
b. verify reported sales to supporting documentation (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide Currently DGS relies on Vendor reporting and State records in FMIS
additional comments as where possible, to match the Vendor reporting. Once eMMA is fully
deemed necessary. implemented, the plan is to use “data analytics” on vendor spend that
will be provided through the emma system to identify and pursue
uncollected vendor fees due DGS.
Recommendation 5a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of A process to ensure that all required sales reports and related contract fees,
corrective action or including the OLA identified outstanding amount of $227,300 has been put in
explain disagreement. place to ensure fees owed the State will be collected timely. The policy and
accompanying process will be drafted in collaboration between the Office of
State Procurement and the Fiscal Services Office.
Recommendation 5b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 10/1/2022
Please provide details of For agencies that use the State’s automated accounting system (FMIS), DGS
corrective action or will verify the accuracy of the vendors’ self-reported sales revenue reports to
explain disagreement. determine whether the administrative fees remitted were accurate.
For agencies that do not utilize FMIS and because some transactions are
completed using the corporate purchasing card, there currently is no process to
verify the appropriate administrative fees were remitted to DGS for those
agencies’ vendor payments made on Statewide contracts. We are currently
unable to generate the necessary reporting from the e-procurement system that
would allow DGS personnel to sufficiently audit sales reports. DGS has hired
a full-time auditor, who will work within the Office of State Procurement and,
among other assignments, will focus on developing a process for verifying the
accuracy of eMMA fees.
Cash Receipts and Non-Cash Credits
Page 7 of 11

--- Page 35 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
DGS did not have sufficient controls over cash receipts and non-cash credits posted to the
accounts receivable records.
We recommend that DGS
a. ensure that the initial record of checks received, or a copy thereof, is given directly by
its preparer to the independent employee responsible for verifying that all recorded
collections were deposited (repeat);
b. maintain a log of all destroyed checks and reconcile this log to the initial recordation of
the deposits (repeat);
c. ensure that non-cash credits to accounts receivable are subject to independent
supervisory review and approval (repeat); and
d. segregate the cash receipts and accounts receivable functions, as required.
We advised DGS how to achieve the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of This process was changed effective December 9th 2020, after initial
corrective action or conversations with the OLA auditors conducting the review. The deposit log
explain disagreement. preparer now presents a copy of the deposit log directly to the accountant who
completes the bank reconciliation. The accountant saves all copies of the
deposit log for the month and uses them when the bank reconciliation is
completed, to ensure there are no discrepancies between what the deposit log
preparer has entered onto the log and what was actually deposited.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Page 8 of 11

--- Page 36 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of The reconciliation process was changed as of January 2021. Each deposit is
corrective action or now individually entered on our bank reconciliation checklist file. Once the
explain disagreement. bank reconciliation is complete, we wait until the following month is reconciled
to ensure there are no chargebacks. Once we have completed that cycle, the
accountant will notify payroll of which month’s deposits can be destroyed, at
which point they are shredded, and the bank reconciliation checklist is updated
with a destroyed date. We began using our new reconciliation checklist file in
January 2021, but we did not document our first check destruction until August
2nd 2021.
Recommendation 6c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of DGS has requested the AZ report (Output report) be run monthly. This report
corrective action or shows all non-cash credits to the accounts receivables. The budget manager
explain disagreement. with User Class 04 and 89, who is independent from the accounts receivables
process and does not have the capability to post a non-cash credit, is
responsible for reviewing this report for accuracy. All non-cash credits will be
reviewed for appropriateness and, thus, approved by the budget manager. This
review will be documented and retained. This process was implemented in
March, 2021.
Recommendation 6d Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of The process here was changed as of December 2020. The DGS Fiscal Office
corrective action or now has a Fiscal Accounts Technician II in our A/P unit picks up the mail and
explain disagreement. prepares the deposit log and deposit ticket. Once these are prepared, the
original of the log is given to the accountant who will prepare the bank
reconciliation, and the checks, deposit ticket and a copy of the log are delivered
to the payroll unit. The Payroll unit employees are responsible for entering the
deposit into FMIS as well as performing the electronic deposit into the bank
using the bank scanner. Once the deposit is entered, the paperwork is scanned
and saved onto the network, and the hard copy is retained until the accountant
completes the bank reconciliation and advises which packets can be disposed
of. The payroll supervisor, deputy director or director of fiscal reviews the
deposit paperwork and approves in FMIS.
Page 9 of 11

--- Page 37 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Payroll and Leave Adjustments
Finding 7
DGS had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of certain overtime
payments and leave adjustments.
We recommend that DGS ensure that
a. overtime preauthorization and justification be required, documented, and retained;
and
b. leave adjustments are subject to independent review and approval.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 3/31/2022
Please provide details of DGS’ HR Office is preparing a department-wide OT policy to ensure
corrective action or compliance with this recommendation by adapting an existing policy used by
explain disagreement. the Maryland Capitol Police and making it broad enough to apply across the
department. The OT policy should be ready to implement as of April 1,
2022.
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed.
Please provide details of The Workday system does not have an approval path for adjustments to
corrective action or employees leave balances. Currently, when a payroll employee makes a leave
explain disagreement. balance adjustment, they scan a copy of the request that was received to make
that adjustment and save it to a shared network folder where it can be
reviewed. At the end of each month, the SPMS Accrual and Time Off
Adjustment report is run, and each adjustment is reconciled back to the
backup that has been saved to the shared payroll folder. This review is
conducted by the Deputy Director of Fiscal Services starting with the month
of January 2021. Once all transactions are verified, the file is printed, signed,
and scanned back into the shared folder for audit purposes.
Page 10 of 11

--- Page 38 ---
Department of General Services
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Agency Response Form
Monitoring of State Property and Equipment
Finding 8
DGS did not adequately monitor State agencies to ensure they complied with State
property and equipment requirements.
We recommend that DGS monitor State agency compliance with State inventory standards
to ensure that they comply with State property and equipment requirements. If personnel
issues impact the completion of audits, consideration should be given to developing a policy
to prioritize audits consistent with available resources.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2022
Please provide details of DGS is in the process of recruiting an ISSSD compliance officer who will
corrective action or monitor State agency compliance with inventory standards to ensure that they
explain disagreement. comply with State property and equipment requirements. ISSSD’s compliance
officer in collaboration with BEA leadership and the Secretary’s Office will
develop a policy and process for use when personnel vacancies impact the
ability to conduct reviews that prioritizes certain reviews to be conducted with
other available resources. DGS anticipates this policy being implemented no
later than June 30, 2022.
Page 11 of 11

--- Page 39 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Walter L. Horan, IV
Anjelecia N. Jacobs
Staff Auditors