Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Motor-fuel, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division

NOTE: Effective July 1, 2009, the Motor-fuel, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division discontinued functioning as a separate division and is now subject to audit during our audits of the Revenue Administration Division.
Date: 07/28/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1acc9d724560674692
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:42:32.935331
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Motor-fuel, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division
July 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
July 28, 2010
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Motor-fuel, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division (MATT) of
the Comptroller of Maryland for the period beginning July 1, 2007 and ending
June 30, 2009. MATT administers laws and regulations pertaining to the
manufacture, storage, transportation, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages,
tobacco, and motor fuel, and collects the related excise taxes. Effective July 1,
2009, MATT discontinued functioning as a separate division and became a unit
within the Comptroller’s Revenue Administration Division.
Our audit disclosed that MATT’s controls over alcohol and tobacco tax receipts
and tobacco tax stamps need improvement. Specifically, procedures for the
verification of alcohol and tobacco tax receipts and for the destruction and
inventory of returned tobacco tax stamps were inadequate.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s response to this audit, on behalf of MATT, is
included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us by MATT during the course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Motor-fuel, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division (MATT) administers laws
and regulations pertaining to the manufacture, storage, transportation, sale, and
distribution of alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and motor fuel, and collects the
related excise taxes. MATT’s primary responsibilities consist of reviewing
alcohol, tobacco, and motor carrier tax returns and refund requests, and
performing certain licensing functions. Although MATT is responsible for the
identification, collection, and deposit of alcohol and tobacco tax receipts and
motor fuel tax receipts, during our audit period, the subsequent accounting for
these funds (including distribution to appropriate State Funds and programs in
accordance with statutory requirements) was the responsibility of the Revenue
Administration Division (RAD). According to MATT’s records, its alcohol and
tobacco tax and motor fuel tax collections and related distributions for fiscal year
2009 were as follows:
Table 1
Taxes and Related Fees Collected and Distributed – Fiscal Year 2009
Type of Tax
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Motor Fuel Tax
(dollars stated in millions)
Gross taxes and related fees collected $434.3 $758.0
Less:
Refunds 0 21.9
Administrative expenses 0 7.9
Total refunds and expenses 0 29.8
Balance available for distribution $434.3 $728.2
Distribution of remaining balance: 
To State’s General Fund $434.3 $6.5
To Transportation Trust Fund 0 715.3
To Chesapeake Bay Trust Fund 0 6.4
Total distributions $434.3 $728.2
 The Revenue Administration Division was responsible for distributing these collections.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Organizational Change
Effective October 1, 2005, certain duties and responsibilities within the
Comptroller of Maryland were reorganized. Specifically, the Motor Fuel Tax
Division was merged into the Regulatory and Enforcement Division (RED). RED
was responsible, for example, for collecting excise taxes on alcoholic beverages
and tobacco, reviewing motor carrier tax returns and refund requests, and
performing certain licensing functions. Subsequently, the Comptroller of
Maryland reorganized RED into two separate divisions effective July 1, 2007.
Specifically, certain responsibilities were transferred from RED to create the
Motor-fuel, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division (MATT).
Effective July 1, 2009, certain duties and responsibilities within the Comptroller
of Maryland were again reorganized. Specifically, MATT discontinued
functioning as a separate division and became a unit under the Revenue
Administration Division (RAD). For the period from July 1, 2007 to June 30,
2009, MATT existed as a separate division of the Comptroller of Maryland, and
the scope of our audit included the activities of MATT during this period. Our
findings and recommendations related to this audit were addressed by RAD. In
the future, the duties and responsibilities of the former MATT will be audited
during our audits of RAD.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Controls over verifying that alcohol and tobacco tax receipts were deposited
were insufficient.
Analysis
Controls over verifying the deposit of alcohol and tobacco tax receipts (in the
form of checks received in the mail), which totaled approximately $46.4 million
during fiscal year 2009, were not sufficient. Specifically, the initial recordation
documents, along with the related cash receipts, were forwarded to two
employees who were responsible for preparing the bank deposits and for updating
taxpayer accounts receivable records. Furthermore, the initial recordation
documents were then given to a third employee who was responsible for verifying
them to the validated deposit slips. However, because the initial recordation
documents were not forwarded directly to the employee who performed the
4

--- Page 7 ---
deposit verifications, collections could be misappropriated without immediate
detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires that an employee independent of the collections function ensure that all
collections were subsequently deposited, and that the cash receipts and accounts
receivable responsibilities be separated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that
a. the employee(s) who prepares the initial recordation documents forward
those documents directly to the independent employee who performs the
deposit verifications, and that these documents be used in the verification
process; and
b. employees with access to collections not have access to the related
accounts receivable records.
We advised RAD on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Tobacco Tax Stamps
Finding 2
Controls over the destruction and inventory of returned unused tobacco tax
stamps were inadequate.
Analysis
The controls over the destruction and inventory of returned unused tobacco tax
stamps were not adequate. Excise tax stamps are sold to tobacco product
wholesalers who affix the stamps to each product (for example, to each pack of
cigarettes) to show that the Maryland tobacco taxes have been paid. The selling
price of the stamps reflects the current tax rate. For example, the current tax rate
is $2.00 for a pack of 20 cigarettes. Wholesalers return unused stamps to MATT,
for eventual destruction, because they are mutilated, or for other reasons, and
receive credit for future purchases. Our review disclosed the following
conditions:
 Although MATT performed a verified count of returned tobacco stamps when
they were received, the stamps were not immediately destroyed; according to
MATT’s records, stamps returned during fiscal year 2009 were, on average,
destroyed approximately one month after receipt. In addition, the stamps
were not re-counted, prior to destruction, by the three employees that
witnessed the destruction of the stamps. Furthermore, while the returned
5

--- Page 8 ---
stamps were stored in a secured cabinet to await destruction, one of the
aforementioned three employees also had routine access to the secured cabinet
for inventory purposes.
 MATT did not maintain an accurate record of tobacco tax stamps that had
been returned from wholesalers. On March 31, 2010, we conducted an
inventory of the returned stamps awaiting destruction and determined there
were 34,127 stamps, with a face value of $68,254, that had not been recorded
on the returned stamp inventory log. According to that log, only 18,029
stamps were awaiting destruction; these stamps had been received between
November 2, 2009 and March 12, 2010.
As a result of these conditions, there was a lack of assurance that all stamps
returned for destruction were actually destroyed. Stamps that are usable could be
misappropriated and reissued without detection. According to MATT’s records,
333,506 returned stamps, with a face value of approximately $667,012, were
destroyed in fiscal year 2009.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that RAD
a. either perform an immediate destruction of returned tobacco tax stamps
once initially verified or re-verify the count prior to subsequent
destruction,
b. ensure that individuals responsible for witnessing the destructions of
stamps are independent of the inventory functions for the stamps, and
c. ensure that all returned stamps are inventoried and properly accounted
for.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Comptroller of Maryland – Motor-fuel, Alcohol and
Tobacco Tax Division (MATT) for the period beginning July 1, 2007 and ending
June 30, 2009. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
6

--- Page 9 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the MATT’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (primarily for taxes and fees
collected for motor fuel, alcohol, and tobacco transactions) and accounts
receivable. Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel,
inspections of documents and records, and observations of the MATT’s
operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this
report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but
were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MATT by the
Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These support services
(such as processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller. Our audit also did not include certain support services provided to
MATT by the Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology Division
related to the procurement and monitoring of information technology equipment
and services. These support services are included in the scope of our audits of the
Information Technology Division.
MATT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MATT’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MATT that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s response, on behalf of MATT, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Comptroller of Maryland regarding the results of our review of
its response.
8

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Roger E. Jaynes, III, CFE
Senior Auditor
Andrew N. Dobin, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditor