Title: Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund

NOTE: OLA no longer conducts audits of the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund.
Date: 09/24/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744f5
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:22:29.769490
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund
September 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF), which consists of an Insured
and an Uninsured Division, operates under the provisions of Title 20 of the
Insurance Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The Insured Division’s
purpose is to provide automobile liability and property damage insurance
coverage on personal vehicles and, to a lesser extent, commercial vehicles to
Maryland residents who are unable to obtain coverage from private insurance
carriers. The Uninsured Division is responsible for paying claims to eligible
victims of traffic accidents caused by operators of uninsured or unidentified
vehicles in instances in which the victim does not have recourse through an
insurance policy which would cover the related loss. According to its records,
during calendar year 2011, MAIF processed and issued claim payments that
totaled approximately $80.2 million. In addition, total MAIF operating
expenditures were approximately $43.8 million during that period.
Financial Statement Audits
MAIF engaged an independent accounting firm to audit the statutory-basis
financial statements of the Insured Division. In the related audit reports for
calendar years 2009, 2010, and 2011, the firm stated that the financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Insured
Division, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then
ended in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the
Maryland Insurance Administration.
In addition, MAIF engaged the same accounting firm to audit the financial
statements of the Uninsured Division for the calendar years 2009, 2010, and 2011.
In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position, results of operations and cash
flows of the Uninsured Division for the years then ended in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The audit report on the Uninsured Division for calendar year 2011 included a note
to the financial statements that indicated that certain factors raised substantial
doubt about the Uninsured Division’s ability to continue as a going concern. The
note indicated that a $4 million liability to the State of Maryland, as of December
31, 2011—a transfer required by the Maryland Budget Reconciliation and
Financing Act of 2011—resulted in the Division’s total liabilities exceeding its
total assets by $915,551. However, the note further indicated that management
3

--- Page 6 ---
would provide sufficient cash flow support from the Insured Division to the
Uninsured Division to ensure that the Uninsured Division continues to meet all of
its obligations until such time as the Uninsured Division’s equity has recovered.
The note also stated that, if necessary, MAIF’s Board of Trustees would authorize
a transfer of funds between the Insured and Uninsured Divisions.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 4, 2009. We determined that MAIF
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Payments
Finding 1
MAIF did not verify that invoice billing rates for certain contractual services
agreed to contract terms.
Analysis
MAIF did not verify billing rates from information system contractual services
invoices to related contract terms. Specifically, our review of five contracts,
totaling approximately $3 million, disclosed that billings related to one $1.5
million contract for information retrieval services (covering the period from July
2010 through December 2011) were not verified to payment rates included in the
related contract. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that invoiced
amounts were valid.
We reviewed approved billings totaling approximately $890,000. Based on our
calculations, MAIF made various overpayments and underpayments for these
services, collectively totaling approximately $133,000, because incorrect billing
rates were used and not detected. Although the net difference was a small
underpayment for the period, it is incumbent upon MAIF to ensure that such
billings reflect agreed-upon rates specified in the contract terms.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MAIF
a. verify all billing rates to contract terms, and
b. review all past invoices from the aforementioned vendor and take
appropriate action for any payment discrepancies noted.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
There was no documented verification that all recorded collections were
subsequently deposited.
Analysis
MAIF did not have a documented deposit verification process. Specifically,
although MAIF advised us that collections received in the form of checks at its
office were independently verified by reconciling with subsequent deposit
documents, this verification was not documented. Our limited testing did not
disclose any instances of a failure to deposit collections; however, this condition
results in a lack of assurance that this critical control was being performed and
that all collections were deposited. MAIF’s check collections totaled
approximately $24.1 million in calendar year 2011.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual states that the
reconciliation of cash receipts to deposit be performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts function. The Manual also states that critical
control procedures should be documented.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MAIF document the independent verification of
collections received to deposit.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF) for the period
beginning March 4, 2009 and ending February 29, 2012. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
5

--- Page 8 ---
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MAIF’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurements and disbursements,
accounts receivable, and payroll. Our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
MAIF’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided
in this report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable,
but were not independently verified.
MAIF engaged an independent accounting firm to audit the statutory-basis
financial statements of the Insured Division. In the related audit reports for
calendar years 2009, 2010, and 2011, the firm stated that the financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Insured
Division, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then
ended in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the
Maryland Insurance Administration. MAIF engaged the same accounting firm to
audit the financial statements of the Uninsured Division for the calendar years
2009, 2010, and 2011. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the
financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position, results of operations and cash flows of the Uninsured Division for the
years then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America. We have relied on the work of the independent
accounting firm to provide audit coverage of certain aspects of MAIF’s operations
(that is, internal controls and testing for claims and investments). Our audit
procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
MAIF’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
6

--- Page 9 ---
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MAIF’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit also disclosed a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to MAIF that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MAIF’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MAIF regarding the results of
our review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Roger E. Jaynes, CFE
Nathan H. Suffin
Staff Auditors