Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Eastern Shore Hospital Center
Date: 07/25/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743c0
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:35:20.952291
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Eastern Shore Hospital Center
July 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Eastern Shore Hospital Center (ESHC), located in Cambridge, Maryland,
provides comprehensive psychiatric and related services to patients from the nine
counties of Maryland’s Eastern Shore. The services provided include inpatient
treatment and community service programs. During fiscal year 2013, ESHC,
which is accredited by The Joint Commission (formerly the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations), had a licensed capacity of 80
inpatients, a budgeted average daily population of 76 inpatients, and an actual
average daily population of 75 inpatients. According to the State’s records,
ESHC’s fiscal year 2013 operating expenditures totaled approximately $17.6
million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 30, 2011. We determined that
ESHC satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Patient Funds
Finding 1
ESHC had not established adequate controls over patient funds.
Analysis
ESHC patient funds were not adequately controlled. Specifically, we noted that
the employee who reconciled ESHC’s patient fund records with the corresponding
State records on a monthly basis also processed patient fund collections.
Furthermore, there was no independent supervisory review and approval of
reconciliations performed. According to ESHC’s records, during fiscal year
2013, patient fund collections and disbursements totaled approximately $114,000
and $134,000, respectively.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires that cash handling, record keeping, and
reconciliation duties be segregated. However, ESHC believes that it does not
3

--- Page 6 ---
have sufficient fiscal personnel to provide for independent preparation of the
patient fund reconciliations. Consequently, it is imperative that these
reconciliations be reviewed and approved by independent supervisory personnel.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that independent supervisory personnel review and approve
the monthly patient fund reconciliations, including verification of critical
amounts to supporting documentation. We advised ESHC on accomplishing
the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Eastern Shore Hospital
Center (ESHC) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the
period beginning February 24, 2011 and ending March 30, 2014. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ESHC’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included patient funds, procurements and disbursements,
materials and supplies, corporate purchasing cards, and payroll. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
ESHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
4

--- Page 7 ---
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
ESHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a condition that we consider to be a significant deficiency in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect ESHC’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit did not
disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of ESHC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
5

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Patient Funds
Finding 1
ESHC had not established adequate controls over patient funds.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that independent supervisory personnel review and approve the
monthly patient fund reconciliations, including verification of critical amounts to
supporting documentation. We advised ESHC on accomplishing the necessary
separation of duties using existing personnel.
Center’s Response
The Center concurs with the findings of the Legislative Auditors regarding the
monthly patient fund reconciliation and agrees with the recommendation. The
Chief Financial Officer (CFO) will be responsible for the approval of the monthly
patient fund reconciliations and verification of critical amounts to supporting
documentation. In the absence of the CFO, the Chief Operating Officer (COO)
will assume those duties. This will begin starting in August 2014.

--- Page 10 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Joshua A. Naylor
Staff Auditor