Title: Maryland Stadium Authority
Date: 04/10/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746c8
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:46:40.284782
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Stadium Authority
April 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenaux TbomasJ.BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
April 10, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Maryland Stadium Authority
(MSA) for the period beginning October 17, 2012 and ending June 30, 2016.
MSA is primarily responsible for developing, constructing, and maintaining
certain facilities (such as sports facilities, convention centers, and entertainment
venues) as authorized by law.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis
audit by MSA.
Respectfully submitted,
ThomaJ. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street• Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fix 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) is an instrumentality of the State of
Maryland, a public corporation, and an independent unit of the Executive Branch
of State Government. MSA functions under the provisions of the Economic
Development Article, Title 10, Subtitle 6, of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
MSA is responsible for developing, constructing, and maintaining certain
facilities (such as sports facilities, convention centers, and entertainment venues)
as authorized by law. In addition, MSA is authorized to perform planning and
construction-related activities for State agencies or local governments, subject to
certain notification requirements of the General Assembly. Current MSA projects
include overseeing the construction and revitalization of certain Baltimore City
public schools and construction of the North Bethesda Conference Center parking
structure. During our audit period, a third significant MSA project, expansion of
the Ocean City Convention Center, was completed. MSA will also be overseeing
the demolition of blighted structures located throughout Baltimore City as part of
Project C.O.R.E, or Creating Opportunities for Renewal and Enterprise.
MSA is governed by a seven-member board, with one member appointed by the
Mayor of Baltimore City, and six members appointed by the Governor, subject to
the advice and consent of the Senate. The members serve four-year terms, and the
board appoints an Executive Director (subject to the approval of the Governor)
who is responsible for directing and supervising the administrative affairs and
activities of MSA.
Agency Budget Oversight
The Economic Development Article, Section 10-623(1) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland specifies that MSA’s annual budget submitted to the Department of
Budget and Management for inclusion in the State budget book is primarily for
informational purposes. Oversight by the Board of Public Works for certain MSA
budgeting matters is established in the master lease and sublease agreements that
exist between MSA and the State for the various MSA facilities. Under the
master leases, the State leases the land and all facilities constructed thereon from
MSA. Under the subleases, MSA leases the facilities back from the State.
According to the State’s records, MSA’s total expenditures for fiscal year 2016
were approximately $180.5 million and were paid from MSA income, bond
proceeds, and State lottery special funds.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Financial Statement Audits
MSA engaged an independent certified public accounting firm to audit its
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2013, 2014, 2015, and
2016. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that MSA’s financial statements
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of MSA as of June
30, 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016, and the respective changes in its financial
position and cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 2, 2013. We determined that MSA
satisfactorily addressed both of these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MSA’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to MSA that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MSA. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Stadium Authority
(MSA) for the period beginning October 17, 2012 and ending June 30, 2016. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
4

--- Page 7 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included accounts receivable, construction project
management, bond trustee accounts, cash receipts, payroll, procurement, and
disbursements. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MSA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted
data from MSA’s financial systems for the purpose of testing certain areas, such
as accounts receivable and contracts. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
MSA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
AUDIT TEAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Lindsay M. Fertig, CPA
Richard Tran
Staff Auditors