Title: Department of Budget and Management - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 04/17/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742b2
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:43:07.335776
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
April 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud,
waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government resources.
Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
through the Office’s website, by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, or by
mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) is mainly responsible for
assisting the Governor in the preparation and monitoring of the State’s annual
operating and capital budgets. The Office of the Secretary coordinates the
functions of DBM’s divisions which include, in addition to the budget process,
overseeing certain statewide procurements and providing fiscal and personnel
services to State agencies. This audit includes the operations of the following
units:
 Office of the Secretary, which includes the Central Collection Unit (CCU)
 Office of Budget Analysis
 Office of Capital Budgeting
DBM’s Office of Personnel Services and Benefits (OPSB), which directs State
personnel policies and administers the health care benefits programs for State
employees and retirees, is audited and reported upon separately.
According to the State’s records, DBM’s expenditures, excluding OPSB, totaled
approximately $19.4 million during fiscal year 2014.
Central Collection Unit Operation
CCU’s primary responsibility is to collect all delinquent debts due the State,
except those excluded by law (such as taxes and child support). Collections on
debt, less CCU’s assessed collection fees, are generally paid to either the State
Treasury or the unit of State government where the debt originated.
State law authorizes CCU to assess and collect for each debt a fee sufficient to
cover all collection and administrative costs. The fee may not exceed 20 percent
of the outstanding principal and interest. Currently, CCU’s collection fee is 17
percent which is added to the original debt amount. Collection fees are deposited
into the Central Collection Fund, a continuing, non-lapsing special fund used to
pay CCU’s operating expenses. According to State law, any balance in the Fund
at the end of the fiscal year in excess of 15 percent of CCU’s actual operating
expenses is required to be reverted to the State’s General Fund. During fiscal
years 2012 to 2014, CCU reverted approximately $17.5 million to the State’s
3

--- Page 6 ---
General Fund. As of July 1, 2014, according to CCU’s records, the balance in the
Fund totaled approximately $2.1 million.
CCU’s operations include its Baltimore headquarters office and five satellite
offices established at selected Motor Vehicle Administration locations to assist
primarily in the collection of uninsured motorist penalty fees assessed by the
Administration.
The balance of outstanding debt referred to CCU was approximately $1.9 billion
as of June 30, 2014, as noted in the accompanying chart. Approximately half of
the outstanding debt was referred by the Department of Transportation (primarily,
the Motor Vehicle Administration).
Outstanding Debts
(at June 30)
Fiscal
Year Accounts Balance Collections*
2012 2,060,798 $1,765,458,762 $125,717,129
2013 2,155,113 $1,879,152,111 $138,492,905
2014 2,425,225 $1,934,949,017 $134,590,503
*Collection amounts are net of account adjustments
(such as refunds)
Source: CCU records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 12, 2012. We determined that DBM
satisfactorily addressed two of these findings. The remaining two findings are
repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Debt Collection Efforts
Background
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) – Central Collection Unit
(CCU) uses a variety of methods and resources to facilitate the collection of
delinquent accounts, including automated and manual efforts, as well as a private
collection agency. Automated collection efforts include the use of the State’s Tax
Refund Intercept Program (TRIP), which captures debtor tax refunds, and other
automated intercept programs. Manual collection efforts include CCU collection
agents working directly with the debtor or with the referring agency where the
debt originated. Agents will pursue voluntary payments (such as payment plan
agreements) via phone and written correspondence and will also forward selected
accounts to the CCU Legal Measures Unit for proactive non-voluntary collection
actions, such as wage garnishments and property liens. See the chart below for
the details of fiscal year 2014 gross collections totaling approximately $135.9
million by collection method. (These collections do not include account balance
reductions of approximately $1.3 million that are not available by collection
source.)
CCU Fiscal Year 2014 Debt
Collections by Source
Manual-CCU
$68,193,825 Automated
(TRIP)
$51,284,548
Manual -
Private Collection
Referring Agency Automated (Other) Agency
$5,722,083 * $10,303,494 $391,554
Source: CCU Records
*Automated (Other) includes State Payroll and Vendor Payment Intercepts, Lottery Winnings Intercepts,
and Federal Tax Refund Intercepts
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 1
CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments from debtors.
Analysis
CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments from debtors when viable
accounts were identified through quarterly computer matches of its accounts with
State wage data from the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation.
CCU’s debt collection policies provide that CCU will generally consider pursuing
wage garnishments on accounts with debts greater than $750 and for which wages
are currently available to attach.
CCU’s October 2014 match identified approximately 50,400 debtor accounts
(each greater than $750) with balances totaling $137.6 million and wages earned
of $383.9 million during the second quarter of calendar year 2014 that could
potentially have been subject to garnishment based on CCU policies. We tested
10 of these debtors, with accounts totaling approximately $1.7 million, who had
not made any debt payments or had not made debt payments for periods ranging
from 8 to 46 months. We noted that the Legal Measures Unit was in the process
of establishing a wage garnishment for only 1 of these 10 debtors. For the
remaining 9 debtors, our test identified that the debtors had earned wages totaling
$132,500 during the quarter but CCU had not referred 8 of these debtors to the
Legal Measures Unit to initiate wage garnishments. Furthermore, there was no
documentation as to why these debtors had not been referred to the Unit. While
the remaining debtor had been referred to the Legal Measures Unit in November
2009, CCU could not explain why a wage garnishment had not been performed.
In addition, CCU conducted a targeted query of these quarterly match results that
focused on Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) debtors (individuals fined for
lapses of insurance) who were late on payment plans. This targeted query is
performed because MVA debtors represent a significant portion of CCU’s
accounts and because of the existence of statute of limitation issues. Wage
garnishments are an effective collection tool for these debtors that can be used in
addition to vehicle registration suspensions that are imposed by MVA. The
October 2014 match query identified approximately 13,150 MVA debtor accounts
with balances totaling $23.9 million and wages earned of $102.4 million during
the second quarter of calendar year 2014 that could potentially have been subject
to garnishment. We tested 10 of these debtors with accounts totaling
approximately $178,300 who had been delinquent on making debt payments for
periods ranging from 5 to 67 months. Our test identified 9 debtors with earned
wages totaling $86,000 during the quarter that could have been subject to wage
garnishment but CCU had not referred the debtor to the Legal Measures Unit to
6

--- Page 9 ---
initiate wage garnishments. Furthermore, there was no documentation as to why
these debtors had not been referred to the Unit.
Similar conditions regarding wage garnishments have been commented upon in
our six preceding audit reports dating back to 1997. CCU management advised us
that executing a wage garnishment is an expensive and lengthy process and that it
may take months or even years to obtain the required judgments and orders from
the courts. CCU further advised us that it uses its limited resources to pursue
debts that are likely to produce the best recoveries; however, its policies did not
address prioritizing accounts for potential wage garnishments once viable
accounts are identified. As of February 2015, CCU management stated that it was
in the process of developing such a policy. CCU estimates approximately 3,000
wage garnishments are performed annually.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DBM take appropriate action to pursue potential wage
garnishments from debtors in a timely manner and document all collection
efforts (repeat). For example, DBM should consider supplementing CCU’s
debt collection policies to provide guidance on prioritizing accounts for
potential wage garnishments.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 2
Controls over system access and sensitive personally identifiable information
were not sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over system access and sensitive personally identifiable information
were not sufficient. CCU operates the Revenue Plus Collection System (RPCS)
which is an automated application system supporting its collection operation.
Functions performed include the maintenance of key data including delinquent
account details, account balances, account collection status, and details of
collection actions.
 Approximately 1,500 users had unnecessary, direct file modification access to
certain critical RPCS programs and data files. As a result of this condition,
erroneous or unauthorized changes to critical production data could occur. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. The
State of Maryland Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT)
Information Security Policy states that agencies must ensure that only
7

--- Page 10 ---
authorized individuals (employees or agency contractors) have access to
confidential information and that such access is strictly controlled, audited,
and that it supports the concepts of “least possible privilege” and “need to
know.”
 A critical file in the RPCS contained approximately one million unique social
security numbers with associated names, addresses, and dates of birth in clear
text. This sensitive personally identifiable information is commonly sought
by criminals for use in identity theft. Accordingly, appropriate information
system security controls need to exist to ensure that this information is
safeguarded and not improperly disclosed. DoIT’s Information Security
Policy states that agencies should protect confidential data using encryption
technologies and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBM
a. restrict access to critical program and data files to only those users
requiring such access (repeat); and
b. encrypt all files containing sensitive personally identifiable information.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the following units of the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) for the period beginning May 23,
2011 and ending July 14, 2014.
Office of the Secretary (including the Central Collection Unit)
Office of Budget Analysis
Office of Capital Budgeting
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DBM’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, collection practices, accounts
receivable, payroll, and procurement and disbursement activities. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit included DBM’s administration of the Cigarette Restitution Fund and
State Reserve Fund that consisted of the Dedicated Purpose Account, the Revenue
Stabilization Account, the Economic Development Opportunities Program Fund,
and the Catastrophic Event Fund.
Our audit also included certain support services (such as payroll, maintenance of
certain accounting records) provided by DBM’s Office of the Secretary to the
Office of Personnel Services and Benefits. In addition, it included certain support
services (such as legal, internal audit, and budgeting) provided by DBM to the
Department of Information Technology.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DBM’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
9

--- Page 12 ---
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part of
ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted data from
CCU’s debt collection system for the purposes of testing accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DBM’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DBM’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DBM that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DBM’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DBM regarding the results of
our review of its response.
10

--- Page 14 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
(including the Central Collections Unit (CCU))
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Audit Period: beginning May 23, 2011 and ending July 14, 2014
Debt Collection Efforts
Finding 1
CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments from debtors.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DBM take appropriate action to pursue potential wage garnishments from
debtors in a timely manner and document all collection efforts (repeat). For example, DBM
should consider supplementing CCU’s debt collection policies to provide guidance on
prioritizing accounts for potential wage garnishments.
DBM CCU Response 1:
DBM CCU agrees that potential wage garnishments from debtors should be adequately pursued
in a timely manner. As noted above, the wage garnishment process is complex, expensive and
lengthy. DBM CCU uses its limited resources to pursue debts that are likely to produce the most
lucrative results. However, DBM CCU also recognizes that not all pursuits of potential wage
garnishments will result in collection of the debt.
In response to this previous audit finding, DBM CCU expanded our garnishment and suit staff by
seven full time employees. Additionally, DBM CCU’s Attorney General Staff expanded their
attorney and support staff. The result is that we now file over 6,000 suits per year and over 3,000
wage garnishments per year. Our attorneys have over 10,000 individual debts in the legal
pipeline at various stages in the above process. DBM CCU’s ability to completely eliminate this
finding is directly related to our ability to expand staff and reduce the burden of the garnishment
process itself.
Going forward, DBM CCU will continue to make the best use of its resources to collect from
debtors and will ensure that collection efforts and/or reasons for not employing a particular
method are documented. Further, CCU management has agreed to and is in the process of
establishing guidelines that prioritize accounts for potential wage garnishments.

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 2
Controls over system access and sensitive personally identifiable information were not
sufficient.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBM
a. restrict access to critical program and data files to only those users requiring such access
(repeat); and
b. encrypt all files containing sensitive personally identifiable information.
DBM CCU/DoIT Response 2:
We agree with the recommendations as follows:
a. The file modification access to RPCS was done in error. The user group containing the
approximately 1,500 users with unnecessary access has been removed. Direct file
modification access to critical RPCS programs and data files is now limited to only those
users requiring access to perform their job functions.
b. The critical RPCS file noted above cannot be removed in order for the RPCS application to
operate. However, DBM CCU utilizes software tools that allow secure and automatic transfer
of files as well as file encryption software to ensure encryption of critical, nonpublic personal
payment information. In addition, the new CCU Collection system, which is currently
planned to be implemented by end 2017, provides for full encryption.

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Jaime A. DeWitt, CPA
Wesley M. Elder
Charles H. Hinds, IV
Isatta B. Mead
Ryan A. Myles
Staff Auditors