Title: Maryland Health Insurance Plan


NOTE: Effective October 1, 2008, MHIP became an independent unit of State government. MHIP activities were previously subject to audit as part of the Maryland Insurance Administration.
Date: 04/25/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d15cc9d724560674506
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:24:52.244019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Health Insurance Plan
April 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Independence and Responsibilities 4
Financial Statement Audits 4
Potential Impact of the Federal Affordable Care Act 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Administrative Service Organization (ASO)
Finding 1 – MHIP Has Not Obtained an Independent Review of the 6
ASO’s Claims Management System
Finding 2 – MHIP Did Not Routinely Conduct Independent Reviews 7
to Ensure the ASO’s Compliance With the Terms of the Contract
Procurement
Finding 3 – Purchases Were Made From a Vendor Without Documented 8
Competitive Bids or a Current Written Contract
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Independence and Responsibilities
The Maryland Health Insurance Plan (MHIP) operated within the Maryland
Insurance Administration (MIA) until it became an independent unit of State
government effective October 1, 2008 pursuant to Chapter 259, Laws of
Maryland 2008. MHIP activities were previously subject to audit during our
audits of MIA. Our audit period begins January 1, 2008 to coincide with the end
of the last audit of MIA that included MHIP activities.
MHIP is governed by a Board of Directors, and operates the High-Risk Pool
Insurance Plan (the Plan) and the Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program
(SPDAP). The Plan’s goal is to provide access to affordable, comprehensive
health benefits to medically uninsurable residents of the State. The Plan is funded
primarily by assessments from both net patient revenues of acute care hospitals in
the State and certain nonprofit health service plans, and by premiums paid by
certain members. SPDAP provides subsidies to reduce out-of-pocket costs for
low and moderate income Medicare recipients enrolled in the Medicare Part D
prescription drug coverage. SPDAP is special funded by a nonprofit health
service plan entity (in lieu of the entity paying premium taxes) as provided for in
State law. All funds are non-lapsing and the financial activity is subject to an
annual audit by an independent accounting firm. According to the audited
financial statements, fiscal year 2011 receipts totaled $231 million and
disbursements were $210 million.
Financial Statement Audits
MHIP engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its statutory
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2008, 2009, 2010, and
2011. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that MHIP’s financial
statements presented fairly, in all material respects, its admitted assets, liabilities
and net assets and results of its operations and cash flows for the years then ended
in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the Maryland
Insurance Administration.
Potential Impact of the Federal Affordable Care Act
In March 2010, the Governor created the Health Care Reform Coordination
Council (HCRCC) to develop a plan for implementing the federal Affordable
Care Act in the State. According to the Council’s final report and
recommendations dated January 1, 2011, it anticipates that beginning January
4

--- Page 7 ---
2014, MHIP will be phased out as a state-run high-risk pool and will no longer be
needed, as insurance carriers will be required to enroll all individuals seeking
coverage in at least a basic benefit package.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of three findings from our
audit report on MIA, dated December 8, 2008, which related to MHIP. We
determined that MHIP satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Administrative Service Organization
Background
The Maryland Health Insurance Plan (MHIP) contracts with an Administrative
Service Organization (ASO) to provide benefit management services, including
enrollment, premium billing and collection, and the payment of provider claims.
The current contract is for a term beginning on July 1, 2007 and ending on June
30, 2014. According to MHIP records, during fiscal year 2011, the ASO paid
medical claims totaling $179.5 million, and for its services, MHIP paid the ASO
$10 million.
Finding 1
MHIP had not obtained an independent review of its ASO claims
management system to ensure that the related internal controls were
designed and operating effectively.
Analysis
MHIP had not obtained an independent review of the ASO’s automated claims
management system. Specifically, although the ASO transferred the processing
of MHIP’s activity to a different automated system effective July 1, 2010, the
system had not been subject to an independent review as of February 14, 2012.
Furthermore, the ASO advised MHIP that it did not have any plans to have the
current system independently reviewed. Reviews had been performed of the
system that had previously been used to process MHIP activities. The purpose of
the review was to provide assurances to all of the ASO’s customers, including
MHIP, concerning the design and effectiveness of internal controls related to its
processing of transactions for clients including its eligibility and claims
management and payment services.
Consequently, the system’s operational integrity could not be ensured and the
system could be vulnerable to a variety of exposures, such as third-party access to
critical system data. In this regard, the system contains demographic information
for individuals, including name, address, and date of birth, as well as sensitive
personal health information, including medical diagnosis codes and prescribed
medications.
Recently, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organization controls (SOC) pertaining to
security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy. Based on
this guidance, customers, such as MHIP, who seek to obtain assurances about
6

--- Page 9 ---
controls over their data, may now obtain from service organizations, such as the
ASO, an independent auditor’s report referred to as a SOC 2, type 2 report. Such
a report, which should be conducted at least annually, contains the service
organization’s description of its system and the results of the auditor’s
examination of the suitability of the system design and operating effectiveness of
the controls.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHIP obtain annual independent reviews of the ASO’s
claims management system (such as a SOC 2, type 2 examination) to ensure
the system’s internal controls are suitably designed and operating effectively.
Finding 2
MHIP did not routinely conduct independent reviews of its ASO to
determine if the ASO was operating in compliance with its contract.
Analysis
Although the contract with its ASO allows MHIP to conduct annual or other
formal audits of the ASO’s performance, during the period January 1, 2008 to
June 5, 2011, only one independent formal review of the ASO’s performance was
conducted. This review covered member enrollment and premium transactions
during the period July 1, 2008 through March 31, 2009. The report, dated March
24, 2010, disclosed instances in which the ASO did not terminate members’
coverage in accordance with the plan’s operating provisions for failure to pay
premiums for 60 days. In August 2010, MHIP’s independent auditor, in
conjunction with the ASO, confirmed that finding and estimated that the failure to
timely terminate membership resulted in the improper payment of claims and
related ASO administrative fees totaling $1.3 million, for which the ASO
reimbursed MHIP.
Independent reviews of member eligibility, enrollment, premium collections, and
claims processing are MHIP’s primary method to determine if the ASO is
operating in compliance with the terms of its contract.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHIP
a. conduct periodic (such as, annually) independent reviews of its ASO to
determine if member eligibility, enrollment, premium collections, and
claims processing are being performed in accordance with the
contractual requirements; and
7

--- Page 10 ---
b. take timely corrective action (such as, obtaining reimbursement for
improperly paid claims and removing ineligible members) when
deficiencies are identified by the independent reviews.
Procurement
Finding 3
MHIP made payments to a vendor totaling approximately $367,000, without
documentation of competitive bids being obtained or of the existence of a
current written contract.
Analysis
During the period from January 2008 through February 2011, MHIP made
payments to a vendor totaling approximately $367,000 for information technology
services, without documentation that competitive bids were obtained or the
existence of a current written contract, as required by its procurement policy.
Consequently, there is no assurance that MHIP received the best price for the
services purchased. Furthermore, an executed written contract would stipulate the
scope of work to be performed and provisions (such as, withholding payment) to
address contractor non-compliance or failure to perform work satisfactorily.
We were advised by MHIP management that, while much of the original
documentation could not be located, it was assumed that the vendor operated
under the scope of an agreement that was executed before MHIP became
independent of MIA. We were further advised by MHIP management that
disputes subsequently arose regarding the vendor unjustifiably increasing its
billable hours and not satisfactorily performing the agreed-upon work. As a
result, MHIP terminated its relationship with the vendor in February 2011 and
determined that approximately $140,000 is in dispute with the vendor.
Specifically, MHIP determined that the vendor owed the State approximately
$90,000 for overcharges previously paid by MHIP. Additionally, as of November
2011, MHIP had also withheld payment of several vendor invoices dated from
November 2010 to February 2011, totaling $50,000. MHIP is currently
negotiating a settlement with the vendor.
Although exempt from State procurement regulations, MHIP was required by
State law to establish written procurement policies and procedures that were to be
approved by its Board of Directors. According to its approved procurement
policies and procedures, contracts with an annual cost in excess of $100,000, are
to be competitively bid and supported by an executed written contract.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MHIP
a. execute written contracts and obtain competitive bids prior to obtaining
the related services, as required by its procurement policy; and
b. in consultation with legal counsel, take appropriate action to resolve the
aforementioned dispute and collect any amounts due.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Health Insurance Plan (MHIP) for the period
beginning January 1, 2008 and ending June 5, 2011. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
MHIP was established by law as an independent unit of State government
effective October 1, 2008. Previously, MHIP was an independent unit which
operated within the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA). The scope of this
audit included MHIP activities beginning January 1, 2008 to September 30, 2008
when MHIP activities were under MIA. The audit also included MHIP activities
since its creation as an independent unit of State government through June 5,
2011.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MHIP’s financial
transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our audit report on MIA dated December 8, 2008, which
related to MHIP.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by our audit included MHIP’s monitoring of the administrative service
organizations contracted to administer the high risk insurance pool and the senior
prescription drug assistance program, contract procurement and disbursements,
and payroll. Our audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel,
inspections of documents and records, and observations of MHIP’s operations.
We also tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for
background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not
independently verified.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to MHIP
by MIA during a portion of the audit period. These support services (such as
processing of invoices and payroll) were included within the scope of our audits
of MIA.
10

--- Page 13 ---
MHIP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MHIP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently and comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MHIP that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
MHIP’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MHIP regarding the results of
our review of its response.
11

--- Page 15 ---
APPENDIX
THE MARYLAND HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN
Finding 1
MHIP had not obtained an independent review of its ASO claims management system to
ensure that the related internal controls were designed and operating effectively.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHIP obtain annual independent reviews of the ASO’s claims
management system (such as a SOC 2, type 2 examination) to ensure the system’s internal
controls are suitably designed and operating effectively.
MHIPs Response
MHIP concurs with the audit finding. MHIP agrees with the importance of an independent
review of the internal controls of the ASO’s medical claims management system. Currently, the
ASO does obtain such a review on their pharmacy claims system. We requested that the ASO
perform a SOC 2, Type 2 examination on the medical claims system and they subsequently
declined our request. The ASO estimates that the external cost of a SOC 2, Type 2 examination
to be several hundred thousand dollars, plus several months of internal resource commitments
from their staff. Since there is no contractual obligation for the ASO to perform this work on
MHIPs behalf, costs to perform the OLA recommended audit will be borne by MHIP.
At the April MHIP Board of Directors meeting the Board approved the funds to perform the
audit. It should be noted that the ASO will arrange for all aspects of the audit, including
procurement of an independent audit firm, overseeing the scope of work and reporting the
results to MHIP. MHIP will request that a contract be administered with the ASO prior to the
release of any funds by MHIP to cover the audit.
Even in the presence of our insistence with the ASO to conduct the audit, they may still persist
in their denial of any formal request from MHIP to perform the audit on our behalf.
Finding 2
MHIP did not routinely conduct independent reviews of its ASO to determine if the ASO
was operating in compliance with its contract.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHIP
1. conduct periodic (such as, annually) independent reviews of its ASO to determine
if member eligibility, enrollment, premium collections, and claims processing are
being performed in accordance with the contractual requirements; and

--- Page 16 ---
APPENDIX
2. take timely corrective action (such as, obtaining reimbursement for improperly
paid claims and removing ineligible members) when deficiencies are identified by
the independent reviews.
MHIPs Response
MHIP concurs with this audit finding and recommendation. MHIP will hire an outside audit
firm to conduct a thorough independent compliance audit of the ASO. The audit work will
examine the ASO’s performance under the contract and applicable insurance laws. This will
include timely and accurate processing of eligibility determinations, enrollment, premium
collection, claims and other ASO duties under the contract. Although the Auditors have
pointed out actions for improvement, MHIP pursues recoveries due to overpayments of claims
and other performance standards as part of its day-to-day oversight of the ASO’s administration
of the Program. For example, under the terms of the Administrative Services Agreement, the
ASO is obligated to meet specified performance standards. In the event the ASO does not meet
those standards, liquidated damage penalties may be imposed. To date, MHIP has recovered
$227,803 in liquidated damages under these provisions of the Agreement.
Finding 3
MHIP made payments to a vendor totaling approximately $367,000 without
documentation of competitive bids being obtained or of the existence of a current written
contract.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MHIP
1. execute written contracts and obtain competitive bids prior to obtaining the
related services, as required by its procurement policy; and
2. in consultation with legal counsel, take appropriate action to resolve the
aforementioned dispute and collect any amounts due.
MHIPs Response
MHIP concurs and will comply with Recommendation No. 3. MHIP maintained three, separate
and distinct agreements with the vendor over the duration of three years. Each agreement
pertained to a narrowly defined scope of work. In 2008, MHIP became an agency independent
of the MIA. Shortly thereafter, MHIP adopted a procurement policy which was amended in
December of 2011. MHIP’s procurement policy requires competitive bidding prior to engaging
vendors when the projected expense of services exceeds certain dollar amounts. MHIP’s
procurement policy also requires written contractual agreements.
MHIP has resolved the issue with the vendor and will pay all outstanding invoices. The matter
has been resolved.

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Senior Auditor
Jennifer L. Thompson
Staff Auditor