Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Baltimore City
Date: 09/18/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745f2
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:36:03.702857
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Baltimore City, Maryland
January 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of the Register of Wills for Baltimore City,
its fiscal year 2014 gross receipts totaled $4,610,021, which consisted of
inheritance tax collections (net of commissions) of $3,029,207 and fees and
commissions of $1,580,814. The Office’s fiscal year 2014 operating expenses
totaled $2,938,513.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of four findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated October 12, 2012. We determined that the Office
satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Payroll
Finding 1
The Office overpaid two part-time housekeepers approximately $8,300 over a
one-year period.
Analysis
The Office overpaid two employees approximately $8,300 during the period from
July 10, 2013 through July 22, 2014. For a number of years, the Office has
employed two housekeepers to work a maximum of three hours each day to
provide daily cleaning services, such as vacuuming, dusting, and trash removal.
However, the employees were frequently paid for working an eight-hour shift
even though their timesheets reflected they had only worked three-hour shifts.
Furthermore, the Office could not locate timesheets for these employees for the
period from December 12, 2012 through July 9, 2013 (15 pay periods).
Consequently, we were unable to determine if these employees were
appropriately paid during this period.
A similar condition regarding overpayments to these two employees was
commented upon in our preceding audit report. As a result of that audit, the
Office reclassified the employees as part-time; however, the overpayments
continued because of a misunderstanding in how time was to be recorded for
these part-time employees.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. ensure that employees are paid only for hours worked (repeat),
b. maintain timesheets for all employees as required,
c. investigate the aforementioned missing timesheets and determine total
overpayments to these two employees, and
d. consult with legal counsel to determine the extent to which overpayments
can be recovered.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Collections
Finding 2
Controls over collections were not sufficient to ensure all receipts were
deposited.
Analysis
The Office had not established adequate controls over collections to ensure all
receipts were deposited. According to the Office’s records, collections totaled
approximately $4.6 million during fiscal year 2014, consisting of cash, checks,
and money orders received through the mail or collected on site from customers
paying in person. These collections consisted primarily of inheritance taxes and
other fees associated with the administration of estates.
 The Office did not restrictively endorse and record checks received through
the mail immediately upon receipt. Instead, all mail was held until the
following day, at which time it was opened and checks were restrictively
endorsed and recorded on a log. Although unopened mail was secured in an
office until the next day, several employees still had access to the collections.
 The Office lacked an independent verification of the initial record of cash
receipts to validated bank documentation. Specifically, one of the employees
who performed the verifications also had access to cash. Consequently, there
was a lack of assurance that all collections had been deposited.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office
a. restrictively endorse and record all checks immediately upon receipt, and
b. ensure that an employee who does not have access to collections verifies
the initial record of collections received to validated bank documentation.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Baltimore City, Maryland for the period beginning December 28, 2011
and ending August 14, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
5

--- Page 8 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, bank accounts,
payroll, and administration of estates. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report. Our audit procedures included
inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and
observations of the Office’s operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services (such as payroll processing, maintenance of accounting records,
and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the
Office of the Comptroller.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Office’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit also
disclosed a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
6

--- Page 9 ---
regulations. A less significant finding was communicated to the Office that did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor