Title: Public Service Commission
Date: 12/08/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745be
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:29:54.492991
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Public Service Commission
December 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or
disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor
December 8, 2016
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Public Service Commission
(PSC) for the period beginning December 17, 2012 and ending february 8, 2016.
PSC regulates public utilities (such as gas, electric, water, and telephone
companies) operating within the State. PSC also regulates common carriers
engaged in the public transportation ofpassengers in the State.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis
audit by PSC.
Respectfully submitted,
72
Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland $77-4$6-9964 Fraud Hotline $77-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Public Service Commission (PSC), which functions under the provisions of
the Public Utilities Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, regulates public
utilities (such as gas, electric, water, and telephone companies) operating within
the State. PSC also regulates common carriers engaged in the public
transportation of passengers in the State and has jurisdiction over taxicabs
operating in Baltimore City, Baltimore County, Cumberland, and Hagerstown.
PSC consists of five members who are appointed by the Governor, with the
advice and consent of the Senate.
In accordance with State law, the operating expenses of PSC are paid for by
annual assessments which are calculated and issued by PSC to regulated
companies. These annual assessments also pay the operating expenses of the
Office of People’s Counsel (OPC). OPC, which we audit separately, is
responsible for protecting the interests of residential and non-commercial users of
these regulated services relating to matters and proceedings before PSC and the
courts. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, the operating
expenses of PSC and OPC totaled $23.6 million and $3.8 million, respectively.
Exelon – Constellation Energy Group Merger
On February 17, 2012, PSC approved the merger of Exelon Corporation (Exelon)
and Constellation Energy Group (CEG), which includes Baltimore Gas and
Electric (BGE), resulting in CEG becoming a subsidiary of Exelon. The merger
was completed as of March 12, 2012.
Certain conditions were placed on these entities by PSC to ensure that the merger
was consistent with the public interest. For example, Exelon was required to
invest $113.7 million in a Customer Investment Fund for the purposes of
promoting energy efficiency and providing for low income energy assistance to
BGE customers. These funds are disbursed by PSC in the form of grants to a
limited number of selected private and governmental entities and, as of May 31,
2016, PSC had disbursed approximately $94.9 million, with the remainder of
approximately $18.8 million scheduled to be disbursed during fiscal year 2017.
Other conditions included, for example, a requirement that Exelon provide $30
million in funding for the State’s use in its efforts to realize an offshore wind
project, and a requirement to annually provide $7 million in charitable
contributions and traditional local community support over a 10-year period.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated July 8, 2013. We determined that PSC satisfactorily
addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of PSC’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances
of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to PSC that did not warrant mention in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to PSC. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Public Service Commission
(PSC) for the period beginning December 17, 2012 and ending February 8, 2016.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine PSC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, payroll, cash
receipts, accounts receivable, assessments charged to regulated utilities, and
PSC’s role in certain trust funds established by law. We also reviewed PSC’s
oversight of certain provisions of the Exelon – Constellation Energy Group
4

--- Page 7 ---
merger. We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding
audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
PSC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
PSC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Winnie J. Tenekam
Staff Auditor