Title: Department of Human Resources - Child Support Enforcement Administration
Date: 09/01/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742ce
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:45:02.797258
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Resources
Child Support Enforcement Administration
June 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401· 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department's
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Enforcement Procedures
Finding 1 – Required Follow-up Action Was Not Always Taken When 9
Withholding Payments Were Not Received From Employers
Finding 2 – Certain Obligors Were Improperly Excluded From the 11
Driver’s License Suspension Process at a Local Child Support
Office
Finding 3 – Certain Obligors Were Improperly Excluded From 12
Occupational License Suspension Enforcement
Finding 4 – CSEA Did Not Ensure State Licensing Authorities Took 13
Action to Suspend Obligors’ Occupational Licenses When
Requested
Local Office Monitoring
Finding 5 – CSEA Needs to Enhance its Monitoring of the Vendor 14
Responsible for Providing Child Support Services at a Local Office
New Hire Registry Contract
Finding 6 – CSEA Did Not Adequately Monitor the New Hire Registry 16
Contract and Did Not Verify the Related Invoices
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Human Resources
Child Support Enforcement Administration (CSEA)
June 2015
 Required follow-up action was not always taken for employers that failed
to remit wage withholding payments. Although CSEA’s automated
system prompted local offices to follow up with the related employers, our
tests identified instances in which the local offices failed to take such
action for extended periods (Finding 1).
CSEA should ensure that the local child support offices take appropriate
follow-up action when wage withholding payments are not received, as
required by its policy.
 At one local child support office, certain obligors who had entered into a
payment plan were excluded from the driver’s license suspension process,
due to improper case coding. Furthermore, our test disclosed obligors on
payment plans that were delinquent but were not referred to the MVA
for license suspension because of the improper coding. At this local
office, we identified 682 obligors with unpaid child support totaling
approximately $10.5 million, who had entered into a payment plan
(Finding 2).
CSEA should ensure that the cases for obligors in payment plans are properly
coded so that the obligors are subject to the driver’s license suspension
process if they become delinquent on their payment plan.
 Certain obligors were not subject to the occupational license suspension
enforcement process. As of September 2014, there were 487 obligors with
unpaid child support totaling $11.2 million for which, due to coding
issues, would not be subject to the license suspension process if their
circumstances change (for example, they become delinquent on their
payments) (Finding 3).
CSEA should reinstate these obligors in the occupational license suspension
program and ensure that the cases for obligors who have been identified as
having an occupational license are properly coded.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 CSEA did not ensure State licensing authorities took action to suspend
obligors’ occupational licenses when requested. Consequently, we
identified two licensing authorities who advised that they do not suspend
related licenses when requested to by CSEA. There were 165 obligors
who were referred to these two authorities and owed child support
totaling $2.6 million (Finding 4).
CSEA should follow-up with licensing authorities to ensure that obligors’
occupational licenses are suspended upon its request, as required.
 CSEA needs to enhance its monitoring of the vendors responsible for
providing child support services at one local child support office and for
maintaining the New Hire Registry (Findings 5 and 6).
CSEA should strengthen its monitoring efforts to ensure that the local child
support office vendor initiates timely follow-up action for delinquent
accounts. CSEA should also ensure that critical account adjustments are
properly supported and reviewed and that adjustments to payee information
are verified. CSEA should establish procedures to verify the completeness
and timeliness of the new hire registry information and the propriety of the
related billings.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Child Support Enforcement Administration (CSEA) is a unit of the
Department of Human Resources (DHR) and is responsible for operating the
Statewide child support program. CSEA provides services to both the
noncustodial and custodial parents, which include the establishment of paternity
and child support orders, the collection of support payments, and the distribution
of such funds.
Local child support offices and other state and local government agencies (for
example, State’s Attorneys’ Offices) perform various child support services.
Furthermore, a private vendor provides child support functions in Baltimore City,
which handles approximately 29 percent of the State’s child support cases. In
addition, CSEA uses the services of vendors to maintain the new hire registry
used to identify noncustodial parent wages on a Statewide basis and to centrally
receive, process, and distribute child support payments.
CSEA’s Child Support Enforcement System (CSES) is used to record child
support case information, including enforcement efforts, and to account for the
collection and subsequent distribution of support payments. CSEA also provides
financial and statistical data for management oversight purposes, and has certain
automated enforcement features to aid in the collection function.
According to CSEA’s records, during federal fiscal year 2014 (October 1, 2013
through September 30, 2014), the Statewide child support collections totaled
approximately $559 million, representing an increase of approximately 9 percent
compared to September 2010, and the CSEA open caseload totaled approximately
214,000. As of September 2014, the Statewide unpaid child support due from
obligors totaled approximately $1.33 billion, representing a decrease of
approximately 13 percent compared to September 2010. According to the State’s
records, CSEA’s operating expenditures for State fiscal year 2014 totaled
approximately $45 million. This excludes local child support office expenditures
which are included in a separate DHR budgetary unit.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 11 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated September 1, 2011. We determined that CSEA
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Enforcement Procedures
Background
Child support services are generally performed by the local offices throughout the
State with oversight and administration provided by Child Support Enforcement
Administration (CSEA) headquarters personnel. CSEA has several enforcement
tools that it can use to pursue court-ordered child support when an obligor does
not pay on time, or does not pay in full. These tools include withholding wages,
intercepting tax refunds, and seizing funds in personal bank accounts.
Child support collections in federal fiscal year 2014 resulting from the wage
withholding enforcement tool totaled approximately $395 million and accounted
for approximately 71 percent of total collections. The primary sources to
facilitate the identification of wages are the State’s new hire registry, which
includes newly hired employees as reported by Maryland employers, and wage
data received from the federal Office of Child Support Enforcement (OCSE),
which includes wage data from Maryland and other states.
Other enforcement tools include driver’s license and occupational license
suspension. State law permits the suspension of driver’s licenses by the Motor
Vehicle Administration (MVA) when an obligor is at least 60 days delinquent in
child support payments. State law also permits CSEA to request 14 licensing
authorities (such as the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation) to
suspend the occupational licenses1 of obligors who are more than 120 days
delinquent in their child support obligations.
Finding 1
Required follow-up action was not always taken for employers with wage
withholding orders that failed to remit wage withholding payments.
Analysis
Local child support offices did not take timely action for employers with wage
withholding orders that failed to remit wage withholding payments within 90
days, as required by CSEA’s procedures. While CSEA’s Child Support
Enforcement System (CSES) alerted the local offices to these cases, our testing
disclosed that caseworkers did not always follow up with the employers in a
timely manner.
1There are 14 licensing authorities responsible for issuing business, occupational, and professional
licenses (hereinafter referred to as occupational licenses).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Specifically, we judgmentally selected 18 cases with significant unpaid child
support totaling $734,000 according to CSES as of March 31, 2014. Our test
disclosed that, for 5 cases from several local offices, generally, CSES prompted
the applicable local offices on several occasions to contact the employer and
inquire about possible wage withholding; however, no such action was taken for
periods ranging from 3 to 26 months. The unpaid child support totaled
approximately $226,000 for these 5 cases. For example, for 1 of these 5 cases,
the obligor owed approximately $65,000. A wage withholding order was in
effect, but payments were not received from the employer. Although CSES
prompted the local office to contact the employer on four occasions between
October 2013 and July 2014, no contact (such as a phone call) was made. For the
year ended March 2014, the obligor earned wages totaling $92,000, according to
OCSE information recorded in CSES. For the remaining 13 cases, no additional
follow-up action was required because, for example, wages had been recently
remitted.
CSEA management advised us that the local offices do not always contact the
employers because past efforts have not always been effective. For example, the
employer may inform CSEA that the obligor is not a current employee. CSEA
management advised us that it is considering new technology to make its follow-
up efforts more efficient.
The aforementioned cases selected for testing were derived from the results of a
match we conducted to identify obligors who were subject to an active wage
withholding order and had wage earnings, but for which no child support wage
withholding payments had been received by CSEA in the preceding 90 days. This
match identified approximately 4,000 obligors with individual unpaid child
support balances over $500, which totaled $48.5 million in the aggregate. To
perform the match we obtained a file from CSEA of noncustodial parents with
unpaid child support (obligors), and matched it with the wage earnings file from
the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation (DLLR). We tested both of
these files and found them to be reliable for our purposes.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CSEA ensure that the local child support offices comply
with its policies by taking timely follow-up action (such as, contacting the
employers) when identified employers fail to remit wage withholding
payments.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
Certain obligors were improperly excluded from the driver’s license
suspension process at a local child support office.
Analysis
For the one local office where we performed testing, certain obligors were
improperly excluded from the automated driver’s license suspension process
based on the coding of the cases in CSES. State law generally provides for the
suspension of driver’s licenses by MVA when an obligor is at least 60 days
delinquent in child support payments. However, this local office removed
obligors from the process indefinitely by applying an improper code when the
obligors entered into a payment plan; accordingly, these obligors were not subject
to license suspension if they became delinquent on their payment plans. CSEA’s
policy states that obligors are only to be removed from the driver’s license
suspension process when a court order prohibits future suspension.
We tested 19 cases that were removed from the driver’s license suspension
process because a payment plan was established. For 7 of the cases with balances
totaling $143,000, the obligors did not make payments in compliance with their
payment plans and were at least 60 days delinquent. In addition, because the
obligors had been removed from the driver’s license suspension process, their
licenses were not referred to MVA for suspension.
At this local office, as of October 2014, there were 682 obligors with unpaid child
support totaling approximately $10.5 million that had entered into a payment
plan. As a result of this procedure, these obligors would not be automatically
subject to driver’s license suspension and could be improperly excluded from the
process if those individuals did not keep current on their payment plans. CSEA
advised us that this condition is unique to this local child support office and does
not exist Statewide, although we did not confirm this assertion.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CSEA ensure that the local office follows CSEA policy
and that cases are coded properly, including the aforementioned cases, so
that obligors who become delinquent on their payment plans are subject to
the driver’s license suspension process.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
Certain obligors were improperly excluded from the occupational license
suspension enforcement process.
Analysis
Certain obligors were improperly excluded from the automated occupational
license suspension enforcement process. State law permits the suspension of
occupational licenses of obligors who are more than 120 days delinquent in child
support obligations. According to CSEA management and its policy, there are
very limited instances (such as, mistaken identity) in which obligors should be
excluded from this enforcement process. According to CSEA’s records, as of
September 2014, 4,479 obligors had an active occupational license.
Our tests disclosed that certain obligors from multiple local offices with
occupational licenses and unpaid child support balances were improperly
excluded from license suspension enforcement based on the coding of the cases in
CSES. For example, certain cases were coded by the local offices to exclude the
license suspension process because the obligor had an inactive license. As a
result, if the obligor subsequently reactivated the license, the obligor would not be
subject to the automated referral to the applicable licensing authority for
suspension. As of September 2014, there were 281 obligors with occupational
licenses and unpaid child support totaling approximately $6.8 million who were
excluded from the automated referral process based on the coding in CSES.
In addition, in July 2013, CSEA discovered that obligors whose licenses were
previously suspended and subsequently reinstated after child support payments
were made were improperly excluded from future occupational license suspension
enforcement. After CSEA became aware of the situation, it began a monthly
batch process to change the coding in CSES so these obligors would be subject to
the occupational license suspension enforcement process if circumstances change
(for example, they become delinquent on their payments); however, CSEA
discontinued this monthly process after December 2013 and could not provide an
explanation. We noted that, as of September 2014, the case coding for 206
obligors with unpaid child support totaling $4.4 million had not been corrected in
CSES and, therefore, these obligors were not subject to occupational license
suspension enforcement. These 206 obligors are in addition to the
aforementioned 281 obligors.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CSEA
a. reinstate the aforementioned obligors in the license suspension
enforcement process, and
12

--- Page 15 ---
b. ensure that the cases for obligors who have been identified as having an
occupational license are properly coded and are only removed from the
occupational license suspension enforcement process for reasons allowed
by its policy.
Finding 4
CSEA did not determine whether State licensing authorities took action to
suspend obligors’ occupational licenses when requested.
Analysis
CSEA did not determine whether licensing authorities took action to suspend
obligors’ occupational licenses when requested. According to its records, during
our audit period, CSEA requested the various licensing authorities to suspend the
occupational licenses of 1,894 obligors who owed child support totaling
approximately $31.5 million as of October 2014. However, CSEA did not
routinely follow up with these authorities when notification or confirmation of the
requested license suspension was not received.
Our test of 10 cases for one local office in which license suspensions were
requested disclosed that, for 7 cases, CSEA did not take follow-up action when
the authorities did not provide notification or confirmation that the licenses were
suspended, as required. We contacted the relevant licensing authorities and were
advised that, for 5 cases, the licenses had not been suspended.
For two of the five cases, the authorities advised that the failure to suspend the
licenses was their oversight. The remaining three cases related to a cab driver’s
license issued by the Public Service Commission (PSC) and vehicle sales licenses
issued by MVA. Both licensing authorities advised that they do not suspend these
licenses when requested by CSEA. While the PSC did not provide a sound
explanation, MVA stated that it did not suspend the licenses because it was
concerned that, because of timing issues, it could erroneously suspend a license
after an obligor became compliant. CSEA was unaware that these two authorities
were not suspending occupational licenses, as required. According to CSEA’s
records, as of October 2014, CSEA had referred for suspension 48 obligors with
an active cab driver’s license and 117 obligors with an active vehicle sales
license, who collectively owed child support totaling approximately $2.6 million.
State law and memoranda of understanding (MOUs) between CSEA and the
authorities generally require the authorities to suspend licenses upon CSEA’s
request. State regulations further require the licensing authorities to notify CSEA
of the suspension effective date.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CSEA follow up with licensing authorities that do not
notify CSEA of requested suspensions of obligors’ occupational licenses
(including cab driver’s licenses and vehicle sales licenses), as required.
Local Office Contract Monitoring
Finding 5
CSEA needs to enhance its monitoring of the vendor responsible for
providing all child support services at a local child support office.
Analysis
CSEA needs to enhance its monitoring efforts over the vendor responsible for
providing all child support services at one local office. While CSEA had
procedures to monitor vendor performance on certain aspects of the services
provided, CSEA needs to improve monitoring with respect to the vendor’s follow-
up on delinquent obligor accounts, and controls over adjustments to account
balances and changes to payee information.
 Although CSEA performed a quarterly review process to ensure that the
vendor complied with its policies and contractual requirements, including
enforcement efforts, our review disclosed that this process did not sufficiently
address the actions taken by the vendor to address delinquent obligors.
Specifically, CSEA’s review did not target the vendor’s actions with respect
to cases listed on the CSES delinquency report, which identifies cases with
child support balances that have been outstanding for more than 90 days.
According to CSEA policy, the vendor at this local office is required to follow
up with the obligors within 30 days for cases that have been delinquent for
more than 90 days.
We judgmentally selected 15 cases from the January 2014 CSES delinquency
report, with higher delinquent balances totaling $144,000. Our tests of those
cases disclosed that, for 9 cases with delinquent balances totaling $62,000, the
local office had not initiated documented follow-up with the obligors in a
timely manner. Delays in performing adequate follow-up action for 7 cases
with balances totaling $45,000 ranged from 24 to 184 days. For the remaining
2 cases, with balances totaling $17,000, no follow-up action had been taken as
of September 2014. According to CSEA’s records, this local office had
12,220 cases that were delinquent for more than 90 days as of April 2014.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 Additional enhancements in CSEA’s contract monitoring efforts are needed
with respect to controls over adjustments to obligor account balances and
changes to payee information. While the contract required an independent
operational review of cash receipts at the local office to be performed by an
accounting firm, this review did not include an assessment of these controls.
Our review disclosed that adjustments to obligor account balances were not
always supported and subject to an adequate supervisory review. We tested
15 account adjustments totaling $9.5 million that were processed during the
period from June 2012 through June 2014. In 7 instances, although the
adjustments were approved by a supervisor, supporting documentation (such
as, the related court order) was not on file to justify the adjustments; these
adjustments totaled $7.8 million, including an adjustment for what appeared to
be a clerical error of $7.6 million. CSEA’s policy requires supporting
documentation substantiating the propriety of the adjustment, such as the
court order, to be included with the adjustment request.
In addition, changes to payee information (name and mailing address)
recorded in CSES were not verified for propriety. Such changes typically
occur when a payment is disbursed to an obligor for a refund and the obligor
was not previously established as a payee. Our test of 10 payee changes
disclosed that none was subject to supervisory approval, as required by
CSEA’s procedure manual. According to CSEA’s records, 295 payee
information changes occurred at this local office during the period from
December 2013 through March 2014. Ensuring the propriety of changes to
payee information is critical. In this regard, in December 2014, an employee
at a different local office pleaded guilty to stealing more than $100,000 from
January 2008 to July 2013. This was accomplished, in part, by changing
payee address information allowing payment checks to be negotiated by the
employee.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CSEA strengthen its monitoring efforts over the vendor.
Specifically, CSEA should enhance its quarterly review process at this local
office and consider using the accounting firm to ensure that
a. documented follow-up action is initiated within 30 days for cases that
have been delinquent for more than 90 days, and
b. obligor account balance adjustments are properly supported and subject
to an adequate supervisory review, and adjustments to payee information
recorded in CSES are verified for propriety.
15

--- Page 18 ---
New Hire Registry Contract
Finding 6
CSEA did not adequately monitor the new hire registry contract and did not
verify the propriety of related invoices.
Analysis
CSEA did not adequately monitor the new hire registry contract and did not verify
that the related invoices were accurate. State law requires all employers in the
State to report newly hired employees within 20 days. This information is used to
identify obligors who may be eligible for wage withholding, which is CSEA’s
primary enforcement tool. CSEA contracts with a vendor to process these new
hire reports and to transmit the information to CSEA to be uploaded to CSES.
 CSEA did not verify that the vendor transmitted complete and timely new hire
data to CSEA. CSEA did not monitor the transmission activity for
reasonableness and did not review the employer reports on file during the
periodic site visits to ensure that the information was properly transmitted to
CSEA in a timely manner. The contract requires the vendor to process and
forward all records to CSEA within two days of receipt from the employers
and allows for periodic site visits by CSEA to review the completeness and
timeliness of its processing.
 CSEA paid the vendor’s invoices without verifying the number of records
billed. The contract provided for the vendor to be paid a fixed price for each
new hire submission. However, CSEA management was not capturing the
number of records which the vendor uploaded to CSES. During the period
from November 2013 through April 2014, the vendor reportedly processed
614,767 new hire submissions.
In November 2013, CSEA entered into a three-year contract totaling
approximately $925,000 for the maintenance of the new hire registry. As of July
2014, payments made under the contract totaled approximately $189,000,
according to State records.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CSEA establish procedures to verify
a. the completeness and timeliness of the new hire registry information
received from the vendor, and
b. that the number of records billed agrees with the number of records
received.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Resources (DHR) – Child Support Enforcement Administration (CSEA) for the
period beginning October 21, 2010 and ending May 4, 2014. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CSEA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included enforcement procedures (for example,
occupational and driver’s license suspensions and wage withholding), CSEA’s
Child Support Enforcement System (CSES) access and controls, monitoring of
local child support offices, and contracts. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to CSEA by DHR –
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll processing,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary. In addition,
our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of CSEA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including CSEA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
CSEA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also extracted data from CSES
for the purpose of testing various enforcement efforts. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
CSEA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect CSEA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to CSEA that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DHR, on behalf of CSEA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHR regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 1
Required follow-up action was not always taken for employers with wage withholding
orders that failed to remit wage withholding payments.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CSEA ensure that the local child support offices comply with its
policies by taking timely follow-up action (such as, contacting the employers) when
identified employers fail to remit wage withholding payments.
The Department’s Response: CSEA agrees with the finding.
From a review of the 4,022 obligors referenced above, 25 of the aforementioned obligor’s cases
were closed at the time of the review with no balance due. Furthermore, 54% of the 4,022
obligor’s cases received a payment prior to or within 90 days after receipt of the DLLR file
referenced.1
Additionally, CSEA conducted a detailed review specifically of the five cases cited. CSEA
determined that income withholding has been in effect in two cases since December, 2014 and in
another case since May, 2014. An interstate action was filed in one case and payments have
been consistently received from Pennsylvania since December, 2014. In the remaining case the
obligor’s place of employment, if any, is unknown.
Furthermore, for clarification, CSEA management did not advise the Office of Legislative Audits
(OLA) that the local offices do not always contact the employers because past efforts have not
always been effective. Rather, CSEA informed OLA that the administration had determined the
Daily Manual Review report is ineffective due to a large proportion of false positives.
Therefore, CSEA’s management implemented processes to enhance automation which is
expected to improve the effectiveness of the program. In lieu of working the Daily Manual
Review report, the following improvements have either been implemented or are in
development.
a. On July 25, 2014, CSEA enhanced the language of the employer delinquency notices, and
now sends three successive notices to an employer who appears to have not complied with
previously sent IWO. (PRJ -4100)
b. CSEA collaborated with the University of Maryland, College Park to develop a
comprehensive case management tool (dashboard) for employees to use. The dashboard
enables staff to identify cases where earnings withholding orders have been sent to
employers but payments have not been received. In December 2014, the dashboard was
implemented in the metro counties as a pilot and CSEA’s Management expanded its’ use as
1Auditor’s Comment: Based on CSEA’s response, the report finding has been clarified to indicate that no child
support wage withholding payments had been received by CSEA in the preceding 90 days. The 54% of cases for
which a payment had been received prior to or within 90 days, as cited by CSEA, does not specifically relate to
employer remittances of withheld wages, which was the focus of the finding.

--- Page 23 ---
of April 2015 to all DSS child support programs. (Action Transmittals 14-07 and 15-02,
respectively)
c. In August 2014, CSEA implemented an Employer Table. Specifically, when an IWO is
returned due to a bad address, the appropriate employee determines the correct address, mails
the IWO, and submits a request to update the employer table so that future IWOs for that
employer are mailed to the correct address. (Policy Alert 14-13) In December 2014, CSEA
has implemented electronic income withholding orders (e-IWO) (PRJ-0411)
d. A system modification has been proposed that will remove the “bypass” indicator if more
than forty-five days pass without a wage withholding payment being received. (PRJ-05383)
Finding 2
Certain obligors were improperly excluded from the driver’s license suspension process at
a local child support office.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CSEA ensure that the local office follows CSEA policy and that cases
are coded properly, including the aforementioned cases, so that obligors who become
delinquent on their payment plans are subject to the driver’s license suspension process.
The Department’s Response: CSEA agrees with the finding.
In 2007, the Maryland legislature enacted a law to assist low income obligors with getting back
on track with child support payments. The law authorized the abatement of arrears owed to the
state (arrears accruing when custodial parent receives public assistance) if the obligor paid
his/her monthly child support for a certain timeframe. This is referred to as the Child Support
Payment Incentive Program (PIP). If the obligor enters into an agreement to consistently pay
their child support, CSEA must exempt the obligor from State enforcement measures. It was
under this law that the child support worker coded the case to exempt the obligor from driver's
license suspension.
It should also be noted that a suspended driver’s license may be reinstated or excluded from
suspension in the event that suspension would be an impediment to the obligor’s current or
potential employment or suspension would create an undue hardship because of the obligor’s
inability to comply with the court order or disability.
Of the 19 cases cited, 12 were compliant with their payment agreements. All seven cases
identified as part of this finding have been corrected. CSEA worked with the University of
Maryland, School of Social Work to develop a statewide report identifying cases in payment
plans which were indefinitely removed from the driver’s license suspension process. The report
identified three cases, all of which have been addressed. As of April 2015, CSEA’s Quality
Assurance Unit monitors this report on a monthly basis to ensure compliance regarding the
driver’s license suspension process.

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 3
Certain obligors were improperly excluded from the occupational license suspension
enforcement process.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CSEA
a. reinstate the aforementioned obligors in the license suspension enforcement process, and
b. ensure that the cases for obligors who have been identified as having an occupational
license are properly coded and are only removed from the occupational license
suspension enforcement process for reasons allowed by its policy.
The Department’s Response: CSEA agrees with the finding.
Of the 281 abovementioned obligors with occupational licenses and unpaid child support, the
professional license for 192 of the obligors, or 68%, had expired. For remaining 89 obligors,
their unpaid child support totaled $1.6 million. Similarly of the 206 obligors referenced, the
professional licenses for 141 of the obligors, or 68%, had expired. For the remaining 65
obligors, their unpaid child support totaled $2.1 million. Since those licenses had expired, CSEA
could not have suspended them. Furthermore, of those 487 obligors, 188, or 39%, made a
payment during the month of September 2014.
Nonetheless, the following procedures have been implemented for all obligors:
a) CSEA implemented a process to correct the coding of the aforementioned obligors and
expect this process to be completed by end of July 2015.
b) CSEA is developing a change to the CSES system that will remove all codes which would
allow a case from being excluded from the automated suspension program with the exception
of a case in which a court order prohibits suspension. (PRJ-05169)
Finding 4
CSEA did not determine whether State licensing authorities took action to suspend
obligors’ occupational licenses when requested.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CSEA follow up with licensing authorities that do not notify CSEA of
requested suspensions of obligors’ occupational licenses (including cab driver’s licenses
and vehicle sales licenses), as required.
The Department’s Response: CSEA respectfully disagrees with this finding.
There is no statutory requirement for CSEA to determine whether State licensing authorities took
action to suspend the license. CSEA fulfilled its duty by referring delinquent cases to State

--- Page 25 ---
licensing authorities so that the licensing authority might fulfill its duty to initiate suspension on
qualifying cases. Moreover, even if CSEA took action to determine whether State licensing
authorities took action to suspend the license, as noted in the Attorney General's advice of
Counsel Letter, CSEA is without authority or power to mandate that suspension actions be taken
by the State licensing agencies.2
Local Office Contract Monitoring
Finding 5
CSEA needs to enhance its monitoring of the vendor responsible for providing all child
support services at a local child support office.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CSEA strengthen its monitoring efforts over the vendor. Specifically,
CSEA should enhance its quarterly review process at this local office and consider using
the accounting firm to ensure that
a. documented follow-up action is initiated within 30 days for cases that have been
delinquent for more than 90 days, and
b. obligor account balance adjustments are properly supported and subject to an
adequate supervisory review, and adjustments to payee information recorded in CSES
are verified for propriety.
The Department’s Response: CSEA agrees with the finding.
It should be noted that of the 12,220, 4,613, or 38% are incarcerated. These orders are not
enforceable during incarceration. Moreover, the above referenced theft was detected as a result
of CSEA’s existing internal controls regarding banking activities. Additionally, to strengthen
existing controls, effective January 2015 CSEA’s Quality Assurance Unit has been conducting
quarterly reviews of the payee change report on a test basis to ensure that adjustments to payee
accounts are adequate and appropriate.
As noted below, we have implemented new procedures that will ensure adherence to the
aforementioned processes.
2Auditor’s Comment: The finding did not state that there was a statutory requirement for CSEA to determine
whether State licensing authorities took action to suspend licenses. Since State regulations require licensing
authorities to notify CSEA of license suspensions, it would be prudent for CSEA to compare its requests for
suspensions to subsequent notifications received from licensing authorities and to follow up with licensing
authorities when such notifications are absent. These actions would identify authorities, such as those noted in the
finding, that are not assisting CSEA in its child support collection efforts by complying with State law. We do not
believe the cited Advice of Counsel means there is an impediment or a prohibition to implementing the
recommendation.

--- Page 26 ---
a) This local office is required to work the delinquency report per policy. CSEA’s Quality
Assurance Unit monitors on a test basis 5% of the cases as reviewed by the supervisors.
Failure to comply will result in the local office being put on a corrective action plan.
b) On a monthly basis, both the CSEA and the local office will conduct reviews of cases on the
Audit Adjustment report. This review includes verifying that all supporting documentation
was provided and that the correct actions were taken in the system to complete the account
adjustment.
New Hire Registry Contract
Finding 6
CSEA did not adequately monitor the new hire registry contract and did not verify the
propriety of related invoices.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CSEA establish procedures to verify
a. the completeness and timeliness of the new hire registry information received from the
vendor, and
b. that the number of records billed agrees with the number of records received.
The Department’s Response: CSEA agrees with the finding.
a) CSEA is in the process of developing conceptual framework to ensure the completeness and
timeliness of the new hire registry information.
b) A reconciliation protocol has been developed and implemented by CSEA’s management that
enables CSEA to compare vendor billed transmissions of new hire information to the new
hire information received by DHR’s Office of Technology for Human Services.
Additionally, any material discrepancies between the vendor’s billings and the information
received from DHR’s Office of Technology for Human Services are investigated and
resolved.

--- Page 27 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Robert A. Wells, CPA
Senior Auditor
Andrea G. Lynch Pyon
Calvin Matthews, Jr.
Lauren E. McLain, CPA
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Staff Auditors