Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Carroll County
Date: 06/25/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ccc9d724560674302
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:12:14.918244
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Carroll County, Maryland
June 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Carroll County and its incorporated municipalities and others, and
subsequently distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2013
revenues totaled $6,160,227. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $295,768 was distributed to Carroll County and its incorporated
municipalities,
 $147,342 was distributed to others, and
 $5,717,117 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The Office’s fiscal year 2013 operating expenses, which were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation, totaled $2,253,861.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds that, according to its
records, had balances totaling $242,493 as of March 31, 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of one of the two
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated September 7, 2011. We
determined that the Office satisfactorily addressed this finding. We did not
follow up on the remaining finding, which pertained to the issuance of business
licenses.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Office’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less
significant finding was communicated to the Office that did not warrant inclusion
in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Office. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court for Carroll County,
Maryland for the period beginning March 2, 2011 and ending March 31, 2014.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions) and bank accounts. We also determined the status of
one of the two findings contained in our preceding audit report. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Office’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Office by the
Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such as payroll,
invoice processing, and maintenance of budgetary accounting records) are
included within the scope of our audits of the Judiciary.
4

--- Page 7 ---
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Evan E. Naugle
Senior Auditor