Title: Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund - Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2013
Date: 06/19/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d724560674268
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:37:21.585472
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland 21201.
The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-970-
5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) was
established to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland in Maryland.
MALPF, which is governed by a Board of Trustees consisting of 13 members,
purchases land easements with Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
(Fund) revenue and places certain restrictions on the use of the land (for example,
the land cannot be subdivided for residential or commercial purposes). The Fund,
which is administered by MALPF, generally derives funding from State transfer
taxes, agricultural transfer taxes, and local subdivision matching funds. In
addition, MALPF uses proceeds from General Obligation Bonds to fund easement
purchases. No State transfer taxes were received by the Fund during fiscal year
2013 as a result of the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2012 which
transferred these collections to the State’s General Fund. According to MALPF’s
records, as of June 30, 2013, it had purchased 2,102 easements on 285,902 acres
of land for a total cost of approximately $617.7 million.
Financial Information
According to State accounting records, as of June 30, 2013, the total resources
available to finance future MALPF expenditures, including easement acquisitions,
were $27.3 million consisting of funds held in a Special Revenue Fund ($7.7
million) and General Obligation Bond funds ($19.6 million). During fiscal year
2013, MALPF acquired easements costing approximately $4.3 million. Available
resources increased by $4.5 million compared to resources available at June 30,
2012. The increase in resources available was primarily attributable to proceeds
of General Obligation Bonds of approximately $10.2 million received during
fiscal year 2013.
The Special Revenue Fund balance is reserved for easement acquisitions that
were approved by MALPF’s Board of Trustees, but were not yet presented to the
landowners, as well as offers accepted by the landowners that were awaiting
Board of Public Works approval or settlement at year-end. General Obligation
Bonds have also been issued to finance future expenditures. In addition to funds
available to fund future expenditures, MALPF holds other funds committed for
the payment of easements purchased by MALPF on an installment basis which,
according to State accounting records, totaled $6.9 million as of June 30, 2013.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated April 30, 2013. We determined that this finding was
not satisfactorily resolved and is repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Easement Violations
Finding 1
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) did not
ensure that all easement violations were resolved in a timely manner.
Analysis
MALPF did not ensure that all easement violation were resolved in a timely
manner. Violations may be noted, for example, during periodic easement
inspections performed by the counties, and include conditions such as an
improper dwelling on the property or a subdivision violation. Inspection reports
submitted by the county offices are entered into MALPF’s database, and MALPF
is responsible for notifying the landowners of noted violations and ensuring
landowner compliance. Although we were advised by MALPF management that
it periodically reviewed a report of outstanding violations from its database, this
review and the related follow-up actions were not documented. These reviews are
critical to ensure corrective actions have been taken by the landowners to comply
with easement terms.
According to a report generated by the database, as of June 30, 2013, there were
348 unresolved violations. Of these violations, 49 were considered to be
relatively high priority violations by MALPF management (including illegal
subdivisions and improper dwellings). According to the database, these 49
violations have remained unresolved for periods of up to seven years. We
performed various tests of the relevant data from the aforementioned report and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit.
The MALPF Easement Inspection Policy requires that the counties perform
inspections on a minimum of 10 percent of their existing State-funded easement
properties and 100 percent of their federally funded easement properties each
year. State regulations allow MALPF to impose civil penalties of $2,500 per day
4

--- Page 7 ---
per violation (up to a $50,000 maximum) on a landowner as a result of
uncorrected violations although no penalties were imposed during fiscal year
2013. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MALPF
a. perform appropriate and timely follow-up actions on outstanding
easement violations to ensure corrective actions were taken (repeat);
b. document periodic reviews of the database and related follow-up actions;
and
c. determine the status of the aforementioned unresolved violations and
impose penalties, if deemed appropriate (repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund (Fund) for
the fiscal year ending June 30, 2013. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. The Fund is audited annually
as required by the Agriculture Article, Section 2-505 of the Code. We also
determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included disbursements for the purchase of easements, as
well as receipt of agricultural land transfer taxes, and compliance with easement
terms.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Fund’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
5

--- Page 8 ---
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Maryland
Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) by the Department of
Agriculture. These support services (such as purchasing, data processing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of the Department.
MALPF management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MALPF’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to MALPF that did not warrant inclusion in
this report.
The Department of Agriculture’s response, on behalf of MALPF, to our findings
and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its
response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Response to Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund Audit
June 30, 2013
Finding: The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) did not ensure that
all easement violations were resolved in a timely manner.
Response: MALPF concurs that we have not done an adequate job of follow-up actions on
outstanding easement violations. Administrators have not consistently documented each contact
with the landowner/attorney and/or county program administrator. Specifically, no notes were
made when there were emails or phone conversations. In order to better document subsequent
activity, a status update sheet will be placed in each violations folder. The administrators and
enforcement coordinator will document each contact that is attempted or made.
Civil penalties were approved by the Maryland Legislature and are used by the Board of
Trustees as a means of encouraging landowners to move toward resolution of violations when
other means have failed; and, is seen by the Foundation as a last resort, not the first. MALPF
first tries to resolve violations amicably; but, when a resolution with a landowner cannot be
reached, MALPF requests the assistance of the Office of the Attorney General to file a lawsuit or
to seek a civil penalty, whichever action is deemed appropriate by the Board of Trustees.
MALPF staff has taken the following steps toward improving our process for violation follow-up
and resolution:
1) We have instituted a requirement that all contacts with landowners, attorneys and/or
county program administrators must be documented in the file. This file is available for
any and all MALPF staff to review.
2) We have inquired with MDA about the possibility of withholding funding for cover crops
or Maryland Agriculture Water Quality Cost-Share (MACS) Program from landowners
whose easements are in violation.
3) MALPF staff continues to hold bi-annual meetings with our Assistant Attorneys General
to review the list of violations, set priorities, and determine if the rating given to each
violation is appropriate.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Lauren R. Crue, CPA
Senior Auditor
Isatta B. Mead
Staff Auditor