Title: St. Mary's College of Maryland
Date: 11/19/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746c4
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:46:22.085296
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
August 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – Sensitive personally identifiable information applicable to 5
117,194 unique individuals was not appropriately safeguarded.
* Finding 2 – The College’s computers were not adequately secured 6
from malware and the College lacked assurance that malware
protection software was fully operational.
Finding 3 – Certain database security events were not monitored, and 7
documentation supporting independent reviews of direct changes
to critical tables did not exist.
Food Services Contract
* Finding 4 – The College did not ensure the accuracy of amounts 8
invoiced by its food services vendor which totaled $4.2 million
during calendar year 2015.
Leave Overpayment
Finding 5 – The College did not independently review accumulated 9
leave payout calculations, resulting in an overpayment of
approximately $10,000 for one individual retiring from State
service.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
St. Mary’s College of Maryland (the College) is a public, liberal arts honors
college that offers undergraduate degree programs in various disciplines and a
graduate degree in Masters of Arts in Teaching. The College is governed by a
Board of Trustees as authorized by the Education Article, Title 14, Subtitle 4 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. This law provides the Board with broad
authority in managing the affairs of the College, and specifies that the Board may
not be superseded in its authority by any State agency or office except as
expressly provided in law. Furthermore, the law provides for the College to
receive State general funds in the form of an annual grant. According to the
State’s records, fiscal year 2015 revenues totaled approximately $65.6 million,
which included a State general fund appropriation of approximately $18.2 million.
According to the College’s records, student enrollment for the Fall 2015 semester
totaled 1,773.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 19, 2013. We determined that the
College satisfactorily addressed six of the findings. The remaining two findings
are repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The St. Mary’s College of Maryland’s (the College) Office of Information
Technology provides information systems support to the College through the
operation and maintenance of campus-wide administrative applications, such as
the student information and financial system. The Office also operates an
integrated administrative and academic computer network that provides
connections to a substantial number of servers used for administrative
applications and related databases. The campus network also includes separate
file servers, Internet connectivity, and firewalls.
Finding 1
Sensitive personally identifiable information applicable to 117,194 unique
individuals was not appropriately safeguarded.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was stored in a critical database
containing, in part, student and employee information in clear text. Specifically,
we noted that, as of January 28, 2016, this database contained sensitive PII for
117,194 unique individuals in clear text. This included the individuals’ full
names, social security numbers and, in some cases, dates of birth. In addition, we
determined that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls.
This PII, which is commonly associated with identity theft, should be protected by
appropriate information system security controls. Best practices as noted in the
University System of Maryland (USM) Information Technology Security
Standards state that protection measures for confidential data can include the
deletion of unneeded confidential information, encryption or other equally secure
safeguards; and if encryption is used to protect confidential information, then
certain encryption standards must be used.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the College
a. perform a complete inventory of its systems and identify all sensitive PII,
b. determine if it is necessary to retain this PII and delete all unnecessary
PII,
c. determine if this sensitive information is properly protected by
encryption or other equally secure safeguards, and
5

--- Page 8 ---
d. comply with the aforementioned USM IT Security Standards to control
and properly secure all sensitive PII.
Finding 2
The College’s computers were not adequately secured from malware, and the
College lacked assurance that malware protection software was operational
on all of its workstations and servers.
Analysis
The College’s computers were not adequately secured from malware, and the
College lacked assurance that malware protection software was operational on all
of its workstations and servers.
 Although the College had procedures requiring written authorization for users
(other than system and network administrators) to have administrative rights
on their local workstations, for 36 of 100 workstations tested the users were
inappropriately given administrative rights without such written
authorizations. As a result, if the workstations used by these 36 employees
were infected with malware, the malware would run with administrative rights
and expose these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights.
 Certain workstations had not been updated with the latest releases for software
products that are known to have significant security-related vulnerabilities.
Although the vendors for these software products frequently provide software
patches to address these vulnerabilities, the College had not updated all of its
workstations for these patches. For example, 9 of 10 workstations tested were
running older versions of three commonly vulnerable applications which were
outdated up to 31 months.
 As of February 22, 2016, the College’s malware protection tool reported that
the Campus network included 314 computers that did not have malware
protection software installed. College personnel advised us that this
information was unreliable because it included numerous retired computers
that had not been removed from the College’s network directory of computers
and that certain computers were configured to report to an outdated malware
protection tool rather than the current malware protection tool. As a result,
the College did not know the number or identity of computers that did not
have malware protection software installed. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Best practices, as noted in the USM Information Technology Security Standards,
state that standard virus protection programs must be installed, updated, and
maintained on all computers.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that administrative rights on its workstations are restricted to
system and network administrators and those employees authorized in
writing to have such rights;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates for
commonly vulnerable applications on all of its workstations; and
c. ensure, on a ongoing basis, that all of its computers are running current
versions of its malware protection software (repeat).
Finding 3
Certain database security events were not monitored and documentation
supporting independent reviews of direct changes to critical tables did not
exist.
Analysis
Certain database security events were not monitored and documentation
supporting independent reviews of direct changes to critical tables did not exist.
 Although security and audit events for the database supporting the student
information and financial system were logged, we were advised that reports of
this logged activity were not generated for subsequent review. As a result,
improper and/or unauthorized changes to database security and audit settings
would not be detected by management.
 Although College personnel advised that independent reviews of reports of
direct changes to 42 critical student information and financial system database
tables were performed, these reviews were not documented. As a result, there
was no assurance that these reviews were performed. Therefore, unauthorized
modifications to critical database tables may not be detected by management.
Best practices as noted in the USM Information Technology Security Standards
require institutions to maintain appropriate audit trails of events and actions
related to critical applications and data and further require that these actions be
independently reviewed and documented.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the College
a. generate reports of security and audit events for the database supporting
the student information and financial system; and
b. perform periodic independent reviews of these security and audit event
reports and direct changes to critical database tables, document these
reviews, and retain the documentation for future reference.
Food Services Contract
Finding 4
The College did not ensure the propriety of amounts invoiced by its food
services vendor before payment. Calendar year 2015 invoices totaled $4.2
million.
Analysis
The College paid its food services vendor without ensuring the propriety of
invoices submitted. The food services contract provided for the College to
reimburse the vendor that operated its dining services facilities for certain costs
incurred (primarily labor costs and the cost of goods sold such as food and
beverages) that exceeded the revenue collected by the vendor (such as from
catered services). However, the College did not routinely obtain and review
detailed documentation to support the invoiced costs. As a result, the propriety of
the invoiced costs was not sufficiently verified before payment. Rather, the
College’s review was generally limited to ensuring that the amounts charged were
within the contractor’s approved annual budget.
College management advised us that, because of the complexity of the invoices,
the College only obtained documentation from the food services vendor for three
weekly invoices each year and used that documentation to verify the propriety of
amounts billed. For example, in calendar year 2015, the College verified just
three invoices totaling $249,000 of the 52 invoices that the College paid the
vendor totaling approximately $4.2 million. Furthermore, our review of the
College’s verification of one of these invoices totaling $47,675 disclosed that
there was no documentation supporting charges totaling $15,200 included on that
invoice. For example, the College represented that it had verified labor charges,
but the documentation obtained did not support the amount invoiced, and the
College could not explain the discrepancy.
In July 2013, the College entered into a two-year contract (with five one-year
renewal options), with a base term valued at approximately $8.7 million for
8

--- Page 11 ---
campus food services management. This contract was awarded to the same
vendor that had provided these services since May 2005. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the College ensure that charges billed by the food
services contractor are adequately supported and verified prior to payment
(repeat).
Leave Overpayment
Finding 5
The College did not independently review accumulated leave payout
calculations, resulting in an overpayment of approximately $10,000 for one
individual retiring from State service.
Analysis
The College did not have a procedure to require that calculations of accumulated
leave payouts for employees leaving State service be independently reviewed for
propriety. Our review of two leave payouts totaling $40,000 disclosed that the
College incorrectly calculated a leave payout for one individual who retired from
State service, resulting in an overpayment of $9,924.
Specifically, the College paid this individual $38,118 for 630 hours of unused
annual leave, which included 564 hours of unused leave carried forward from the
preceding year. However, State law only allows payments for up to 400 hours of
leave from prior years, as well as for leave earned in the current year, which
would have resulted in a payout of $28,194, indicating an overpayment of $9,924.
Although the College is exempt from the aforementioned State law, this
individual was employed by another State agency but was assigned to work at the
College and, therefore, was subject to this law.
We were advised by College management that it was unaware of the State laws
applicable to this individual so it paid the employee for the total leave balance.
However, this approach was also not consistent with the College’s own policy
which was more restrictive than the State law and would have limited the
payment to this employee to $11,497 (resulting in an overpayment of $26,621).
College management further advised us that it will not attempt to recover this
overpayment because the individual could have taken the unused leave prior to
retirement. However, the individual did not use the leave and would not have
9

--- Page 12 ---
been able to use all of the leave under State regulations. Specifically, the
regulations provide that, once an employee has given notice of resignation, the
employee may not use more than 10 days of annual, personal, or compensatory
leave, or any combination of those types of leave, between the time notice is
given and the effective date of resignation.
In light of these circumstances, we discussed this matter with the Office of the
Attorney General. The Office has agreed to consider performing additional
follow-up action, including possible recovery of the funds.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the College
a. ensure that calculations of accumulated leave payouts are subject to a
documented independent review and approval;
b. ensure future annual leave payouts are calculated in accordance with
State law or College policy, as appropriate; and
c. in conjunction with the Office of the Attorney General, take appropriate
follow-up actions including pursuing the recovery of the aforementioned
overpayment.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of St. Mary’s College of Maryland
(the College) for the period beginning July 1, 2012 and ending August 23, 2015.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the College’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, cash receipts, information systems security and control, payroll,
student financial aid, and corporate purchasing cards. Our audit included certain
support services (such as payment processing, payroll processing, maintenance of
personnel and accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by the
College to the Historic St. Mary’s City Commission. We also determined the
status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of the College’s compliance with those laws and regulations because
the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit
such programs administered by State agencies, including the College.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
College’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
11

--- Page 14 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from the College’s financial system for
the purpose of testing certain areas, such as student accounts receivable and
financial aid. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The College’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of
assets and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the College’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the College that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
The response from the College to our findings and recommendations is included
as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the College
regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
St. Mary’s College of Maryland
Agency Response to Draft Audit Report
for the Period Beginning July 1, 2012 and Ending August 23, 2015
Finding 1 – Sensitive personally identifiable information applicable to 117,194 unique
individuals was not appropriately safeguarded.
Response: The College agrees with this finding. We have taken steps to mask certain personally
identifiable information in the database for users that do not require that information to perform
their job duties. The College expects to have all recommendations implemented by January
2017.
Finding 2 – The College’s computers were not adequately secured from malware and the
College lacked assurance that malware protection software was fully operational.
Response: The College agrees with this finding. Work has begun on all recommendations
ensuring limited and documented access for user administrative rights, applying critical security
related updates for commonly vulnerable applications to all workstations, and ensuring all
computers are running current versions of malware protection software. The College expects to
have all recommendations implemented by November 2016.
Finding 3 – Certain database security events were not monitored, and documentation
supporting independent reviews of direct changes to critical tables did not exist.
Response: The College agrees with this finding and has implemented the recommendations to
generate reports of security and audit events, provide independent reviews of the reports, and
document the reviews.
Finding 4 – The College did not ensure the accuracy of amounts invoiced by its food
services vendor which totaled $4.2 million during calendar year 2015.
Response: The College agrees to perform additional verification of charges billed by the food
service vendor. The College and OLA have agreed on specific procedures which will be
implemented by October 2016. The major points of the agreed upon procedure is that the
College will verify direct labor charges on a bi-weekly basis and will randomly select a limited
number of significant cost of goods sold items each week for verification.
Finding 5 – The College did not independently review accumulated leave payout
calculations, resulting in an overpayment of approximately $10,000 for one individual
retiring from State service.
Response: The College agrees that future annual leave payouts are to be calculated in
accordance with College policy. The College will implement procedures to ensure that payout of
accrued leave does not exceed the number of allowed hours.
Further, the College has contacted the Office of Attorney General and will coordinate any
additional follow-up action on this issue as they deem appropriate.
August 16, 2016

--- Page 18 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Marissa L. Eby, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Matusala Y. Abishe
Amanda M. Jones
Staff Auditors
Steven D. Bryant
Robert H. Dean
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditors