Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Rosewood Center
Date: 09/23/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744f1
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:22:03.063268
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Rosewood Center
September 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
September 23, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Rosewood Center of the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene for the period beginning September 26, 2005 and ending May 11, 2008.
The Center provides treatment services to people who are developmentally
disabled.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during this audit by the
Center.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Rosewood Center, located in Baltimore County, provides treatment services to
people who are developmentally disabled. The Center (which is a budgetary unit
within the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Developmental
Disabilities Administration) has a licensed capacity of 225 clients, a budgeted
capacity of 195 clients, and served an average daily population of 159 clients in
fiscal year 2008. According to the State’s accounting records, total Center
expenditures were approximately $42 million during fiscal year 2008.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
We reviewed the status of the two findings included in our preceding audit report
dated February 2, 2006. We determined that the Center satisfactorily addressed
these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Center’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Certain
less significant findings were communicated to the Center that did not warrant
mention in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Center. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Rosewood Center of the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene for the period beginning September 26, 2005 and ending May 11, 2008.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
3

--- Page 6 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules and regulations. We also determined the status
of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Center’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Peter J. Klemans, CPA
Audit Manager
Ronnette L. Bailey, CFE
Senior Auditor
Kingsley M. Ndi
Staff Auditor