Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Regulatory Services
Date: 06/19/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d19cc9d72456067467c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:40:51.372779
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Regulatory Services
April 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Desehenaux ThomasJ. BarnickelIII, CPA
LegislativeAuditor
ExecutiveDirector
April 26, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofRegulatory Services, a budgetary
unit within the Department ofHealth and Mental Hygiene (DHMH), for the
period beginning March 25, 2013 and ending September 27, 2015. In addition,
other matters came to our attention during the audit that resulted in us reviewing
certain activities beyond the audit period. Regulatory Services consists ofthe
following entities:
• Health Professional Boards and Commissions (comprising 17 individual
boards and 2 commissions)
• Board ofNursing
• Board ofPhysicians
• Office ofHealth Care Quality (OHCQ)
These entities are responsible for licensing and regulating health professionals
(such as physicians, nurses, and pharmacists) and health care facilities in the
State.
Our audit disclosed that the Board ofProfessional Counselors and Therapists did
not properly track and monitor complaints received against licensees, resulting in
complaints not being investigated and submitted to the Office ofthe Attorney
General (OAG) for administrative and/or criminal action in a timely manner. We
noted untimely action for 9 ofthe 15 complaints tested, including 3 that had not
been submitted to OAG even though the Board recommended at least ten months
earlier they should have been referred to OAG for administrative action
(including license revocation). As ofNovember 2016, 136 complaints were still
under investigation or not yet investigated, including 91 that had been open for
more than one year. The timely investigation and resolution ofcomplaints is
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland21201
410-9465900/301-970-5900 Fax 41O9465999/3O1-97O-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
critical since licensed counselors and therapists continue to practice until any
action deemed necessary is taken.
The Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission (MMCC) improperly procured
license application evaluation services through interagency agreements with a
State university, circumventing competitive procurement and control agency
approvals. The structure and use ofthe interagency agreements resulted in a lack
ofassurance that these services were obtained at the most advantageous cost to
the State. For example, MMCC significantly understated the number of
applications to be evaluated, resulting in an increase in the value ofthe
agreements from $545,000 to $2.4 million. MMCC relied on Towson
University’s Regional Economic Studies Institute to renegotiate prices with the
hired evaluators without ensuring the cost increases were reasonable.
The Board ofNursing did not always take timely action to suspend the licenses of
delinquent noncustodial parents referred by the Child Support Enforcement
Administration as required by State law. In addition, as noted during our past
audits, OHCQ had not performed annual inspections for a number oflicensed
assisted living facilities and facilities for the developmentally disabled.
Certain boards had not established adequate controls over cash receipts. For
example, for 17 ofthe boards, employees who were responsible for handling
collections also had access to the licensing systems, which gave them the
capability to issue or renew the related licenses. These functions should be
separated to ensure collections are properly controlled.
The Board ofPhysicians did not adequately monitor a $2.5 million rehabilitation
services contract, and certain controls over the information systems used by three
boards were not sufficient to protect critical licensee data.
DHMH’s response to this audit, on behalfofRegulatory Services, is included as
an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to
us during the course ofthis audit by Regulatory Services.
Respectfully submitted,
Thomas Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Organizational Changes 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Licensing
Finding 1 – The Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists did 7
not properly track complaints against licensees, resulting in complaints
not being investigated and submitted to the Office of the Attorney
General for administrative and/or criminal action in a timely manner.
Finding 2 – The Board of Nursing did not always take timely action to 9
suspend the licenses of delinquent noncustodial parents referred by
the Child Support Enforcement Administration as required by
State law.
* Finding 3 – The Office of Health Care Quality did not conduct annual 10
inspections of certain health care facilities as required.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 4 – The Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission improperly 11
used interagency agreements with a State university to procure
license application evaluation services, circumventing competitive
procurement and control agency approvals.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 5 – Certain boards did not adequately control and account for 16
collections.
Finding 6 – Seventeen boards and commissions did not ensure that 17
employees handling collections were denied the capability to issue or
renew licenses.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Contract Monitoring
Finding 7 – The Board of Physicians did not adequately monitor a 19
rehabilitation services vendor and did not always obtain
documentation to support amounts invoiced.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8 – Password and account controls for the Boards of Nursing, 20
Physicians, and Pharmacy were not sufficient to properly protect
critical data.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Regulatory Services is a separate budgetary unit within the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) consisting of the
• Health Professional Boards and Commissions (comprising 17 separate
boards and 2 commissions),
• Board of Nursing,
• Board of Physicians, and
• Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ).
The various boards and commissions are responsible for licensing and regulating
health professionals (including physicians,
nurses, pharmacists, dentists, social
workers, and chiropractors) in the State.
OHCQ is responsible for regulating health
care facilities in the State. According to
the State’s records, fiscal year 2016
expenditures for Regulatory Services
totaled approximately $51.1 million. The
expenditures were funded by special funds
from licensing and registration fees ($32.2 million), general funds ($12.4 million),
federal funds ($6.0 million), and reimbursable funds ($502,000).
Organizational Changes
Effective October 1, 2013, Chapter 403, Laws of Maryland, 2013 created the
Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Marijuana Commission as an independent unit
functioning within DHMH. This law also created the Natalie M. LaPrade
Medical Marijuana Fund as a special, continuing, non-lapsing fund. Effective
June 1, 2014, Chapters 240 and 256, Laws of Maryland, 2014, clarified the
responsibilities of the Commission and provided for the collection of fees to fund
the Commission’s operating costs. Finally, Chapter 251, Laws of Maryland,
2015, effective May 12, 2015, renamed the Commission and related Fund to the
Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission (subsequently referred to as
the Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission) and the Natalie M. LaPrade
Medical Cannabis Commission Fund. The scope of our audit included the
operations of the Commission and the Fund.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Subsequent to the period covered by our audit, Chapter 739, Laws of Maryland
2016, effective October 1, 2016, separated the Board of Chiropractic and Massage
Therapy Examiners into two boards – the Board of Chiropractic Examiners and
the Board of Massage Therapy Examiners. The law change established separate
special funds for the two boards while retaining shared personnel.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report on Regulatory Services dated June 19, 2014. We
determined that Regulatory Services satisfactorily addressed one of the findings.
The remaining two findings are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Licensing
Finding 1
The Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists did not properly track
complaints against licensees, resulting in complaints not being investigated
and submitted to the Office of the Attorney General for administrative
and/or criminal action in a timely manner.
Analysis
The Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists did not properly track and
monitor complaints (such as, allegations of sexual misconduct, unprofessional
conduct, practicing without a license, and insurance fraud) related to some of the
7,800 active licensees under its oversight. Specifically, our review of the
complaint logs for three boards disclosed that the Board of Professional
Counselors and Therapists’ log contained incomplete information. As a result, we
conducted a more detailed review of this Board and noted that complaints were
not timely investigated and submitted to the Office of
the Attorney General (OAG) for administrative (such
Complaint Process
as license revocation or suspension, probation,
Step 1: Complaint is received by
reprimand, and fines) and/or criminal action.
Board staff and is required to be
Adequate tracking and timely resolution of
recorded in tracking log.
complaints is critical since licensed individuals
Step 2: Board reviews each complaint
continue to practice until OAG takes action.
monthly and decides whether to
investigate (or dismiss) complaint.
Complaints received by Board staff are to be
Step 3: Board staff investigates
recorded in a tracking log and follow a five-step complaint.
complaint process. Our test of 15 complaints
Step 4: Board reviews results of staff
received during the period from January 2014 investigation and decides whether case
should be referred to OAG for
through June 2016, disclosed untimely action for 9
administrative and/or criminal
complaints as of December 2016. These complaints
action(s).
were selected based upon the nature of the allegations
Step 5: Board staff refers case to
and the length of time the complaints remained open.
OAG for appropriate action.
 Three complaints (for an alleged unlicensed
practice, unprofessional conduct, and lack of
supervision) had not been submitted to OAG even though, between December
2014 and February 2016, the Board had recommended that these complaints
should be referred to OAG for administrative action (including license
7

--- Page 10 ---
revocation). As of December 2016, the Board staff should have referred these
complaints to OAG between ten months to two years earlier.
 Four complaints (two for sexual misconduct and two for practicing without a
license) were submitted to OAG between six months and one year after the
Board recommended the administrative action (including license revocation)
be taken.
 Two complaints received in March 2014 and recommended by the Board for
investigation still did not have completed investigations.
Although there were no formal timelines established for steps in the complaint
process, in accordance with State law, the Secretary of the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) had developed timeliness goals for complaint
resolution by various health occupation boards. A timeliness goal of 3 to 12
months was developed for the completion of a complaint investigation and a
determination to bring charges. The range is based on a number of factors, such
as the complexity of the case and does not address the individual steps in the
complaint investigation process.
The Board was not aware of the aforementioned delays since it did not
periodically review the complaints recorded on the log that tracks the steps in the
complaint process. The Board advised us that, after recommendation for
administrative action, a complaint should be referred by staff to OAG within a
few days.
We were advised by Board management that the referral delays were an oversight
due to not having enough digital storage media (such as compact discs) to transfer
the complaint files to OAG and due to staffing issues. Having enough digital
storage media does not appear to be a valid reason for not forwarding complaints
to OAG more timely. With regard to staffing issues for investigations, there was
only one investigator during the period of our review and we were advised that
the Board is recruiting for two additional positions to assist with the timeliness of
investigations and the complaint tracking process.
Board staff also did not always document critical information in the complaint
tracking log which would assist in tracking the timely disposition of complaints.
For example, the date the Board received the complaint had only been recorded in
the log for 16 complaints received since January 2010. Furthermore, as of
November 2016, none of the 15 complaints received since July 2016 (based on
the Board’s meeting minutes) had been recorded in the log.
8

--- Page 11 ---
According to the tracking log, 437 complaints were recorded during the period
from January 2010 to November 2016, including 48 complaints received in
calendar year 2016. For those 437 complaints, 185 were investigated, of which
79 were reported as being referred to OAG. For the remaining complaints, 102
were dismissed, 14 were referred to another agency, and 136 complaints were still
under investigation or not yet investigated, including 91 that had been open for
more than one year.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Board
a. properly monitor complaints (such as periodically review the tracking
log) and develop a strategy to ensure the timely disposition of complaints;
b. ensure that complaints are promptly referred to OAG upon the Board’s
recommendation for administrative action, including the three noted
above; and
c. properly maintain the tracking log and ensure it reflects all critical
information, including key dates such as initial receipt.
Finding 2
The Board of Nursing did not always take timely action to suspend the
licenses of delinquent noncustodial parents referred to it by the Child
Support Enforcement Administration as required by State law.
Analysis
Our review of the license suspension process for Child Support Enforcement
Administration (CSEA) referrals at three Boards (Board of Nursing, Board of
Physicians, and the Board of Social Work Examiners), disclosed that the Board of
Nursing did not always take timely action to suspend the licenses of delinquent
noncustodial parents referred to it by CSEA. According to CSEA’s records,
during the period from July 2013 to November 2015, it referred 236 delinquent
noncustodial parents to the Board of Nursing for license suspension. Our review
of the Board’s follow-up on referrals as of April 2016 disclosed that the Board
had not sent the written notice of the suspension for 88 referrals for periods
ranging from one to five months after being notified by CSEA to suspend the
licenses.
State law and a Memorandum of Understanding between the Board of Nursing
and CSEA require the Board to suspend or deny a license upon written
notification from CSEA. In accordance with State law, prior to suspending a
license, the Board sends a written notice of the suspension action to the licensee
to provide the licensee with the option to contest the suspension based on
9

--- Page 12 ---
incorrect identification. The failure to issue the notices timely prolongs the
process to suspend the license and could delay the licensee’s compliance with
child support obligations.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Board take timely action to suspend the licenses of
delinquent noncustodial parents referred by CSEA as required by State law.
Finding 3
The Office of Health Care Quality did not conduct annual inspections of
certain health care facilities as required.
Analysis
The Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) did not inspect certain health care
facilities annually as required by State law. Specifically, for fiscal year 2015,
OHCQ had not performed inspections for 308 of the 1,497 (21 percent) assisted
living facilities and had not inspected 132 of the 203 (65 percent) facilities for the
developmentally disabled. Similar situations have been commented upon in
DHMH audit reports dating back to 2004. For example, in the preceding audit
report of Regulatory Services, we commented that 55 percent of the assisted
living facilities and 73 percent of the facilities for the developmentally disabled
were not inspected for fiscal year 2012.
While the number of inspections conducted in fiscal year 2015 represents an
improvement from our last audit, OHCQ is still not in compliance with State law
which requires that inspections of these facilities be conducted at least annually to
ensure compliance with State and federal regulations regarding patient care and
safety. When deficiencies are noted, OHCQ initiates administrative action against
the facilities. If a facility fails to correct problems, OHCQ may impose sanctions
such as license revocation, fines, or other restrictions on the operating license.
According to OHCQ’s fiscal year 2015 Annual Report and Staffing Analysis
submitted to the General Assembly, insufficient staff has impacted its ability to
meet the annual inspection requirements. OHCQ advised us that it will be unable
to perform the required inspections unless additional personnel are assigned or
legislative action is taken to change the intervals for inspections. OHCQ further
advised that it had not initiated any recent actions to pursue additional staff or to
recommend a law change.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OHCQ, in conjunction with DHMH, develop a strategy
to ensure inspections of the various health care facilities are completed as
required by law (repeat).
Interagency Agreements
Finding 4
The Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission improperly used interagency
agreements with a State university to procure license application evaluation
services, circumventing competitive procurement and control agency
approvals.
Analysis
The Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission (MMCC) improperly procured
consulting and license application evaluation services for medical cannabis
growers, processors, and dispensaries through interagency agreements with
Towson University’s Regional Economic Studies Institute (RESI). The use and
structure of the interagency agreements resulted in a circumvention of control
agency approvals and a lack of assurance that these services were obtained at the
most advantageous cost to the State.
In July 2015, MMCC entered into an interagency agreement with RESI to
develop an application scoring and rating structure and to select subject matter
experts (SMEs) to review applications for medical cannabis growers, processors,
and dispensaries. In October 2015, MMCC entered into three additional
agreements with RESI to oversee and coordinate the evaluation and scoring
process performed by the SMEs.
RESI’s compensation was based on a fixed rate for each application received
which represented payments to the SME for its services as well as RESI’s
overhead costs for overseeing the SMEs. RESI was also paid for its direct
personnel costs, based on an hourly rate, to sift (review the applications for
adequacy), sort (assign the applications to the SMEs to review the applications),
and compile the SMEs’ scores. Initially, these four agreements had a combined
not-to-exceed value of $544,607, but were modified to increase the value to $2.4
million (see table).
11

--- Page 14 ---
Schedule of Interagency Agreements
Modified Agreement Value
Original
Subject
Scope of Services Agreement RESI
Matter Total
Value
Direct Overhead Experts
1 Consulting services to develop the
application scoring and rating
$80,000 $150,000 $0 $0 $150,000
structure, and to select subject
matter experts
2 Oversee evaluation/scoring of
135,975 48,290 135,236 290,830 474,356
grower license applications
3 Oversee evaluation/scoring of
81,470 43,000 122,249 262,900 428,149
processor license applications
4 Oversee evaluation/scoring of
247,162 188,000 254,778 926,265 1,369,043
dispensary license applications
TOTAL $544,607 $429,290 $512,263 $1,479,995 $2,421,548
Source: Interagency Agreements
Questionable Use of Interagency Agreements
Generally, the use of an interagency agreement permits one State agency to obtain
services directly from another, alleviating the need for a competitive third-party
vendor procurement process. However, the SMEs were not University
employees. Therefore, MMCC’s use of interagency agreements with RESI to
procure and oversee the SMEs was not consistent with State law requiring
competitive procurement for goods and services valued at $25,000 or more.
MMCC started the process to competitively procure all application evaluation
services as one contract (that is, to include medical cannabis growers, processors,
and dispensaries) and had paid a consultant approximately $22,000 to draft a
request for proposal (RFP). The proposal was submitted to DHMH’s Office of
Procurement and Support Services (OPASS) for review in April 2015. However,
MMCC never issued the RFP and, instead, entered into the first interagency
agreement with RESI in July 2015 and the three subsequent interagency
agreements in October 2015. MMCC management advised us that it wanted to
pre-approve the licenses by December 2015 and believed an OPASS competitive
procurement process, including review and approval by the Board of Public
Works, would take too long. MMCC management could not provide any
documentation to support this determination or the reason for the December 2015
deadline.
Agreements Were Artificially Split and Understated
MMCC artificially split and underestimated the anticipated number of
applications for the three interagency agreements for application evaluation
12

--- Page 15 ---
services, circumventing the Department of Budget and Management’s (DBM)
oversight. Rather than create one interagency agreement for these services to
evaluate all license application types as originally planned when drafting the
aforementioned RFP, MMCC created three interagency agreements, one for each
license type, with identical scopes of
work. MMCC also underestimated the
anticipated number of applications in the
agreements. For example, the agreement
for dispensary application evaluations
was initially based on an estimated 89
applications even though State
regulations allowed for at least 94
licensees. MMCC was aware there
would be strong demand for license
applications, as stated in the RFP, and
eventually received 275 dispensary
applications for evaluation. MMCC
could not provide us with documentation
for how it determined the number of
applications used in the agreements.
MMCC’s understated estimates are significant because all three agreements were
eventually modified to increase the number of applications at significantly higher
costs (see graph1). The average cost to evaluate each application increased by
$960 for growers, $1,335 for processors, and $1,001 for dispensaries. For
example, under the original agreement, the average cost to evaluate a dispensary
application was $2,608, but the average cost to evaluate each application under
the modified agreement was $3,609 – a difference of $1,001 per evaluation. We
were advised by MMCC management that the rates increased for the additional
applications to incentivize the SMEs to evaluate the increased number of
applications without an extension of time. We were also advised by MMCC
management that RESI renegotiated the costs with the SMEs without MMCC’s
involvement, and MMCC did not ensure that the basis for the cost increases was
documented and reasonable.
In addition, had the agreements been combined and properly valued, MMCC
would have exceeded the $500,000 threshold requiring it to submit the
interagency agreement to DBM for review and approval. According to DBM’s
1 MMCC actually received 145 grower, 124 processor, and 811 dispensary applications.
However, RESI combined applications when the same applicant submitted individual applications
for multiple legislative districts. The figures used in our report represent the amount of
applications RESI used to invoice MMCC.
13

--- Page 16 ---
policy for reviewing and approving interagency agreements, MMCC would have
been required to explain why the services could not be provided by the agency
and why it was appropriate to use RESI, what other alternatives had been
considered, and the impact on the agency mandates and operations if the
agreement was not continued. Although we were advised that MMCC disclosed
the agreements in its required annual reporting to DBM, it did not submit the
grower, processor, and initial dispensary agreements for review and approval
since each one was below the $500,000 threshold; the modified dispensary
agreement, valued at $1,369,043, was submitted and approved after it was
modified in April 2016. DBM advised us that it approved the modified agreement
and the related overhead rates described below because the work was already
substantially performed.
MMCC Did Not Determine if RESI Overhead Rates Were Reasonable
MMCC did not review overhead rates included in the three interagency
agreements with RESI to oversee the evaluation and scoring process by the
SMEs; the overhead rates ranged from 31 percent to 47 percent. Consequently,
the modified agreements included $512,262 in payments to RESI for overhead.
This amount is in addition to $279,290 in direct payments to RESI for sifting,
sorting, and consolidating the SME scores. According to DBM’s instructions for
reviewing and approving interagency agreements, any overhead rates greater than
20 percent are required to be justified by the higher education institution, in this
case RESI, to ensure the rates are properly supported and reasonable. However,
as noted above the justification for the modified dispensary agreement was not
submitted to DBM until after the work was already substantially performed and
MMCC had not taken any steps to ensure that the rates included in the three
interagency agreements were reasonable.
As of January 2017, MMCC had received RESI invoices totaling approximately
$2.4 million, but had only made payments relating to the first agreement totaling
$150,000. We were advised by MMCC management that MMCC had not
approved the remaining invoices because of a lack of sufficient documentation
from RESI to support the amounts invoiced.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MMCC
a. discontinue the practice of using interagency agreements as a mechanism
to avoid a competitive procurement process to obtain contractual
services;
b. discontinue splitting contracts (including interagency agreements) to
circumvent procurement oversight from control agencies;
14

--- Page 17 ---
c. ensure estimates, personnel costs, and any overhead rates are reasonable
when it is determined appropriate to use interagency agreements in the
future; and
d. approve the RESI invoices for payment once sufficient supporting
documentation is received.
Cash Receipts
Background
The Regulatory Services boards and commissions collected approximately $37.7
million during fiscal year 2015 (see table below). These collections were
received via credit card, lockbox, or by mail.
Summary of Fiscal Year 2015 Collections
Boards and Commissions
Credit
Board/Commission Mail-In Lockbox Total
Card
Board of Physicians $ 405,351 $4,490,148 $8,385,837 $13,281,336
Board of Nursing 1,062,562 0 7,604,858 8,667,420
Board of Pharmacy* 3,004,184 0 1,257,795 4,261,979
Board of Dental Examiners 631,112 0 1,922,383 2,553,495
Board of Social Work Examiners 481,359 0 1,231,866 1,713,225
Board of Chiropractic and Massage Therapy
364,180 0 1,034,080 1,398,260
Examiners
Board of Professional Counselors and
403,037 0 519,154 922,191
Therapists
Board of Physical Therapy Examiners 276,839 0 715,212 992,051
Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors 624,923 0 115,800 740,723
Board of Examiners of Psychologists 199,048 0 464,372 663,420
Board of Occupational Therapy Practice 120,749 0 501,920 622,669
Board of Audiologists, Hearing Aid
92,906 0 274,269 367,175
Dispensers and Speech Language Pathologists
Board of Acupuncture 95,971 0 212,997 308,968
Board of Podiatric Medical Examiners 95,965 0 208,950 304,915
Board of Optometry 43,463 0 234,466 277,929
Board of Dietetic Practice 87,238 0 189,244 276,482
Commission on Kidney Disease 169,615 0 0 169,615
Board of Environmental Health Specialists 104,475 0 0 104,475
Board of Examiners of Nursing Home
19,050 0 44,600 63,650
Administrators
Board for the Certification of Residential
32,767 0 0 32,767
Child Care Program Professionals
Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis
0 0 0 0
Commission
TOTAL $8,314,794 $4,490,148 $24,917,803 $37,722,745
Source: State Accounting Records
* The Board of Pharmacy instituted a lockbox in April 2016.
15

--- Page 18 ---
We performed a detailed review of the cash receipts procedures and controls at
the Board of Physicians, Board of Nursing, Board of Pharmacy, and Board of
Social Work Examiners, as well as a review of the segregation of licensing and
cash handling duties at all 20 boards and commissions with collections during
fiscal year 2015.
Finding 5
Certain boards did not adequately control and account for collections.
Analysis
All four boards reviewed did not establish adequate controls over certain aspects
of the collections process. According to State records, fiscal year 2015
collections for the four boards totaled approximately $28.0 million, including
$13.3 million at the Board of Physicians, $8.7 million at the Board of Nursing,
$4.3 million at the Board of Pharmacy, and $1.7 million at the Board of Social
Work Examiners.
Board of Physicians
The Board did not segregate critical collection duties. Specifically, the employee
responsible for performing deposit verifications had access to the related mail-in
collections. Additionally, the Board did not always deposit collections timely.
Our test of mail-in collections totaling $75,700 received on 10 days during the
period from September 2013 to October 2015 disclosed that collections received
on 7 days, totaling $68,800, were deposited between 4 and 7 days after receipt.
Finally, the Board did not perform a verification of the accuracy of the electronic
credit card payment data uploaded daily to the licensing system.
Board of Nursing
The Board did not segregate critical collection duties. Specifically, the employee
responsible for performing deposit verifications had access to the related mail-in
collections and did not document the verifications performed. The lack of
adequate deposit verification by the Board has been commented upon in our audit
reports dating back to 2002. The Board also did not verify that credit card
collections were deposited in the State’s bank account and did not ensure the
credit card collections were recorded in the State’s accounting records. Finally,
the Board did not periodically reconcile the value of licenses issued with the
related collections to ensure that all collections were accounted for and deposited.
Board of Pharmacy
The Board did not always deposit collections timely. Our test of mail-in
collections totaling $609,500 received on 10 days during the period from March
2015 to September 2015 disclosed that collections received on 9 days totaling
16

--- Page 19 ---
$564,300 were deposited between 2 and 11 days after receipt. In addition, the
Board did not periodically reconcile the value of licenses issued with the related
collections. The lack of these reconciliations by the Board has been commented
upon in our audit reports dating back to 2006.
Board of Social Work Examiners
The Board did not document its verification that mail-in collections and credit
card collections were deposited in the State’s bank account and did not ensure
credit card collections were recorded in the State’s accounting records. Finally,
the Board did not periodically reconcile the value of licenses issued with the
related collections to ensure that all collections were accounted for and deposited.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient controls over collections, including depositing
collections totaling more than $5,000 no later than the first working day after
receipt, performing an independent verification of collections to deposit,
recording deposited collections in the State’s accounting records, and reconciling
the value of licenses to the related collections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the applicable Boards
a. ensure that the employees responsible for performing the deposit
verifications do not have access to collections (repeat) and that the
verifications are documented,
b. deposit collections within one working day of receipt as required,
c. perform documented verifications that mail-in and credit card collections
were deposited and properly recorded in the State’s accounting records,
d. perform documented verifications of the accuracy of the credit card
payment data uploaded to the licensing system, and
e. periodically reconcile licensing activity with the related collections
(repeat).
Finding 6
Seventeen boards and commissions did not ensure that employees who
handled collections were denied the capability to issue or renew licenses in
the electronic licensing systems.
Analysis
Seventeen of the 20 boards and commissions reviewed did not ensure that
employees who handled collections were denied the capability to issue or renew
17

--- Page 20 ---
licenses in the electronic licensing systems.2 Specifically, employees who
handled collections also had been assigned system user functions that allowed
them the capability to issue or renew licenses in the electronic licensing systems.
For example, five of the seven individuals who physically handled collections at
the Board of Nursing also had the access capability to issue or renew licenses or
certificates.
Although we were advised by most of the boards and commissions that they did
not allow employees to both handle collections and issue or renew licenses,
having the aforementioned capabilities on the licensing systems still created a risk
that employees could issue a license and misappropriate the related collections
without detection. Furthermore, as noted in Finding 5, three of the four boards
reviewed did not have a process to periodically reconcile licensing activity with
the related collections, which could allow any misappropriation to remain
undetected.
We were advised by several boards that eliminating licensing issuance and
renewal capabilities for all cash handling employees would be a challenge
because of limited personnel. In this regard, the Board of Physicians and, as of
April 2016, the Board of Pharmacy use a bank lockbox account to process most of
their collections, significantly reducing the aforementioned risk. The remaining
boards and commissions had not evaluated the feasibility of using a bank lockbox
account to receive collections.
The Office of the State Treasurer maintains a banking contract to provide lockbox
services to State agencies. The various health professional boards and
commissions, in conjunction with DHMH, should evaluate the costs associated
with the lockbox account in relation to the related benefits associated with the
inherent control of checks being directly sent to the bank for deposit.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the boards and commissions
a. ensure that employees processing collections are denied the system
capability to issue or renew licenses, certificates, or permits; and
b. in conjunction with DHMH, consider the feasibility of using a bank
lockbox account to receive collections.
2 This condition was not identified during our review of the Board of Podiatric Medical
Examiners, Board of Optometry, and the Commission on Kidney Disease.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Contract Monitoring
Finding 7
The Board of Physicians did not adequately monitor a rehabilitation services
vendor with a $2.5 million contract and did not always obtain documentation
to support amounts invoiced.
Analysis
The Board of Physicians did not adequately monitor a rehabilitation services
vendor and did not always obtain documentation of services provided prior to
payment of the related invoice. The Board contracted with a vendor to administer
rehabilitation services to physicians and other health professionals enrolled in the
Physician Rehabilitation Program for alcoholism, chemical dependency, or other
physical or psychological conditions. The vendor is required to provide
evaluation, treatment referral, case management, and reporting of participant
compliance in the Program. The contract covered the period from January 1,
2015 through December 31, 2019 and was valued at approximately $2.5 million.
The vendor is paid quarterly in equal installments, which, according to State
records, totaled approximately $356,250 for the period January 1, 2015 through
February 17, 2016.
• The Board did not maintain documentation that it obtained and reviewed
supporting documentation from the vendor to verify that rehabilitation
services (such as chemical screenings and therapy) were being provided to all
program participants and to verify reported physician compliance with the
requirements of their individual rehabilitation plans. Specifically, the Board
did not compare participant rehabilitation plans with records of actual
treatment services provided to ensure that all the planned services were
received. The Board also did not obtain and review chemical screening
reports as required by the contract for individuals reported as compliant by the
vendor. The vendor reported in its quarterly reports that participant
compliance rates ranged from 88 percent to 94 percent during the first year of
the contract.
• Our test of two paid invoices totaling $237,500, disclosed that, for one invoice
totaling $118,750, the Board did not receive the required quarterly detail
reports for all program participants documenting the services provided prior to
the invoice being paid. According to the contract, if all quarterly detail
reports are not received, the contractor is considered to be out of compliance
and payment may be withheld.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the Board
a. obtain and review supporting documentation, such as rehabilitation plans
and chemical screenings, at least on a test basis, to ensure appropriate
rehabilitation services were provided to Program participants; and
b. ensure that quarterly detail reports are received for all program
participants prior to invoice payment.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
Fourteen boards and two commissions have licensing systems maintained by the
Health Professional Boards and Commissions’ information technology staff on a
consolidated licensing application database system. The remaining five boards
maintain licensing systems residing on servers located at each board’s office and
principally utilize application security to provide system security. Additionally,
several boards provide an online license verification service to the general public
and numerous boards offer online license renewals.
Our audit of these systems was primarily limited to the review of select database
system controls for the Board of Physicians and the Board of Nursing. Our audit
also included the review of certain other controls (including the review of
operating systems and critical application account and password controls) for
several boards.
Finding 8
Password and account controls for the Boards of Nursing, Physicians, and
Pharmacy were not sufficient to properly protect critical data.
Analysis
Password and account controls for the Boards of Nursing, Physicians, and
Pharmacy were not sufficient to properly protect critical data (such as personally
identifiable information). Specifically, we noted that password and account
controls over critical applications used by the Boards of Nursing and Pharmacy
did not comply with required settings prescribed by the State of Maryland
Information Security Policy with respect to length, complexity, age, history and
account lockout. In addition, password controls over the production licensing
databases used by the Boards of Nursing and Physicians did not comply with
certain password settings required by the Policy. For example, settings for
password age, length, complexity and history were not enforced for the critical
Board of Nursing’s production licensing database.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Given the results of our review of selected systems and the fact that many of the
other boards and commissions maintain sensitive licensee information, we believe
DHMH should ensure that all boards and commissions have established
appropriate password and account controls.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that
a. the three Boards implement strong controls over passwords and accounts
for critical applications and databases, in accordance with those
prescribed by the Information Security Policy; and
b. DHMH determine the extent to which additional password and account
controls are needed to protect licensee data for the remaining boards and
commissions.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of Regulatory Services, a unit of the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH), for the period beginning
March 25, 2013 and ending September 27, 2015. In addition, other matters came
to our attention during the audit that resulted in us reviewing certain activities
beyond the audit period (refer to Findings 1 and 4). Regulatory Services consists
of the Health Professional Boards and Commissions (comprising 17 separate
boards and 2 commissions), the Board of Nursing, the Board of Physicians, and
the Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ). The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine Regulatory
Services’ financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included health professional and facilities licensing, cash
receipts, contracts, corporate purchasing card expenditures, and information
systems. In addition, as required by State law, we audited the accounts and
transactions of the Board of Dental Examiners’ Dental Well-Being Committee
and the Dental Hygiene Well-Being Committee, as well as the Board of
Physicians’ Maryland Physician Rehabilitation Program.3 We also determined
the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to Regulatory Services
by DHMH – Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
included within the scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
3 The Board of Dental Examiners’ committees and the Maryland Physician Rehabilitation Program
exist to provide confidential support for licensed individuals experiencing physical, emotional,
mental, or substance abuse difficulties.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Regulatory Services’ operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions
were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers
risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical
audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of
the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from
which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card
Program (credit card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing
internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were
subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the data
extracted from these sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from various agency systems, including the licensing
systems at the Board of Nursing and the Board of Physicians and the inspection
system at OHCQ, for the purpose of testing whether licenses were properly issued
and inspections were performed as required. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
Regulatory Services’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
23

--- Page 26 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect Regulatory Services’ ability to maintain reliable financial
records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws,
rules, and regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to Regulatory Services’ that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from DHMH, on behalf of Regulatory Services, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
24

--- Page 27 ---
APPENDIX
STATE Of
Maryland Department ofHealth and Mental Hygiene
LariyHogan, Governor BoydRutheiford, Lt. Governor DennisR. $chrader, Secretaiy
- -
April 21, 2017
Mr. Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office ofLegislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
Thank you for your letter regarding the draft audit report for the Department ofHealth and
Mental Hygiene Regulatory Services for the period beginning March 25, 2013 through September 27,
—
2015. Enclosed you will find the Department’s response and plan ofcorrection that addresses each audit•
recommendation.
I will work with the appropriate administration directors, program directors and deputy secretary
to promptly address the audit exceptions. In addition, the Office ofthe Inspector General’s Division of
Internal Audits will follow up on the recommendations to ensure compliance.
Ifyou have any questions or require additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me
at 410-767-4639 or Megan D. Limarzi, Inspector General, at 410-767-5862.
Sincerely,
Dennis R. Schrader
Secretary
cc: Brandon P. Wright, Associate Director, Health Occupations Boards and Commissions, DHMH
Christine A. farrelly, Executive Director, State Board ofPhysicians, DHMH
Richard A. Proctor, Interim Executive Director, State Board ofNursing, DHMH
DeenaN. Speights-Napata, Executive Director, State Board ofPharmacy, DHMH
201 W. Preston Street Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Toll Free 1-$77-4MD-DHMII ITY/Maryland Relay Service 1-800-735-2258
—
Web Site: www.dhmh.maryland.gov

--- Page 28 ---
Stanley E. Weinstein, Ph.D., Executive Director, State Board ofSocial Work Examiners, DHMH
Tracey R, DeShields, Executive Director, State Board ofProfessional Counselors and Therapists,
DHMH
Patrick Jameson, Executive Director, Natalie M. Laprade Medical Cannabis Commission,
DHMH
Megan Davey Limarzi, Esq., Inspector General, DHMH
Elizabeth A. Morgan, Assistant Inspector General, Audits, DHMH
J. David Lashar, ChiefofStaff, DHMH

--- Page 29 ---
Agency Responses
to the
Findings and Recommendations
Licensing
Finding 1
The Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists did not properly track
complaints against licensees, resulting in complaints not being investigated
and submitted to the Office of the Attorney General for administrative
and/or criminal action in a timely manner.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Board
a. properly monitor complaints (such as periodically review the tracking
log) and develop a strategy to ensure the timely disposition of complaints;
b. ensure that complaints are promptly referred to OAG upon the Board’s
recommendation for administrative action, including the three noted
above; and
c. properly maintain the tracking log and ensure it reflects all critical
information, including key dates such as initial receipt.
Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists Response
a. The Board concurs with the recommendation. The Board is working to
address the timeliness of the resolution of complaints, and through the
Executive Director has been working to improve the tracking of complaints to
better monitor the timeliness of complaint resolution. The Board’s Ethics
Committee will monitor complaints by reviewing the complaint log
periodically to ensure timely disposition of complaints.
b. The Board concurs with the recommendation. The Board will refer all cases to
the OAG within thirty (30) days of the Board’s vote; however, on occasion
additional follow-up work is required after the Board’s vote, and before
transmitting to the OAG, which may delay the transmission. When such a
delay occurs, the reason for the delay will be fully documented and retained.
The Board will monitor the timely transmission of cases to the OAG through
its Ethics Committee during review of the complaint tracking log. The three
cases noted, that were not transferred to the OAG, have been transferred to the
OAG.

--- Page 30 ---
c. The Board concurs with the recommendation. The Board will ensure through
its Ethics Committee that the complaint tracking log is properly maintained
and reflects all critical information, including key dates such as the initial
receipt of a complaint. This will be implemented by May 2017.
Finding 2
The Board of Nursing did not always take timely action to suspend the
licenses of delinquent noncustodial parents referred to it by the Child
Support Enforcement Administration as required by State law.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Board take timely action to suspend the licenses of
delinquent noncustodial parents referred by CSEA as required by State law.
Board of Nursing Response
The Board concurs with the recommendation and has taken steps toward
compliance with the State law. In August 2013, the Board and CSEA entered into
a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) which outlines a multitude of steps for
the agencies to abide by before taking an action to suspend. The MOU has been
reviewed by Board counsel and is pending revision. In February 2017, the Board
hired an additional employee to address suspension orders and take timely action
to suspend the licenses of delinquent noncustodial parents referred by CSEA.
Finding 3
The Office of Health Care Quality did not conduct annual inspections of
certain health care facilities as required.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that OHCQ, in conjunction with DHMH, develop a strategy
to ensure inspections of the various health care facilities are completed as
required by law (repeat).
Office of Health Care Quality Response
OHCQ concurs with the recommendation. By October 1, 2017, DHMH will be
submitting a Joint Chairmen’s Report detailing a three-year plan to adequately
staff OHCQ. Additional staff will allow us to complete more of the mandated
survey activities.

--- Page 31 ---
Interagency Agreements
Finding 4
The Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission improperly used interagency
agreements with a State university to procure license application evaluation
services, circumventing competitive procurement and control agency
approvals.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MMCC
a. discontinue the practice of using interagency agreements as a mechanism
to avoid a competitive procurement process to obtain contractual
services;
b. discontinue splitting contracts (including interagency agreements) to
circumvent procurement oversight from control agencies;
c. ensure estimates, personnel costs, and any overhead rates are reasonable
when it is determined appropriate to use interagency agreements in the
future; and
d. approve the RESI invoices for payment once sufficient supporting
documentation is received.
Maryland Medical Cannabis Commission Response
The Commission respectfully submits that state law permits the use of inter-
agency agreements between state agencies. The Commission’s use of interagency
agreements here does not reflect any intent to circumvent state law. The
Commission does not intend to use MOU’s to avoid competitive procurements.
The Commission has renewed its commitment to the competitive procurement
process.
The Commission is in the process of reviewing the application procedures for a
more cost effective and timely system.
a. The Commission concurs with the finding. The Commission will review all
MOU’s to make sure they are compliant with state procurement rules.
b. The Commission concurs with the finding.
c. The Commission concurs with the finding.

--- Page 32 ---
d. The Commission concurs with the finding. Payments will be evaluated once
the Commission receives all proper, complete and supporting documentation.
This is in process at this time.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
Certain boards did not adequately control and account for collections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the applicable Boards
a. ensure that the employees responsible for performing the deposit
verifications do not have access to collections (repeat) and that the
verifications are documented,
b. deposit collections within one working day of receipt as required,
c. perform documented verifications that mail-in and credit card collections
were deposited and properly recorded in the State’s accounting records,
d. perform documented verifications of the accuracy of the credit card
payment data uploaded to the licensing system, and
e. periodically reconcile licensing activity with the related collections
(repeat).
Board of Physicians Response
a. The Board concurs with the recommendation. To ensure independent
verification of collections to deposits, the access of the employee performing
deposit verifications to the related collections was terminated on May 31,
2016. In addition, his ability to process license renewals was removed.
b. The Board concurs with the recommendation. Effective May 31, 2016, the
Board began depositing all payments within one business day.
c. Not applicable to the Board of Physicians.
d. The Board concurs with the recommendation. Effective May 2016, the Board
began conducting a random sampling of electronic credit card payment data.
To ensure that only legitimate payment information from the credit card
renewal text file is uploaded to the Board’s database, the Board implemented
a monthly audit of account records to reduce the risk of fictitious payments.
e. Not applicable to the Board of Physicians.

--- Page 33 ---
Board of Nursing Response
a. The Board concurs with the recommendation and has taken steps toward
compliance. As of April 1, 2016, new processes were implemented to ensure
the separation of the duties of each individual who has access to deposit
collections (checks/money orders) from those individuals who are able to
verify those deposits. In April 2017, the initial recordation ledger was
revamped into a more uniform and automated document which limits the
opportunity for misappropriation. Additionally, all individuals responsible for
verifications no longer have access to collections, and all verifications are now
documented for record.
b. Not Applicable to the Board of Nursing
c. The Board concurs with the recommendation and has taken steps toward
compliance. As of February 2017, the Board has hired additional staff whose
duties include verifying mail-in and credit cards collections with the State’s
accounting records, while still adhering to the strict separation of duty
protocols.
d. Not applicable to the Board of Nursing
e. The Board concurs with this recommendation and has taken steps toward
compliance. This finding continues to exist because of the limitations of our
licensing system. The Board is still working on updates to its current licensing
system which will assist staff in performing this task. In conjunction with
updates to the licensing system, the Board has hired additional personnel in
September 2016 and February 2017 to assist with these reconciliations.
Board of Pharmacy Response
a. Not applicable to the Board of Pharmacy.
b. The Board of Pharmacy concurs with the recommendation. Effective April
2016, the Board no longer directly accepts cash or checks in person or via the
mail. All payments are processed either directly online via credit card, or
checks and money orders are mailed into the lockbox and are directly
deposited to the Board’s revenue account.
c. Not applicable to the Board of Pharmacy.
d. Not applicable to the Board of Pharmacy.

--- Page 34 ---
e. The Board of Pharmacy concurs with the recommendation. In April 2014, the
Board implemented procedures to reconcile license activity with the related
collections, and to research any discrepancies
Board of Social Work Examiners Response
a. Not applicable to the Board of Social Work Examiners.
b. Not applicable to the Board of Social Work Examiners.
c. The Board concurs with the recommendations. The Board documents its
verification that mail-in collections and credit card collections were deposited
in the state bank account.
d. Not applicable to the Board of Social Work Examiners.
e. The Board concurs with the recommendation that a process to reconcile
license activity for both check and credit card collections take place. These
reconciliations have been in effect since 2016.
Finding 6
Seventeen boards and commissions did not ensure that employees who
handled collections were denied the capability to issue or renew licenses in
the electronic licensing systems.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the boards and commissions
a. ensure that employees processing collections are denied the system
capability to issue or renew licenses, certificates, or permits; and
b. in conjunction with DHMH, consider the feasibility of using a bank
lockbox account to receive collections.
Boards and Commissions Response
a. The Boards and Commissions concur with the recommendation to ensure that
employees processing collections do not have the capability to issue or renew
licenses or certificates. These functions are separated and staff responsible for
doing collections do not have the capability to issue or renew licenses or
certificates nor make changes in the licensing system. The Boards will work to
better document the separation of these functions.

--- Page 35 ---
b. The Boards and Commissions concur with the recommendation and will
collaborate with DHMH to determine the feasibility of using a lockbox and
other more efficient and cost effective options.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 7
The Board of Physicians did not adequately monitor a rehabilitation services
vendor with a $2.5 million contract and did not always obtain documentation
to support amounts invoiced.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that the Board
a. obtain and review supporting documentation, such as rehabilitation plans
and chemical screenings, at least on a test basis, to ensure appropriate
rehabilitation services were provided to Program participants; and
b. ensure that quarterly detail reports are received for all program
participants prior to invoice payment.
Board of Physicians Response
a. The Board concurs with the recommendation. Although the Board routinely
obtains and reviews supporting documentation to ensure rehabilitation
services are provided to participants, the Board did not have a formal process
in place. Effective April 2016, the Board began a formal process of
documenting its comparison of individual quarterly reports with the
underlying documents. At the beginning of each new quarter, the Probation
staff requests, then thoroughly reviews the rehabilitation plans and chemical
screenings for five randomly selected Maryland Professional Rehabilitation
Program participants from the previous quarter. Results of the comparison are
documented and kept in a binder.
b. The Board concurs with the recommendation. In accordance with the contract
terms, the Board will ensure that quarterly detail reports are received for all
program participants prior to the invoice payments, effective April 2017.

--- Page 36 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 8
Password and account controls for the Boards of Nursing, Physicians, and
Pharmacy were not sufficient to properly protect critical data.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that
a. the three Boards implement strong controls over passwords and accounts
for critical applications and databases, in accordance with those
prescribed by the Information Security Policy; and
b. DHMH determine the extent to which additional password and account
controls are needed to protect licensee data for the remaining boards and
commissions.
Board of Nursing Response
a. The Board concurs with this recommendation. As of April 2016, the Board of
Nursing implemented various user and administrative password requirements
related to length, complexity, age, history, and account lockout in compliance
with the Information Security Policy.
Board of Physicians Response
a. The Board concurs with this recommendation as it relates to password
controls over the production licensing database. Effective January 27, 2016,
the Board modified the Verify Function file to reflect a minimum password
length of 8 characters. The Password Grace Time was also modified for all
Profiles (including Default) to remove the grace period.
Board of Pharmacy Response
a. The Board concurs with recommendation. The board has submitted to DOIT
IT system features needed to meet the system security requirements that have
been identified. The all-board IT procurement is still being developed and
there is no defined date for implementation.
DHMH Response
b. DHMH concurs with this recommendation. Whereas the Department does not
possess authority over the IT operations and applications of the Health
Occupation Boards ("Boards"), the Department will conduct for the Boards a
review of policies and practices related to password creation and management,
and will also offer to the Boards assistance with coming into compliance with
the policies and practices.

--- Page 37 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Maryia Kuzina
Dianne P. Ramirez
Staff Auditors