Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Division of Pretrial Detention and Services

NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services due to the establishment of the DPSCS - Central Region. This Division ceased to exist as a separate budgetary unit.
Date: 04/01/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d7245606745a4
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:50:20.489256
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Division of Pretrial Detention and Services
April 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410 946-5400 or 301
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
April 1, 2011
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Delegate Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator James C. Rosapepe, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services (DPDS) of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) for the period
beginning June 14, 2007 and ending April 15, 2010. DPDS includes the
Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center and the Baltimore City Detention
Center. These Centers house arrestees who are awaiting trial in criminal
proceedings in Baltimore City. DPDS also administers the Pretrial Release
Services Program responsible for presenting pretrial release recommendations to
various courts.
Our audit disclosed that an agreement with a State’s Attorney’s Office for case
review services excluded critical elements, such as specific deliverables and
payments terms. In addition, annual and sick leave earnings for certain
employees were improperly calculated, resulting in those employees earning more
leave than for which they were eligible. Furthermore, certain of these employees
received overpayments for leave payouts when they separated from State service.
Finally, our audit disclosed internal control and record keeping deficiencies with
respect to cash receipts, certain inmate funds, purchases and disbursements,
equipment, and the working fund.
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page 5. DPSCS’
response, on behalf of the DPDS, is included as an appendix to this report. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by the
DPDS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Service Agreement
* Finding 1 – An Agreement With a State’s Attorney’s Office Did Not 9
Include Sufficient Specifications
Leave Records
Finding 2 – Leave for Certain Employees Was Improperly Calculated 10
Resulting in Employees Receiving More Leave Than They Were Eligible
for and Certain Employees Receiving Overpayments for Leave Payouts
Cash Receipts
Finding 3 – Procedures Were Inadequate to Ensure All Recorded 11
Collections Were Deposited
Contaminated Inmate Funds
Finding 4 – Controls Over Contaminated Inmate Funds Were Inadequate 12
Allowing the Misappropriation of Approximately $12,500 by a
Management Employee
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 5 – FMIS Access Was Not Sufficiently Reviewed and Proper 13
Controls Were Not Established Over Certain Purchases
Equipment
Finding 6 – Equipment Records Were Inadequately Maintained 14
Working Fund
Finding 7 – The Inmate Working Fund Balance Contained Funds 15
That Had Not Been Properly Approved
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Division of Pretrial Detention and Services (DPDS)
April 2011
 An agreement with a State’s Attorney’s Office (SAO) for case review
services did not include critical elements, such as specific deliverables and
payment terms. Payments in fiscal year 2009 totaled $709,000. During
fiscal year 2010, payments totaling $708,210 were withheld pending the
development of a new agreement; however, as of September 2010, a new
agreement had not been established.
DPDS should establish a new agreement with the SAO for case review
services that includes specific deliverables and payment terms and should
ensure that any future payments are consistent with the terms of the new
agreement.
 The automated leave system improperly calculated annual and sick leave
for certain employees, resulting in those employees earning more leave
than they were eligible for. In addition, certain employees who separated
from State service were overpaid for leave payouts. We were advised by
the contractor who developed the leave system that the miscalculations
were the result of system errors in the database.
DPDS should work with the contractor to resolve and address the system
deficiencies. DPDS should also review the propriety of annual and sick leave
earnings for all employees and, for errors noted, take appropriate action,
including recovery of overpayments.
 The DPDS procedures did not provide for a timely and independent
verification that all recorded collections were deposited. No collections
received after May 25, 2010 had been verified as of August 4, 2010.
DPDS should perform independent verifications of recorded collections to
deposit in a timely manner.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 Controls over inmate funds contaminated from bodily fluids (such as
blood) that were received during inmate intake were inadequate and,
consequently, during the period from June 2006 until November 2008, a
management employee misappropriated funds totaling $12,500 that were
not deposited in a bank. In April 2010, during an investigation by the
Department’s Internal Investigative Unit, the employee admitted to
misappropriating funds and was terminated. This matter was referred to
the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division and the former
employee paid restitution and pled guilty to felony theft. Although DPDS
had modified its procedures, as of September 2010, contaminated funds
were still not adequately controlled and were not being deposited in the
bank.
DPDS should establish proper control over contaminated inmate funds by
properly depositing these funds in the bank.
 Internal control and recordkeeping deficiencies were noted in the areas of
purchases and disbursements, equipment, and the working fund.
DPDS should take the recommended actions to improve controls in these
areas.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Division of Pretrial Detention and Services (DPDS) consists of an
administrative unit, the Pretrial Release Services Program, the Baltimore Central
Booking and Intake Center, and the Baltimore City Detention Center. DPDS is
directed by a Commissioner who is appointed by the Secretary of the Department
of Public Safety and Correctional Services.
The Pretrial Release Services Program is responsible for presenting pretrial
release recommendations to various courts and for supervising all defendants
released to its custody. The Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center is a
centralized booking facility for Baltimore City. In addition, this facility and the
Baltimore City Detention Center house people committed to the custody of DPDS
while awaiting trial in Baltimore City or for service of a sentence of usually one
year or less. According to agency records, as of June 30, 2010, these two units
had a combined population of 3,391 detainees. In addition, according to the
State’s records, the DPDS fiscal year 2010 appropriation provided for 1,557
employee positions, including 1,230 correctional officers, and DPDS expenditures
totaled approximately $151 million during fiscal year 2010.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the ten findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 10, 2008. We determined that DPDS
satisfactorily addressed nine of the findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Service Agreement
Finding 1
An agreement with a State’s Attorney’s Office for case review services did
not include sufficient specifications.
Analysis
DPDS contracted with a State’s Attorney’s Office (SAO) for an agreed-upon
Quality Case Review (QCR) process; however, the agreement excluded critical
elements, such as specific deliverables by the SAO, related payment terms, and a
total contract amount. In fiscal year 1995, DPDS entered into an agreement with
the SAO, which was to remain in effect until one of the parties terminated it,
whereby the SAO was to provide front-end QCR services shortly after detainee
arrests and/or intake into the Baltimore City Detention Center. These QCR
services included evaluating cases for probable cause, plea agreements, reduction
of charges, possible referrals to drug court, and dismissal of charges.
During fiscal year 2009, DPDS made payments to the SAO totaling $709,000,
which was the amount included in the State budget request. Although the basis
for payment was not specified in the agreement, quarterly invoices from the SAO
included a list of employees and total related salaries and benefits. We were
advised by DPDS management that there was no verification performed to ensure
that the invoices were for the actual costs of the QCR program. In addition, other
documentation was not available, such as the number of cases screened to enable
DPDS to assess actual deliverables and the impact of the QCR process.
During fiscal year 2010, although the SAO continued to perform the QCR
services, DPDS stopped paying for them. We were advised by DPDS
management personnel that it was in the process of developing a new agreement
with the SAO and that payments would continue according to the established
terms once a new agreement was reached. As of September 2010, a new
agreement had not been established and, as such, SAO invoices for services
received during fiscal year 2010, which totaled $708,210, had not been paid but
were accrued at fiscal year-end.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPDS
a. establish an agreement with the SAO that includes payment terms and
deliverables (repeat), and
b. ensure that future payments are made in accordance with the payment
terms and deliverables in the new agreement (repeat).
Leave Records
Finding 2
Annual and sick leave for many employees was improperly calculated,
resulting in employees receiving more leave than they were eligible for and
overpayments to employees for annual leave payouts upon separation from
State service.
Analysis
Annual and sick leave for certain employees was improperly calculated, resulting
in these employees receiving more leave than for which they were eligible.
Furthermore, certain employees received overpayments for annual leave payouts.
Our test of employee earnings payments (including annual leave payouts)
disclosed that certain employees received improper annual leave earnings, and as
a result, received overpayments for their annual leave payout upon leaving State
service. To determine the extent of the problem, we obtained data from the DPDS
automated annual and sick leave database for the period from June 2007 to June
2010 for all employees. This database was developed by a third-party contractor
and implemented by DPDS in 2002. We reviewed the database for all instances
in which employees received eight or more hours of annual leave earnings in a
pay period. Except for annual leave adjustments—which should be infrequent—
these leave earnings would be excessive because the maximum annual leave that
an employee can properly earn in a pay period is 7.7 hours (based on 20 years or
more of State service). Our approach would not identify all instances of excessive
annual leave earnings since employees with less than 20 years of service would
earn less than 7.7 hours in a pay period. In determining the amount of excessive
sick leave earnings, we considered instances in which employees received 4.6 or
more hours of sick leave earnings in a pay period because that is the maximum
sick leave an employee can earn according to State law. Based on our review of
the leave database (which we tested and found to be reliable for our purposes), we
noted the following conditions:
10

--- Page 13 ---
 We identified 149 employees with excessive annual leave earnings totaling
1,655 hours, which we estimated to be valued at $40,000. For example, for
one employee, the leave system calculated that the employee earned 30 annual
leave hours for a two-week pay period, rather than 7.7 annual leave hours,
based on the employee’s years of State service. Of these 149 employees, we
determined that, according to leave records, 86 employees received an annual
leave payout during this period. The value of excessive leave received by
these 86 employees represented approximately $29,000 of the aforementioned
$40,000. Our test of 10 of these 86 annual leave payouts disclosed that all 10
of these employees were overpaid as a result of the incorrect leave received.
The total overpayment for these 10 employees was $7,367.
 We identified 360 employees that collectively received 2,495 sick hours more
than the maximum allowable of 4.6 hours per pay period; we estimated the
value of these additional hours at $52,000.
DPDS could not explain these errors and we were advised by the contractor that
the miscalculations occurred because of certain system errors within the leave
database. We were also advised that the system can provide routine reports that
highlight nonstandard leave earnings, but that these reports were not generated
and reviewed by DPDS personnel.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPDS
a. work with the contractor to resolve and correct the system errors that
caused the leave miscalculations;
b. review the propriety of annual and sick leave received for all employees
and, for errors noted, take appropriate action, including adjusting
accumulated leave balances and collecting overpayments; and
c. review the reports of nonstandard leave earnings on a periodic basis and
investigate any questionable leave earnings.
Cash Receipts
Finding 3
Adequate procedures were not in place to ensure that all recorded collections
were deposited.
Analysis
The DPDS deposit verification process was not timely and related duties were not
adequately segregated from the cash receipts process. The employee responsible
11

--- Page 14 ---
for performing deposit verifications had access to the collections, and therefore,
missing funds would not be readily detected. Furthermore, as of August 4, 2010,
no collections received after May 25, 2010 had been verified to deposit; during
this time, there were 43 deposits, totaling approximately $486,000 that had not
been verified as deposited. We subsequently verified, on a test basis, that these
collections were, in fact, deposited by DPDS. According to its records, DPDS
deposits totaled approximately $2.2 million during fiscal year 2010.
A directive from the Office of the State Treasurer specifies that deposit
verifications be performed and the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Procedures Manual requires that these verifications be performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPDS
a. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts process
performs the deposit verifications, and
b. perform verifications of recorded collections to deposit in a timely
manner.
We advised DPDS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Contaminated Inmate Funds
Finding 4
Controls over contaminated inmate funds were inadequate, allowing a DPDS
management employee to misappropriate inmate funds totaling $12,500.
Analysis
Controls over contaminated inmate funds were inadequate and, consequently, a
management employee misappropriated $12,500 over an approximate three-year
period. These funds, which were received occasionally during the inmate intake
process, were contaminated from bodily fluids, such as blood.
According to DPDS management, beginning in June 2006, DPDS mistakenly
believed that the local bank branch would no longer accept contaminated funds
for deposit. The aforementioned management employee collected all
contaminated funds, which totaled $12,500 between June 2006 and November
2008, and allegedly disposed of the funds in a county landfill. State general funds
were then improperly transferred to the related inmate accounts. However, it was
12

--- Page 15 ---
later determined that this employee had misappropriated these funds. We were
advised by the State Treasurer’s Office that the bank did accept deposits of
contaminated funds during this period at another location.
In November 2008, DPDS revised its procedures for contaminated funds so that
the funds were maintained in a safe until the inmates were released. These
procedures continued to be inadequate because the funds were not deposited in a
bank. According to DPDS records, contaminated inmate funds collected from
November 2008 through June 2010 totaled approximately $3,600, including
approximately $1,850 which was on hand as of June 30, 2010.
In April 2010, the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) Internal Investigative Unit conducted an investigation of the
contaminated funds that were received during the period from June 2006 through
November 2008. During the investigation, the aforementioned management
employee admitted to misappropriating contaminated funds. Consequently,
DPDS terminated the employee from State service and referred the matter to the
Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division. In August 2010, the former
employee paid restitution in the amount of $12,500, which was credited to the
State’s General Fund. In October 2010, the former employee pled guilty to felony
theft and received a six-month suspended sentence, unsupervised probation, and
community service.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPDS establish controls over contaminated funds by
properly depositing these funds in the bank.
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 5
FMIS access was not adequately reviewed and proper internal controls were
not established over the processing of certain purchasing transactions.
Analysis
Access to the State’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS) was not
periodically reviewed for all users and proper internal controls were not
established over the processing of certain purchasing transactions. Specifically,
we noted the following conditions:
13

--- Page 16 ---
 DPDS did not periodically review employee access to FMIS for all users. The
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) provides agencies with
bimonthly reports of employee FMIS security access to review for accuracy
and appropriateness. While this review was periodically performed, this
review only included employees under the reviewer’s direct supervision,
representing only 9 of 105 employees listed on the bimonthly report.
Furthermore, our review of the March 2010 bimonthly security report noted
one employee who had been terminated from DPDS in February 2010 and
continued to have FMIS access until we brought this to DPDS’ attention in
June 2010. We confirmed that this employee had not accessed FMIS after the
last date of employment. DoIT’s Internal Control and Security Policy and
Procedures require agencies to perform a documented review of the
bimonthly report. According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal
year 2010, DPDS processed disbursements totaling $39.3 million through
FMIS.
 Online approval rules allowed five individuals (one DPDS employee and four
employees of the DPSCS Office of the Secretary) the capability to initiate
purchase orders and also to make changes to those transactions after
independent approvals were obtained. Consequently, these employees could
make unauthorized changes to critical information (such as vendors and
amounts) without those changes being subject to independent review.
According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2010, DPDS
payments related to FMIS purchase orders totaled $4.6 million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DPDS
a. perform documented reviews of assigned FMIS access capabilities that
include all users, and
b. establish approval requirements that prevent individuals with the
capability of initiating purchasing transactions from modifying the
transactions after related approvals have been obtained.
Equipment
Finding 6
Equipment records were not adequately maintained by DPDS.
Analysis
Equipment records were not maintained in compliance with certain requirements
of the Department of General Services (DGS) Inventory Control Manual. As of
14

--- Page 17 ---
June 30, 2010, the reported book value of DPDS equipment totaled approximately
$6.5 million.
Specifically, we noted that the DPDS detail equipment records were not
adequately maintained. Our test of 265 equipment items (including televisions
and protective vests) purchased during fiscal years 2009 and 2010, at a cost of
$99,200, disclosed that 162 items costing $63,112 were not recorded in the detail
records. In addition, an equipment control account was not maintained. A
control account is a continuous summary of transactions and serves as a total
dollar value control over amounts in the detail records. Control accounts are to be
maintained and periodically reconciled with the detail equipment records to
ensure all purchased equipment items were capitalized and any disposals were
properly recorded.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that detail records and a control
account be properly maintained for all categories of equipment, and that the two
records be periodically reconciled.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DPDS comply with the aforementioned requirements of
the DGS Inventory Control Manual.
Working Fund
Finding 7
The DPDS inmate working fund balance contained a $25,000 advance that
had not been approved by the Comptroller of Maryland.
Analysis
The DPDS inmate working fund advance totaled $46,000; however, only $21,000
had been authorized by the Comptroller of Maryland. The additional $25,000
advance was from an unknown source.
The inmate working fund is primarily used to disburse funds belonging to inmates
(such as those confiscated during the intake process and subsequent deposits from
family or friends) and upon an inmate’s release, it is used to return any unspent
funds. During our review of the inmate working fund composition, we noted a
$25,000 advance recorded as an “interagency temporary advance.” DPDS
management advised that it did not know the specific source of this advance and
that it has been included in the inmate working fund balance since at least 1999.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Furthermore, DPDS had not requested approval for this advance from the
Comptroller of Maryland as required in the Comptroller’s Accounting Procedures
Manual and a Comptroller of Maryland’s representative advised that the
Comptroller was unaware of this advance. In a recent audit report of other
Division of Correction facilities, we noted similar transfers for which DPSCS
officials could not provide an explanation. These actions impaired accountability
for the funds and circumvented the Comptroller’s approval process for
establishing the amount authorized for the working fund.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DPDS transfer the advance to the State General Fund
unless the Comptroller of Maryland approves retaining the advance.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services (DPDS) of the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) for the period
beginning June 14, 2007 and ending April 15, 2010. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DPDS’ financial
transactions, records, and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, cash receipts,
payroll, inmate and working funds, equipment, and materials and supplies. Our
audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspection of
documents and records, and observations of DPDS’ operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
DPDS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DPDS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DPDS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
DPSCS’ response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of DPDS, is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
APPENDIX
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
300 E. JOPPA ROAD • SUITE 1000 • TOWSON, MARYLAND 21286-3020
(410) 339-5000 • FAX (410) 339-4240 • TOLL FREE (877) 379-8636 • V/TTY (800) 735-2258 • www.dpscs.state.md.us
STATE OF MARYLAND
MARTIN O’MALLEY
GOVERNOR
ANTHONY G. BROWN
LT. GOVERNOR
March 28, 2011
GARY D. MAYNARD
SECRETARY
G. LAWRENCE FRANKLIN
DEPUTY SECRETARY
ADMINISTRATION
RANDALL NERO
ACTING DEPUTY
SECRETARY Mr. Bruce A. Myers, CPA
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES
Legislative Auditor
DAVID N. BEZANSON
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
Office of Legislative Audits, Room 1202
CAPITAL PROGRAMS
CHIEF OF STAFF 301 West Preston Street
Baltimore MD 21201
DIVISION OF CORRECTION
DIVISION OF PAROLE AND
PROBATION Dear Mr. Myers:
DIVISION OF PRETRIAL
DETENTION AND SERVICES
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services has reviewed
PATUXENT INSTITUTION
the draft audit report dated March 2011 for the Division of Pretrial Detention and
MARYLAND COMMISSION
ON CORRECTIONAL Services (DPDS) for the period beginning June 14, 2007 and ending April 15, 2010.
STANDARDS
The Department appreciates the constructive recommendations that were made as
CORRECTIONAL TRAINING
COMMISSION the result of this audit. Be assured that appropriate corrective actions have been or
POLICE TRAINING will be implemented to ensure full compliance with each recommendation.
COMMISSION
MARYLAND PAROLE
COMMISSION It should be noted that of the ten findings contained in the auditors’
CRIMINAL INJURIES preceding audit report dated April 14, 2008, it was determined that the DPDS had
COMPENSATION BOARD
satisfactorily resolved nine of those findings. The Department believes that this is
EMERGENCY NUMBER
SYSTEMS BOARD indicative of its commitment to implement the necessary corrective action to
SUNDRY CLAIMS BOARD achieve compliance and eliminate repeat findings.
INMATE GRIEVANCE OFFICE
Attached is Commissioner France’s response to the draft audit report, with
which I concur. Commissioner France will continue to implement corrective action
to address all of the audit findings, and will closely monitor the status in order to
prevent any repeat audit findings in the next audit.

--- Page 23 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
DIVISION OF PRETRIAL DETENTION AND SERVICES
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER
400 E. MADISON STREET• BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 21202
(410) 209-4290 • FAX (410) 209-4250 • TOLL FREE (866) 274-0105 • V/TTY (800) 735-2258 • www.dpscs.state.md.us
STATE OF MARYLAND
MARTIN O’MALLEY March 28, 2011
GOVERNOR
ANTHONY G. BROWN
LT. GOVERNOR
Gary D. Maynard, Secretary
GARY D. MAYNARD
SECRETARY Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
300 East Joppa Road, Suite 1000
G. LAWRENCE FRANKLIN Towson, Maryland 21286-3020
DEPUTY SECRETARY
WENDELL M. FRANCE
COMMISSIONER Dear Secretary Maynard:
Included below are the responses to the Draft Legislative Audit Report dated March 2011
KEVIN D. PATTEN covering the examination of the accounts and records of the Division of Pretrial Detention and
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER
Services for the period beginning June 14, 2007 and ending April 15, 2010. The Division of
RENARD E. BROO KS Pretrial Detention and Services will aggressively pursue implementation of the Draft Audit
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER
Report recommendations.
Finding 1 - An agreement with a State’s Attorney’s Office for case review services did
not include sufficient specifications.
Recommendation 1:
We recommend that DPDS
a. establish an agreement with the SAO that includes payment terms and deliverables
(repeat), and
b. ensure that future payments are made in accordance with the payment terms and
deliverables in the new agreement (repeat).
We agree. On March 3, 2011, DPDS executed a new agreement with the SAO that includes
payment terms and deliverables. DPDS will ensure that future payments are made in
accordance with the payment terms and deliverables in the new agreement.
Finding 2 - Annual and sick leave for many employees was improperly calculated,
resulting in employees receiving more leave than they were eligible for and
overpayments to employees for annual leave payouts upon separation from State
service.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that DPDS
a. work with the contractor to resolve and correct the system errors that caused the
leave miscalculations;
b. review the propriety of annual and sick leave received for all employees and, for
errors noted, take appropriate action, including adjusting accumulated leave
balances and collecting overpayments; and
c. review the reports of nonstandard leave earnings on a periodic basis and
investigate any questionable leave earnings.

--- Page 24 ---
We agree. In September 2010, DPDS contacted the contractor and obtained the updated
version (168C) of the Leave Accounting System (LAS), which corrected the improper
calculation of the annual and sick leave hours earned by employees. Effective August 2010,
DPDS has taken steps to print and to review the Earned Leave Reports that denote all non-
standard leave earnings on a bi-weekly basis to ensure accuracy of leave earned by
employees. This Earned Leave Report gives the user the ability to view only the nonstandard
leave earnings, instead of all of the employee’s earnings. DPDS will maintain and review the
annual and sick leave documentation for all employees, investigate any questionable leave
rates earned by all employees, make any proper adjustments, and collect any overpayments.
Finding 3 - Adequate procedures were not in place to ensure that all recorded
collections were deposited.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that DPDS
a. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts process performs the
deposit verifications, and
b. perform verifications of recorded collections to deposit in a timely manner.
We advised DPDS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
We agree. Effective November 2010, an employee independent of the cash receipts process
performs the deposit verifications. This verification of recorded collections to deposit will be
done on a daily basis.
Finding 4 - Controls over contaminated inmate funds were inadequate, allowing a
DPDS management employee to misappropriate inmate funds totaling $12,500.
Recommendation 4:
We recommend that DPDS establish controls over contaminated funds by properly
depositing these funds in the bank.
We agree. In April 2009, DPDS put in place a process to safeguard un-deposited
contaminated funds and by June 30, 2011, DPDS will establish the recommended control
over contaminated funds by properly depositing these funds in the bank.
Finding 5 - FMIS access was not adequately reviewed and proper internal controls
were not established over the processing of certain purchasing transactions.
Recommendation 5:
We recommend that DPDS
a. perform documented reviews of assigned FMIS access capabilities that include all
users, and
b. establish approval requirements that prevent individuals with the capability of
initiating purchasing transactions from modifying the transactions after related
approvals have been obtained.
We agree. Effective March 5, 2010 DPDS established approval requirements that prevent
individuals with the capability of initiating purchasing transactions from modifying the
transactions after related approvals have been obtained. Starting with the January 5, 2011
Bi-Monthly FMIS Security Report, DPDS began documented reviews of assigned FMIS
access capabilities that include all users
2

--- Page 26 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh
Senior Auditor
Brett M. Sheppard
Staff Auditor