Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Information Technology Division (Fiscal Operations)
Date: 06/16/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d72456067446c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:57:43.207409
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Information Technology Division
(Fiscal Operations)
November 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Information Technology Division (ITD) of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) operates the Annapolis Data Center (ADC) as a shared cost data center.
All operating costs of the ADC are reimbursed by user agencies that are charged
for services performed. In addition to operating a statewide computer network
and providing data center disaster recovery capabilities, ITD develops and
maintains application systems for the COM and certain other State agencies.
Additionally, ITD maintains the operating system and security software
environment in which agency applications are executed. Finally, ITD monitors
information technology related services and maintains the information technology
equipment inventory records for the COM. According to the State’s records,
ITD’s operating costs totaled approximately $34.3 million during fiscal year
2016.
Our audit focused on ITD’s fiscal operations. A separate audit of the computer
operations of the ADC is conducted and a separate audit report is issued.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Equipment
Finding 1
Procedures and controls over equipment were not adequate.
Analysis
The Information Technology Division (ITD) had not established adequate
procedures and controls over equipment, and was not in compliance with certain
requirements of the Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control
Manual. According to its records, ITD’s equipment was valued at approximately
$58.9 million as of June 30, 2017, which consisted of $1.2 million in sensitive
equipment, and $57.7 million in non-sensitive equipment, including computer
software. ITD’s equipment records include the Annapolis Data Center and all
information technology equipment for the Comptroller of Maryland.
One employee was responsible for maintaining the detailed equipment records
and the related control account and for performing periodic physical inventories
of equipment and, therefore, had access to the equipment. In addition, the
physical inventories were not conducted within the time frames, as required. For
example, as of June 2017, 270 items classified as sensitive equipment, such as
computer laptops, with a recorded cost of $630,695, had not been inventoried
within one year, as required, including 44 items that had not been inventoried for
periods ranging from 18 to 40 months. Under these conditions, errors or
discrepancies could occur without timely detection.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires the duties of record keeping and
conducting physical inventories be segregated. The Manual also requires that
sensitive equipment be inventoried annually and non-sensitive equipment be
inventoried at least once every three years.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ITD comply with the requirements of the Inventory
Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that ITD
a. segregate the duties of performing physical inventories and
maintaining equipment records, and
b. conduct equipment inventories within the required time frames.
We advised ITD on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) – Information Technology Division (ITD) for the period beginning March
24, 2014 and ending May 30, 2017. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ITD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included accounts receivable, collections, procurement,
and equipment. Our audit also included certain support services provided by ITD
to the other units of the COM. These support services consisted of monitoring
information technology related services and maintaining information technology
equipment inventory records.
Our audit did not include the computer operations and security controls of ITD’s
Annapolis Data Center (ADC). Rather, a separate audit is conducted of the ADC
and a separate audit report is issued. Our audit also did not include certain
support services provided to ITD by the COM – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services (such as processing of invoices, maintenance of accounting
records, and related fiscal functions) are included in the scope of our audits of the
Office of the Comptroller.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
ITD’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
5

--- Page 8 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
ITD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect ITD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to ITD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from COM, on behalf of ITD, to our finding and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise COM
regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Finding 1
Procedures and controls over equipment were not adequate.
Analysis
The Information Technology Division (ITD) had not established adequate procedures and
controls over equipment, and was not in compliance with certain requirements of the Department
of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual. According to its records, ITD’s
equipment was valued at approximately $58.9 million as of June 30, 2017, which consisted of
$1.2 million in sensitive equipment, and $57.7 million in non-sensitive equipment, including
computer software. ITD’s equipment records include the Annapolis Data Center and all
information technology equipment for the Comptroller of Maryland.
One employee was responsible for maintaining the detailed equipment records and the related
control account and for performing periodic physical inventories of equipment and, therefore,
had access to the equipment. In addition, the physical inventories were not conducted within the
time frames, as required. For example, as of June 2017, 270 items classified as sensitive
equipment, such as computer laptops, with a recorded cost of $630,695, had not been inventoried
within one year, as required, including 44 items that had not been inventoried for periods ranging
from 18 to 40 months. Under these conditions, errors or discrepancies could occur without
timely detection.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires the duties of record keeping and conducting
physical inventories be segregated. The Manual also requires that sensitive equipment be
inventoried annually and non-sensitive equipment be inventoried at least once every three years.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ITD comply with the requirements of the Inventory Control Manual.
Specifically, we recommend that ITD
a. segregate the duties of performing physical inventories and maintaining equipment
records, and
b. conduct equipment inventories within the required time frames.
We advised ITD on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Comptroller of Maryland – Information Technology Division’s Response:
The Information Technology Division concurs with the recommendations and going forward,
will comply with the requirements regarding segregation of duties and routine equipment
inventories as outlined in the DGS Inventory Control Manual.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Tu N. Vuong
Senior Auditor