Title: Department of Human Resources - Local Department Operations
Date: 05/16/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d13cc9d7245606744bd
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:14:45.281427
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Resources
Local Department Operations
July 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Audit Approach 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Findings From the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) Audit Reports
* Finding 1 – The Most Recent OIG Audits of the Local Departments 9
of Social Services (LDSS) Contained a Significant Number of
Reportable Conditions and Repeat Findings
OIG’s Corrective Action Monitoring Process
Finding 2 – OIG’s Corrective Action Monitoring Process for LDSS 10
Audits Was Not Effectively Followed
LDSS Audit Report Distribution
Finding 3 – OIG Audit Reports of the LDSSs Were Not Distributed to 12
All Appropriate Parties
Local Departments of Social Services Audit Findings
* Finding 4 – Controls Were Insufficient Over Bank Accounts, 14
Procurements, and Gift Cards
* Finding 5 – Numerous LDSS Deficiencies Existed Related to Critical 15
Family Investment Administration Policies
Finding 6 – Numerous LDSS Deficiencies Existed Related to Critical 17
Social Services Administration Policies
* Finding 7 – Users’ Access to Certain Key Computer Systems Was Not 18
Properly Restricted and Monitored
* Finding 8 – Medicaid Eligibility Determinations for Long-Term Care 19
Recipients Were Not Always Proper
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Exhibit 1 – Summary of All OIG Audit Findings 23
Exhibit 2 – Selected OIG Audit Findings 24
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Human Resources (DHR)
Local Department Operations
July 2015
 Although the local departments of social services (LDSS) continued to
have a significant number of audit deficiencies in critical areas of
operations, DHR executive management (which includes management of
the relevant DHR administrations) had not established a formal process
to provide oversight and monitoring of LDSS corrective actions. As of
December 2014, the most recent DHR Office of the Inspector General’s
(OIG) audit reports for the 24 LDSSs collectively included 299 audit
findings, including 89 findings deemed to be repeat conditions from the
preceding OIG audits (Finding 1).
DHR executive management should establish a process to actively monitor
corrective actions taken to ensure that the detailed recommendations
contained in the OIG audit reports are implemented.
 The OIG’s corrective action monitoring process for the LDSS audit
reports was not effectively followed to help ensure that the findings were
corrected. Our review of the progress reports and related documentation
provided by five LDSSs after report issuance disclosed that the OIG
determined certain findings were resolved based on insufficient evidence
and, for other findings, the OIG had not performed adequate follow-up
(Finding 2).
DHR should ensure that the OIG consistently and effectively follows its
corrective action monitoring process.
 The OIG did not distribute the LDSS audit reports to all appropriate
parties. Although required by law, OIG did not issue the reports to the
respective local oversight boards and the local governing authorities. In
addition, the LDSS audit reports are not readily available to the general
public, which we believe would provide greater transparency and may
lead to increased accountability by the LDSSs (Finding 3).
DHR OIG should distribute the LDSS audit reports to the local boards and
governing authorities, as required. DHR should assess the benefits of making
OIG audit reports readily available to the general public.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 The OIG’s most recent audit reports contained findings relating to all of
the LDSSs’ major operational responsibilities, such as fiscal management
activities, as well as compliance with policies established by the DHR’s
Family Investment Administration and Social Services Administration
(Findings 4 - 8).
DHR should ensure that the LDSSs improve accountability and controls over
fiscal operations and information systems and comply with applicable DHR
administration policies as identified in the audit reports.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Local Department Operations (LDO) is one of seven budgetary units of the
Department of Human Resources (DHR). It consists of the funds appropriated for
operating the State’s 24 local departments of social services (LDSS) and
supporting the various assistance activities they administer. These activities
primarily involve the various DHR public assistance programs, such as the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (formerly the food stamp program)
and Temporary Cash Assistance, that are administered by the LDSSs under
policies promulgated by other units within DHR. According to the State’s
records, the LDO’s fiscal year 2014 expenditures totaled approximately $2.2
billion, which included approximately $1.7 billion in assistance program
expenditures and $500 million in operating expenditures (primarily employee
salaries and benefits).
The remaining six units of DHR (Office of the Secretary, Child Support
Enforcement Administration, Family Investment Administration, Social Services
Administration, Office of Technology for Human Services, and Operations
Office) are audited and reported upon separately by our office. Generally, these
six units direct or support the activities (including public assistance programs)
that are administered Statewide by the 24 LDSSs. The executive director of each
LDSS reports to the DHR Secretary.
Audit Approach
Section 3-602 of the Human Services Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires DHR to conduct, or contract for, a financial and compliance audit of each
LDSS at least once every three years. During our audit period, all 24 LDSSs were
audited by DHR’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG). To avoid duplication of
work, we performed audit procedures necessary to determine whether we could
rely on the audit work of DHR’s OIG to accomplish our audit objectives. Our
audit procedures were generally limited to obtaining a sufficient basis for that
reliance. Specifically, we reviewed the audit reports and the related working
papers of certain OIG audits performed during our audit period. Based on this
review, we concluded that the OIG’s audit coverage of the LDSSs provided a
sufficient basis for reliance on its work.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 16, 2012. We determined that one of
these findings was satisfactorily addressed. Specifically, the conditions identified
in our prior report finding pertaining to the LDSSs’ lack of compliance with
certain Social Services Administration policies were generally not cited as audit
deficiencies in the latest OIG audit reports on the LDSSs. The remaining five
findings are repeated in this report in that similar conditions still existed with
respect to centralized monitoring and oversight of the LDSS audit results and with
respect to certain other operations of the LDSS as noted in the OIG audit reports.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Findings From the Office of the Inspector General Audit Reports
Finding 1
The Office of the Inspector General’s audits of the local departments of
social services contained a significant number of reportable conditions,
including many repeat findings. Department of Human Resources executive
management had not established a formal process to provide oversight and
monitoring of corrective actions.
Analysis
The audit reports issued by the Department of Human Resources (DHR) Office of
the Inspector General (OIG) indicate that the local departments of social services
(LDSS) continued to have a significant number of deficiencies in five critical
areas of operations, including a large number of repeat findings. Although the
OIG has an established corrective action monitoring process for each audit report,
DHR executive management (which includes management of the relevant DHR
administrations) had not established a formal process to provide oversight and
monitoring of LDSS corrective actions. Furthermore, as detailed in Finding 2 of
this report, the OIG was not effectively following its corrective action monitoring
process. More active oversight could help ensure that audit findings are
addressed by the LDSSs and repeat audit findings are minimized.
As previously noted in this report, we placed reliance on the LDSS audits
performed during our audit period by the DHR OIG. Our review of the latest OIG
audit reports for all 24 LDSSs issued as of December 2014 disclosed that the
reports collectively included 299 audit findings, including 89 findings deemed by
the OIG to be repeat conditions from the preceding OIG audits.
Exhibit 1 includes a summary of the number of LDSS findings included in the
OIG audit reports, by critical area, including the number of repeat findings.
Certain of these findings are described in more detail in Findings 4 through 7 of
this report. Selected highlights of the information presented in Exhibit 1 are as
follows:
 The number of findings resulting from each LDSS audit ranged from 5 (two
LDSSs) to 30 (one LDSS). Five LDSS audit reports contained at least 20
findings.
9

--- Page 12 ---
 The greatest number of findings was found in the areas of fiscal management
(which includes procurement, disbursements, and receipts processing), and
compliance with policies of the Family Investment Administration (which
includes the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Temporary Cash
Assistance) and the Social Services Administration (which includes foster
care). The number of findings in these areas was 97, 70, and 63, respectively.
Not every LDSS report contained a finding in each of these critical areas.
 The total number of findings noted by the OIG has decreased (from 373) since
our preceding audit report; however, the number of findings deemed by the
OIG to be repeated has increased (from 77). Specifically, in our preceding
audit report, we noted that 21 percent of the OIG’s findings were considered
repeat findings; during our current audit, the percentage of findings deemed
by the OIG to be repeated was 30 percent. Nineteen LDSSs had at least one
repeat finding.
While DHR executive management had no formal process to oversee LDSS
corrective actions, we were advised by DHR executive management and the
LDSS directors that occasional discussions occurred regarding the OIG reports,
related findings, and corrective actions. DHR executive management advised us
that it is planning to form a task force to discuss effective strategies to resolve
these audit findings and, in particular, repeat audit findings.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHR (that is, the Office of the Secretary and the
management of DHR administrations) establish a process to actively monitor
corrective actions taken to address OIG audit findings (repeat).
OIG’s Corrective Action Monitoring Process
Finding 2
The OIG’s corrective action monitoring process for the LDSS audit findings
was not effectively followed to help ensure that appropriate corrective
actions were taken and that DHR executive management was properly
informed of the status of the findings.
Analysis
The OIG was not adequately monitoring LDSS corrective actions taken, as
required by its established process, for LDSS audit reports. Accordingly, there
10

--- Page 13 ---
was reduced assurance that DHR executive management was properly informed
of the status of the findings, as required by OIG policy, and that each LDSS had
properly addressed and resolved the findings. Furthermore, the OIG determined
certain findings were resolved based on insufficient evidence and, for other
findings there was no documentation indicating that the findings had been
followed up on at all. We reviewed the actions taken by five LDSSs to address
the 106 findings in the related OIG audit reports. As of February 2015, all five
audit reports had been issued for at least eight months. We noted the following
conditions:
 For the five audits reviewed, documentation was not provided by the LDSSs
to the OIG regarding the corrective actions taken to address 17 of the 106
findings, and the OIG had not adequately followed up with the related LDSSs
to obtain this information.
 The OIG determined, based on insufficient evidence, that certain findings
were resolved. In this regard, the OIG determined that 63 of the 106 findings
had been resolved; however, our review of the LDSS progress reports and
related documentation provided by the LDSSs disclosed that 19 of these
findings had not been adequately resolved. For example, the OIG audit report
for one LDSS noted that the inventory of merchant gift cards was not
reconciled to the related records by an employee who was independent of the
gift card process. The OIG reported that this finding was resolved because the
reconciliations were performed. However, based on the LDSS
documentation, the employee who performed the reconciliation was not
independent of the gift card process and, therefore, this finding was not
actually resolved. We discussed these 19 findings with OIG personnel who
generally agreed with our conclusions.
 For four of the five audit reports, which had been issued for more than one
year, site visits were not performed to assess the corrective actions taken by
the LDSSs, as required. According to the OIG’s policy, a site visit is required
to be performed approximately one year after the issuance of the audit report.
 Although we were advised by the OIG that periodic LDSS progress reports
and its assessments of those reports were provided to DHR executive
management as required by OIG policy, the OIG could not provide us with
documentation to support this assertion.
After the issuance of each audit report, the OIG’s corrective action unit uses the
LDSS-prepared corrective action plan as the basis to monitor corrective action.
This unit is separate from the unit that performs the initial audits. The OIG’s
11

--- Page 14 ---
corrective action monitoring process includes periodic meetings with LDSS
personnel and reviews of records provided by the LDSSs. The OIG is responsible
for documenting the actions taken by the LDSSs to resolve the findings and
periodically reports their progress to DHR executive management. Additionally,
the OIG’s policy requires it to perform a site visit at each LDSS approximately
one year after the issuance of the audit report. State law requires the OIG to
conduct the LDSS audits in accordance with the auditing standards issued by the
Institute of Internal Auditors. These standards require an audit follow-up process
to monitor and ensure that management actions have been effectively
implemented.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHR ensure that the OIG
a. follows up with the LDSSs when documentation of corrective action is not
provided,
b. obtains sufficient evidence as part of the corrective action process and
properly reviews the evidence to accurately determine the status of audit
findings,
c. performs site visits of LDSSs as required by its corrective action
monitoring policy, and
d. retains documentation of required reports provided to DHR executive
management regarding actions taken by the LDSSs to address audit
findings.
LDSS Audit Report Distribution
Finding 3
The DHR OIG did not distribute the LDSS audit reports to all appropriate
parties.
Analysis
The DHR OIG did not distribute its LDSS audit reports to all of the appropriate
governing authorities and to the local oversight boards, as required by State law.
The DHR OIG generally distributed its audit reports to the executive management
within DHR, to the applicable LDSS executive directors, and to the applicable
county executives (or Baltimore City Mayor). However, the reports were not
distributed to the members of the City or county council and to the LDSS
oversight boards, as required by State law. The LDSS oversight boards are
established to advise the LDSS directors and to communicate with the residents,
the DHR Secretary, and the local governing authorities. The boards are also
required by State law to review the OIG’s audit reports on their respective LDSS
12

--- Page 15 ---
and consult with their LDSS executive director as to the proper implementation of
the recommendations.
In addition, although the LDSSs administer programs that provide essential
services using considerable public funding (both State and federal), the OIG’s
audit reports on the LDSSs’ operations are not available to the public, such as
through DHR’s website. We acknowledge that the aforementioned law
concerning the distribution of the OIG’s reports does not require the public
issuance of the reports and that interested parties could request those reports under
the Maryland Public Information Act. Furthermore, public disclosure of audit
reports is not mandated by the standards issued by the Institute of Internal
Auditors, to which the OIG adheres. Nevertheless, publishing these reports is not
precluded by State law and would provide greater transparency, potentially
resulting in increased accountability by the LDSSs, especially those that have
experienced a higher number of repeat audit findings. Also, model legislation
issued by the Association of Inspectors General (AIG)1 includes a provision for
public reporting of audit findings, and we were advised by AIG staff that a few
offices of inspectors general in other states publicly issue their reports.
We were advised by DHR’s executive management that providing public reports
would result in the need for additional resources and increased costs, such as to
enhance its internal quality assurance process, and is unnecessary given that the
OIG’s audit findings are included in the audit reports of our office. Although
additional refinements to the reports may be needed for public release, that should
not be a deterrent. Furthermore, while our office does report the collective results
of the OIG’s 24 LDSS audit reports once every three years, publishing the
individual results of each LDSS report as each one is available would provide
more detailed and timely information.
Since DHR’s current executive management team has only been in place for the
last six months, DHR believes it should be given the opportunity to ensure that
the LDSSs implement the most recent OIG’s audit recommendations before it
considers such a significant change in its reporting procedures. To achieve that
goal, we were advised that DHR has recently formed an executive management
task force to address the resolution of OIG audit findings.
1The AIG is a national nonprofit organization with members drawn from the local, state, and
federal inspectors general communities. Its mission includes fostering and promoting public
accountability and integrity, and standardizing practices, policies, conduct, and ethics.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the DHR ensure that the OIG distribute the LDSS audit
reports to the local boards and governing authorities, as required by State
law. We also recommend that the issue of resolving OIG audit findings be
addressed by DHR, including an assessment as to whether issuing public
reports might be beneficial for improving accountability and transparency.
Local Departments of Social Services Audit Findings
The OIG classifies the findings from its audits of the 24 LDSSs into several
functional areas, referred to by the OIG as “critical areas.” These areas generally
equate to each LDSS' major operational responsibilities, which include
implementing policies established by the Family Investment Administration (FIA)
and the Social Services Administration (SSA), and adhering to fiscal and
information system regulations and/or controls. Using the results of the OIG’s
audits of the 24 LDSSs, we summarized some of the more significant findings in
five critical areas as they appeared in selected reports. Additional examples of the
OIG findings can be found in summary form in Exhibit 2.
Finding 4
Controls were insufficient over bank accounts, procurements, and gift cards.
Analysis
Controls and procedures were insufficient over certain LDSS fiscal management
activities. Specifically, 97 findings from the most recent OIG audit reports for 23
LDSSs related to fiscal areas (Exhibits 1 and 2) such as bank accounts,
procurements, and gift cards. Our review of various OIG audit reports disclosed
the following selected significant and/or prevalent findings related to fiscal
operations:
 Bank accounts, which were maintained by the LDSSs to pay for certain
administrative and program-related expenditures, were not reconciled timely
and had outstanding checks for extended periods. Also, former employees
had remained as authorized check signers and physical security over blank
check inventories was inadequate. Consequently, there is the potential that
unauthorized payments could be processed without prompt detection.
 State procurement regulations were not always followed. For example,
payments were made to vendors without written contracts and formal
procurement processes were circumvented. Consequently, assurance was
lacking that the related procurements were in the best interest of the State.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 Accountability of prepaid gift cards was not established. For example,
physical inventories of prepaid gift cards were not documented or were not
performed by an independent employee. Gift cards are provided to certain
public assistance recipients who are in urgent need of support; for example,
these gift cards could be used to cover the cost of a meal at a fast food
restaurant. A lack of accountability could result in the misuse of the prepaid
cards.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DHR establish appropriate accountability and control
over fiscal operations. Specifically, DHR should ensure that the LDSSs
a. establish adequate controls over bank accounts and blank check
inventories, including the timely preparation of account reconciliations
and resolution of outstanding checks (repeat);
b. comply with State procurement regulations (repeat); and
c. establish proper accountability over prepaid gift cards (repeat).
Finding 5
Numerous LDSS deficiencies existed related to critical FIA policies, such as
ensuring eligibility for public assistance and food benefits.
Analysis
Numerous LDSS deficiencies existed regarding the lack of compliance with
critical policies promulgated by FIA. Specifically, 70 findings from the most
recent OIG audit reports for 22 LDSSs related to FIA policies for public
assistance programs (Exhibits 1 and 2), including the Temporary Cash Assistance
(TCA) program and the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP). TCA provides cash assistance to needy families with dependent children
when available resources do not fully address the family’s needs and while
preparing program participants for independence through work, and SNAP helps
low-income households purchase food. TCA and SNAP benefits are accessed
through the Electronic Benefits Transfer System (EBT); the associated EBT card
functions as a debit card. Our review of various OIG audit reports disclosed the
following selected significant and/or prevalent findings related to FIA programs:
 Critical duties over EBT cards were not properly segregated. As a result,
LDSSs could not ensure that TCA and SNAP benefits were issued to the
intended recipients. In addition, the physical inventory counts of EBT cards
15

--- Page 18 ---
disclosed differences between the inventory on hand and the control records.
As a result, missing cards could be improperly activated and used.
 The required number of public assistance case files was not subject to
supervisory review, in accordance with FIA quality assurance policies. The
reviews are to be performed to help ensure the accuracy and propriety of
assistance payments and to help reduce and eliminate program errors.
 Potential payment or client eligibility errors indicated by periodic OIG
computer matches were not pursued timely. Deficiencies regarding computer
match follow-up were also commented upon during the most recent Office of
Legislative Audits (OLA) audit of FIA dated April 9, 2015. In that report,
OLA stated that FIA lacked documentation that all computer matches were
performed and that related system alerts were adequately resolved.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
According to the DHR records, during fiscal year 2014, SNAP disbursements,
which are entirely federally funded, totaled approximately $1.2 billion; TCA
disbursements, which are generally split between federal and State funding,
totaled approximately $203 million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHR ensure that the LDSSs comply with all FIA
program requirements. Specifically, DHR should ensure that the LDSSs
a. establish appropriate controls over the EBT card inventories (repeat),
b. perform supervisory reviews on the required number of case files
(repeat), and
c. perform timely follow-up on all potential payment or eligibility errors
identified by the OIG (repeat).
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 6
Numerous LDSS deficiencies existed related to critical SSA policies, such as
for the out-of-home placement program.
Analysis
Numerous LDSS deficiencies existed related to the lack of compliance,
accountability, and control over critical activities subject to SSA oversight.
Specifically, 63 findings from the most recent OIG audit reports for 19 LDSSs
related to SSA activities (Exhibits 1 and 2), including the out-of-home placement
and adoption programs and adult protective services. The out-of-home placement
program is a temporary service that provides short-term care and support to
children who are unable to live at home because of child abuse or neglect.
Generally, these children are temporarily placed in either kinship care (with a
relative) or a foster care setting (a fee-based individual foster home or group care
environment). Adoption services are provided to affect a permanent plan for a
child in out-of-home placement. Adult protective services exist to assist
vulnerable adults who are subject to abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or exploitation.
Our review of various OIG audit reports disclosed the following selected findings
related to the SSA programs:
 Out-of-home placement case files did not always contain documentation that a
caseworker had monthly contact with the child, as required by State
regulations. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that children in out-
of-home placements were receiving vital services necessary for their
emotional, physical, and educational well-being.
 Foster care trust accounts were not being appropriately maintained. For
example, instances were noted in which trust accounts remained open for
former foster care children, accounts had negative balances, and accounts
were not established when children had the necessary funds. Therefore, there
was an increased risk that children may be deprived of funds.
 Adoption expenses were not properly paid. Specifically, expenses were paid
without any documented support justifying the expenditure and without
obtaining partial reimbursement from federal funding.
 Adult protective services investigations were not always completed and closed
within 30 days for reported non-emergency incidents, as required by State
regulations. These investigations help protect the welfare of vulnerable
adults.
17

--- Page 20 ---
According to DHR records as of June 2014, there were 5,339 children in the out-
of-home placement program and 337 adoption cases. The related fiscal year 2014
expenditures totaled $303 million. Also, in fiscal year 2014, there were 9,139
adult protective service cases.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHR ensure that the LDSSs comply with all SSA
program requirements. Specifically, DHR should ensure that the LDSSs
a. document all monthly contacts between the caseworker and the out-of-
home placement child;
b. adequately maintain foster care trust accounts;
c. ensure that adoption expenses are proper and supported, and federal
reimbursement is obtained as allowed; and
d. perform adult protective services investigations within 30 days of
reported non-emergency incidents, as required.
Finding 7
Users’ access to certain key computer systems was not properly restricted
and monitored.
Analysis
Numerous LDSS deficiencies existed related to critical information system
security controls, including employee access to key systems. Specifically, 40
findings from the most recent OIG audit reports for 21 LDSSs related to computer
security (Exhibits 1 and 2). These findings included the lack of adequate security
over critical computer applications, such as the mainframe-based Clients’
Automated Resource and Eligibility System used to record, authorize, and
disburse TCA and SNAP benefits. Our review of various OIG audit reports
disclosed the following selected findings related to computer access and controls:
 Controls over the granting of user access to critical systems were inadequate.
For example, documents authorizing certain employee access were missing or
were not completed, and some employees were granted access capabilities
that were not required for their job duties.
 Employees’ assigned access capabilities were not properly monitored. For
example, the logonids of certain former employees were not deleted and
employee access was not periodically reviewed for continued appropriateness.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Based on these conditions, assurance was lacking that employee access was
necessary and appropriate. Unnecessary system access could potentially result in
unauthorized changes to critical data without detection.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHR establish appropriate accountability and control
over information system access. Specifically, DHR should ensure that the
LDSSs
a. maintain a properly completed and approved authorization form for all
user accesses granted, and assign access capabilities appropriate to each
employee’s job duties (repeat); and
b. perform formal, periodic monitoring of employee system access and
promptly delete the access of former employees (repeat).
Finding 8
Medicaid eligibility determinations for long-term care recipients were not
always proper.
Analysis
In addition to its audits of the 24 LDSSs, the OIG conducted a review of the DHR
Bureau of Long-Term Care, which performs eligibility determinations for
Medicaid long-term care recipients at several large LDSSs (Anne Arundel
County, Baltimore City, Baltimore County, and Prince George’s County). The
objective of this review was to determine if certain larger LDSSs were taking
appropriate action to ensure that Medicaid eligibility determinations for long-term
care recipients were proper.2 In its July 2014 report, the OIG determined that
certain case records could not be located, certain eligibility documentation was
missing, and real property searches were not conducted to assist in determining if
financial resources were within the limit established by State regulation. For
example, the OIG’s review of 42 long-term care case files disclosed 12 cases in
which eligibility determinations or lien documentation were inadequate.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding two audit reports.
2Through an interagency memorandum of understanding between the Department of Human
Resources and the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, the LDSSs perform the eligibility
determinations for the majority of Medicaid recipients.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHR ensure that the Bureau of Long-Term Care
properly performs Medicaid eligibility determinations (repeat).
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Resources (DHR) – Local Department Operations (LDO) for the period beginning
July 1, 2011 and ending December 14, 2014. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine LDO’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Section 3-602 of the Human Services Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires DHR to conduct, or contract for, a financial and compliance audit of each
LDSS at least once every three years. During our audit period, all 24 LDSSs were
audited by DHR’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG). To avoid duplication of
work, we performed audit procedures necessary to determine whether we could
rely on the audit work of DHR’s OIG to accomplish our audit objectives
pertaining to LDO’s major financial-related areas of operations based on
significance and risk. These areas addressed by the OIG audits included the
LDSS responsibilities to implement various DHR assistance programs as well as
their financial processes. Our audit procedures were generally limited to
obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance. Accordingly, we reviewed the audit
reports and the related working papers of certain OIG audits performed during our
audit period and reviewed certain aspects of OIG’s audit operations, including
those related to our prior audit report findings. Based on this review, we
concluded that the OIG’s audit coverage of the LDSSs provided a sufficient basis
for reliance on its work. As a result, we did not conduct audits of the LDSSs.
Rather, the findings in this report are primarily based on the results reported by
the OIG for the 24 LDSSs it audited during our audit period. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
Our audit scope did not include certain support services provided to LDO by
DHR’s Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll,
maintenance of certain accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are
21

--- Page 24 ---
included within the scope of our audit of the DHR Office of the Secretary. In
addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over
compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs (such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) and an
assessment of LDO’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including LDO.
LDO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect LDO’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The response from DHR, on behalf of LDO, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DHR regarding the results of our review of its response.
22

--- Page 25 ---
EXHIBIT 1
Summary of All Audit Findings
Reported by DHR’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
Most Recent Audits of the 24 Local Departments of Social Services as of December 2014
Number of OIG Reportable Findings by Area
(Refer to EXHIBIT 2 for a description of selected Number Percentage
Local Department of findings.) Total of Repeat of Repeat Fiscal Year
Social Services OIG 2014
Social Family Fiscal Computer OIG OIG
(LDSS) Findings Expenditures
Services Investment Manage- System Other Findings Findings
Admin. Admin. ment Security
Allegany County n/a 4 1 2 2 9 1 11% $39,378,780
Anne Arundel County 5 4 6 1 n/a 16 5 31% 109,354,808
Baltimore City 9 2 8 5 4 28 14 50% 742,453,073
Baltimore County 3 4 5 2 n/a 14 8 57% 259,858,949
Calvert County 2 5 1 3 1 12 4 33% 24,948,915
Caroline County 2 1 4 1 1 9 1 11% 18,644,502
Carroll County n/a 1 4 2 n/a 7 1 14% 30,674,390
Cecil County 2 2 3 1 1 9 2 22% 43,579,264
Charles County 4 6 6 2 2 20 6 30% 43,968,551
Dorchester County 1 3 n/a 1 1 6 2 33% 24,547,142
Frederick County n/a 2 4 n/a 1 7 1 14% 53,436,597
Garrett County 3 n/a 2 2 n/a 7 2 29% 12,973,375
Harford County 2 3 1 2 1 9 1 11% 64,203,087
Howard County n/a 5 15 2 4 26 8 31% 46,057,777
Kent County 1 1 3 n/a n/a 5 0 0% 9,366,453
Montgomery County 6 11 7 3 3 30 13 43% 163,316,060
Prince George’s County 8 7 6 2 3 26 14 54% 261,985,948
Queen Anne’s County 1 1 1 n/a 2 5 1 20% 12,618,447
Somerset County 1 1 6 2 1 11 0 0% 19,412,493
St. Mary’s County 4 1 3 1 1 10 4 40% 39,010,840
Talbot County n/a 2 3 1 n/a 6 0 0% 13,145,597
Washington County 2 2 2 1 n/a 7 0 0% 66,941,605
Wicomico County 6 n/a 3 2 n/a 11 0 0% 50,709,439
Worcester County 1 2 3 2 1 9 1 11% 19,327,203
TOTAL 63 70 97 40 29 299 89 30% $2,169,913,296
n/a – Not applicable; no findings reported in this area.
23

--- Page 26 ---
EXHIBIT 2
Selected Audit Findings
Most Recent Audits of the 24 Local Departments of Social Services
Reported by DHR’s Office of the Inspector General as of December 2014
Number of
Critical Area Selected Findings
Findings
Social Services Administration 63  case files were missing required documentation
Includes programs designed to  documentation of monthly contact with children in care
prevent or remedy abuse, was missing
neglect, or exploitation of  controls were inadequate over trust accounts (for
children and families, including example, accounts remained open when children left
out-of-home placement, adoption foster care)
services, and adult protective
 adoption expenses were not properly paid
services (Finding 6)
 adult protective service investigations were not
completed and closed timely
Family Investment 70  critical duties over electronic benefits transfer (EBT)
Administration cards were not segregated
Includes the Temporary Cash  physical count of EBT cards disclosed differences
Assistance (TCA) program and  required number of cases were not reviewed by
the Supplemental Nutrition supervisors to help ensure the accuracy and propriety
Assistance Program (SNAP), of assistance payments
including the electronic benefits
 discrepancies in outstanding collection amounts were
transfer (EBT) cards (Finding 5)
not reconciled
 overpayment claims were not established timely
 welfare avoidance grants case files were missing
required documentation
 OIG computer matches relating to potential payment or
eligibility errors were not pursued timely
24

--- Page 27 ---
EXHIBIT 2 (continued)
Selected Audit Findings
Most Recent Audits of the 24 Local Departments of Social Services
Reported by DHR’s Office of the Inspector General as of December 2014
Number of
Critical Area Selected Findings
Findings
Fiscal Management 97  bank reconciliations were not performed timely or
Includes bank accounts were not adequately approved
maintained by local departments  former employees remained as authorized check
of social services, small signers on bank accounts
procurements, gift cards, cash  physical inventories of pre-paid gift card were not
receipts, and corporate documented or were not performed by an independent
purchasing cards (Finding 4) employee
 procurement processes were circumvented
 internal controls over cash receipts were inadequate
 security over blank check inventories was inadequate
 outstanding checks were not voided after 180 days
Computer System Security 40  users’ access capabilities were not periodically
Relates to security over critical reviewed
computer applications, such as  logonids of former employees were not deleted
the mainframe-based Clients’  authorization documents for employee access were
Automated Resource and lacking
Eligibility System, which is used
 employees were granted access not required for the
to record and authorize TCA and
employees’ duties
SNAP benefits (Finding 7)
Other 29  child care subsidy cases were missing documentation
Includes certain administrative  supervisory reviews of child care subsidy cases were
operations and child care not performed timely
subsidy activities overseen by the
Maryland State Department of
Education
Total 299
25

--- Page 29 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Findings From the Office of the Inspector General Audit Reports
Finding 1
The Office of the Inspector General’s audits of the local departments of
social services contained a significant number of reportable conditions,
including many repeat findings. Department of Human Resources executive
management had not established a formal process to provide oversight and
monitoring of corrective actions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHR (that is, the Office of the Secretary and the
management of DHR administrations) establish a process to actively monitor
corrective actions taken to address OIG audit findings (repeat).
The Department’s Response
The Department of Human Resources (hereafter, DHR or the Department)
agrees with the recommendation.
The Department takes audit findings seriously and is committed to resolving all
audit findings identified in the report. However, for clarification purposes, we are
noting that these are not 299 different findings against the department but rather
findings that are duplicated among the 24 LDSSs.
DHR will cooperate with our Office of Inspector General as they continue to
conduct quality audits, on which OLA can continue to rely while improving our
monitoring and corrective action follow-up process.
As indicated by the Legislative Auditors, total findings have decreased; however,
we will not be satisfied until there is an even greater decrease in overall findings
and complete elimination of repeat findings. To accomplish this goal, DHR has
established a Corrective Action Monitoring and Resolution team spearheaded by
the Office of the Secretary. The team meets on a regular basis, identifies root
causes of findings among the local departments; provides solutions for resolving
the findings; as well as keep respective parties more accountable.
The OIG will continue to conduct routine follow-up reviews to determine and track
the progress of implementation of the corrective action steps and ongoing
compliance. With the effort described above, we are confident that repeat
findings will be eliminated, accordingly.

--- Page 30 ---
OIG’s Corrective Action Monitoring Process
Finding 2
The OIG’s corrective action monitoring process for the LDSS audit findings
was not effectively followed to help ensure that appropriate corrective
actions were taken and that DHR executive management was properly
informed of the status of the findings.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHR ensure that the OIG
a. follows up with the LDSSs when documentation of corrective action is not
provided,
b. obtains sufficient evidence as part of the corrective action process and
properly reviews the evidence to accurately determine the status of audit
findings,
c. performs site visits of LDSSs as required by its corrective action
monitoring policy, and
d. retains documentation of required reports provided to DHR executive
management regarding actions taken by the LDSSs to address audit
findings.
The Department’s Response:
The Department agrees with a portion of the recommendation with reservations.
a. follows up with the LDSSs when documentation of corrective action is not
provided – Disagrees.
OIG followed up with the LDSSs when documentation of corrective action
was not provided. Email correspondences of OIG’s efforts to obtain
documentation were provided to OLA for the occurrences identified.
Auditor’s Comment:
Subsequent to the issuance of the draft audit report, adequate
documentation of follow-up efforts was provided for certain OIG findings
and our report finding has been adjusted accordingly. We continue to
believe that substantive follow-up actions were not taken for 17 findings,
although DHR disagrees. It should be noted that the OIG intends to
eliminate this follow-up process; instead, it will conduct annual onsite
reviews, which will result in the issuance of a formal report.
b. obtains sufficient evidence as part of the corrective action process and
properly reviews the evidence to accurately determine the status of audit
findings – Agrees.

--- Page 31 ---
Nearing the end of legislative audit period, the OIG made several personnel
changes including filling a few key positions in the corrective action follow-up
unit that had been vacant for several months. The program supervisory
position was a key position filled to provide direct oversight of the corrective
action follow-up process. With a direct program supervisor on board, the
corrective action follow-up process has been modified to include more in
depth supervisory review similar to our internal audit process on which OLA
relied. Specifically, supervisory reviews will be performed to ensure
adequate documentation exist to support determinations made.
c. performs site visits of LDSSs as required by its corrective action monitoring
policy – Agrees with an explanation.
In an effort to reduce repeat findings, there was a temporary deviation from
our policy to heighten our focus on repeat findings via our corrective action
follow-up reviews. This deviation resulted in significantly more follow-up
reviews, especially on repeat findings, than the self-imposed requirement that
dictates only two annual onsite follow-up reviews. This temporary deviation
from our standard procedures did not lend itself to routine site visits because
of the numerous follow-up reviews that were being conducted simultaneously
with a significant staff limitation (i.e. at the time 50% staff vacancy rate within
the corrective action follow-up unit). We had resumed our practice of
conducting follow-up reviews via site visits prior to the commencement of this
legislative audit.
We continue to respectfully request that that this condition remains a
“discussion note only item” as documentation exists to support that follow-up
reviews were actually conducted just not always via site visits.
d. retains documentation of required reports provided to DHR executive
management regarding actions taken by the LDSSs to address audit findings
– disagrees.
Progress updates were provided to DHR executive management (the
Secretary) approximately every two weeks at a scheduled biweekly meeting
between the Inspector General and the Secretary. The Inspector General
provided updates verbally and at times, via an audit status update matrix. A
formal summary of these discussions would not be prudent as majority of the
matters discussed were confidential in nature as it related to various forms of
investigations and not audits only. Nonetheless, other correspondences
(emails, memos, etc) resulting from the meetings serve as support that
executive management (the Secretary) was kept apprised of OIG’s
assessment of corrective action implementation among the Local Department
of Social Services. Such documentation has been provided to the legislative
auditors.

--- Page 32 ---
We deemed this method of updating upper management to be sufficient and
most efficient to compliment the aforementioned temporary deviation from our
policy. The temporary deviation resulted in on-going follow-up reviews being
conducted, at times, monthly and weekly. Consequently, formal individual
reports for each follow-up review with the LDSS were not the most efficient.
Now that we are no longer conducting multiple on-going follow-up reviews,
we have resumed our practice of issuing a formal report to upper
management after the completion of each LDSS follow-up review in
accordance with our policy. Such report will further serve as documentation
that related parties are apprised of the progress of corrective action
implementation among the locals.
We continue to respectfully request that this condition remain a “discussion
note only item.”
Auditor’s Comment:
DHR disagreed with our statement that it lacked documentation that
progress reports were provided to DHR executive management.
However, in its response, it acknowledged that these progress reports
were verbal and stated that it has resumed its practice of issuing formal
reports to management, which should address the audit
recommendation.
LDSS Audit Report Distribution
Finding 3
The DHR OIG did not distribute the LDSS audit reports to all appropriate
parties.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the DHR OIG distribute the LDSS audit reports to the
local boards and governing authorities, as required by State law. We also
recommend that the issue of resolving OIG audit findings be addressed by
DHR, including an assessment as to whether issuing public reports might be
beneficial for improving accountability and transparency.
The Department’s Response:
The Department agrees with the recommendation with reservations.
OIG will continue to issue the audit report to the DHR’s upper management
(including the Secretary), LDSSs Directors, City/County Executive as well as post
the report on DHR’s intranet. Majority of the Local Department Directors serve
as members of their local boards and share the reports with the boards

--- Page 33 ---
accordingly. Nonetheless, OIG will also submit the reports to the respective local
boards and city/county council.
Making reports public: As noted by OLA, there are no laws or policies requiring
the public issuance of the reports and that interested parties could request those
reports under the Maryland Public Information Act. Additionally, public disclosure
of audit reports is not mandated by the standards issued by the Institute of
Internal Auditors, to which the OIG adheres.
In our opinion, it is not reasonable and somewhat misleading to generally
compare the federal and other States’ Office of Inspectors General (OIG) with the
DHR OIG, as the structures of the organizations are completely different.
Specifically, the federal and the other States’ OIG to which OLA is comparing
DHR OIG are completely separate, external entities to their auditees, which
make their audits external. As a result, the federal and these other States’ OIG
follow an external reporting process similar to the Office of the Legislative Audits.
We confirmed this via our research and discussion with the chief counsel at one
of the Offices referenced by OLA. By contrast, our OIG is a part of the DHR and
therefore, should be allowed to follow internal reporting process.
Furthermore, as noted by OLA these findings are already being disclosed to the
general public since the Office of Legislative Audits discloses the findings in its
report and OLA’s reports are made available to the general public. The
Department being required to make such disclosure would be a duplication of
effort, time, and potential waste of funds.
Specifically, if reports were to be made public, OIG would need to change its
reporting process and allocate more time and resources to establish a quality
assurance team, similar to the Office of the Legislative Audits, to ensure that the
content of the report is adequate for public release. This could result in increased
cost to employ additional resources or place undue strain on an already short-
staffed audit team, potentially affecting the quality and timeliness of audits.
DHR’s new management has established a robust Corrective Action Monitoring
and Resolution team and would like to be given the opportunity to resolve these
findings before such a significant change of procedures is considered.
Nonetheless, the Department will perform additional cost benefit assessment(s)
as recommended.

--- Page 34 ---
Local Departments of Social Services Audit Findings
Finding 4
Controls were insufficient over bank accounts, procurements, and gift cards.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DHR establish appropriate accountability and control
over fiscal operations. Specifically, DHR should ensure that the LDSSs
a. establish adequate controls over bank accounts and blank check
inventories, including the timely preparation of account reconciliations
and resolution of outstanding checks (repeat);
b. comply with State procurement regulations (repeat); and
c. establish proper accountability over prepaid gift cards (repeat).
The Department’s Response
The Department agrees with the recommendations.
a. establish adequate controls over bank accounts and blank check inventories,
including the timely preparation of account reconciliations and resolution of
outstanding checks;
In response to local department audits, training has been regularly provided
at monthly local department finance meetings on various fiscal topics. New
finance officers receive training from the Office of Budget and Finance upon
appointment, and local directors and finance officers can request training for
their staff.
To enforce accountability and control over bank accounts, the Department’s
Office of Budget and Finance will review all local department bank account
and funds control reconciliations on a quarterly basis to ensure compliance
with established fiscal policy and procedures.
b. comply with State procurement regulations;
To enforce compliance with State Procurement Regulations, the Department
has instituted Procurement Training during its bi-monthly Procurement
Advisory Committee meetings and will begin to review direct voucher usage
on a quarterly basis for compliance with procurement regulations.
c. establish proper accountability over prepaid gift cards
The Department is examining our use of gift cards to determine whether
these tools are still required to meet our program needs. To the extent that
we can identify sufficient alternative methods for issuing benefits and paying
for services on an informal, as-needed basis, the Department will discontinue
the use of gift cards. If sufficient alternative means cannot be identified (or

--- Page 35 ---
until such alternative means can be implemented), the Department will
provide Local Departments of Social Services with appropriate guidance and
training to apply the necessary accountability over gift cards.
Finding 5
Numerous LDSS deficiencies existed related to critical FIA policies, such as
ensuring eligibility for public assistance and food benefits.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHR ensure that the LDSSs comply with all FIA
program requirements. Specifically, DHR should ensure that the LDSSs
a. establish appropriate controls over the EBT card inventories (repeat),
b. perform supervisory reviews on the required number of case files
(repeat), and
c. perform timely follow-up on all potential payment or eligibility errors
identified by the OIG (repeat).
The Department’s Response
The Department agrees with the recommendations.
DHR has taken the following steps to ensure that all critical FIA policies, such as
ensuring eligibility for public assistance and food benefits, are maintained.
a. establish appropriate controls over the EBT card inventories
DHR will request a blanket hiring exception for clerical staff that supports
FIA's duties so that FIA's Executive Director could begin to approve or
redeploy the positions to offices that need to ensure separation of duties for
EBT card operations. For a long term solution, the FIA Audit Task Force will
examine the use of vault cards, by office, to determine if they are being used
appropriately, or if some of the recipients should have been directed to the
toll-free number to request a replacement by mail. LDSS EBT custodian will
continue to ensure documentation is completed prior to each transaction and
separation of duties is strictly followed at the local level. LDSS designee,
who does not perform EBT custodian duties, will complete monthly physical
inventory and report accordingly.
b. perform supervisory reviews on the required number of case files
FIA's Office of Operations now calculates the completion rates for the Pre-
reviews, monitors the local offices’ month-to-month Pre-reviews and is
designing a web-based PIRAMID Pre-review Direct system that will provide
immediate reports and calculations to assist local offices in meeting their
expected number of reviews. The Director of Program Evaluation will
continue to monitor compliance with the 10% new applications and 15%
redeterminations in accordance to the approved SOP.

--- Page 36 ---
c. perform timely follow-up on all potential payment or eligibility errors identified
by the OIG
The Bureau of Program Evaluation (BPE) is working with the Office of the
Inspector General to enhance FIA’s follow up with local offices that have not
addressed matches within the timeline requested by OIG (typically 30 days).
BPE's role is to email a letter to the Assistant Director of Family Investment
for the office describing the deficiency. After 30 days, if there are matches
that have not been dispositioned, another letter is emailed, but to the LDSS
Director. An electronic version of the letter is maintained in a file to document
this process.
BPE is also working with the Bureau of Information Analysis to create a
database that can be shared with BPE, OIG, and the local offices. This
database will allow more timely monitoring of the disposition of all cases in
addition to tracking of all cases addressed through this process. This new
database is scheduled for implementation before 2016.
Finding 6
Numerous LDSS deficiencies existed related to critical SSA policies, such as
for the out-of-home placement program.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHR ensure that the LDSSs comply with all SSA
program requirements. Specifically, DHR should ensure that the LDSSs
a. document all monthly contacts between the caseworker and the out-of-
home placement child;
b. adequately maintain foster care trust accounts;
c. ensure that adoption expenses are proper and supported, and federal
reimbursement is obtained as allowed; and
d. perform adult protective services investigations within 30 days of
reported non-emergency incidents, as required.
The Department’s Response:
The Department agrees with the recommendations.
a. document all monthly contacts between the caseworker and the out-of-home
placement child
The audit findings by OIG revealed two separate issues in relation to monthly
caseworker contact with children in foster care: failure to have monthly
contact with the child and failure to document that contact in MD CHESSIE
within 5 days. SSA tracks visitation between the caseworker and children on
a monthly basis. We have consistently met the statewide goal of 95%
children visited monthly over the past 18 months. Although we strive to visit

--- Page 37 ---
every child under a department’s custody every month, there are allowable
reasons that a visit would not occur, such as if the child is on runaway and
their whereabouts are unknown or if they are placed out-of-state.
The majority of the findings in this area stemmed from the failure of local
department staff to document the contact within 5 days of the visit. Most of
the locals have already put standard operating procedures (SOP’s) in place
aimed at ensuring prompt record keeping. SSA provides a monthly exception
report detailing the contacts that have not been put into the system by the 5th
day of the month following the contact date. SSA plans to provide further
technical assistance to the local departments to ensure compliance with this
requirement.
b. adequately maintain foster care trust accounts
The local departments cited for this deficiency have put in place procedures
to ensure that trust accounts are properly maintained throughout the time that
a youth is in foster care. Improved coordination between casework staff and
finance staff is recommended in order to ensure that accounts are disbursed
in a timely manner when youth leave the system.
c. ensure that adoption expenses are proper and supported, and federal
reimbursement is obtained as allowed
SSA agrees with the recommendation that SSA ensure that adoption
expenses are supported by proper documentation. The findings were in the
following areas: improper coding of service log entries, direct payment to
vendors vs reimbursement, and failure to obtain required documentation.
We will address each in turn.
1. Improper coding of service log entries
The improper coding was due to an issue within the MD CHESSIE
system that did not allow local departments to select the federal code
for IV-E eligible cases. This has since been corrected so we
anticipate correct coding of service log entries moving forward.
2. Direct payments to attorneys for adoption finalization
Local departments have ensured that staff are aware of the
requirements relating to reimbursement of attorneys fees. During this
audit period (FY13), SSA developed policy and provided training to
every local department on adoption subsidy procedures. The
procedures relating to the reimbursement for adoption finalization
expenses were reviewed.
3. Lack of documentation to support expenditures
In February 2009, MD CHESSIE started issuing the financial
payments for adoption subsidies. The subsidy rate is put into the
system by the user with an end date within 12 months. A new rate
must be established each year for payments to continue. During
FY11, we connected the requirement for completing a yearly
redetermination check list to the payment of subsidy, thereby

--- Page 38 ---
preventing a payment where no yearly redetermination has been
done. The checklist was updated to ensure that local staff obtain
required documentation before entering the new rate. During this
audit period (FY13), SSA developed policy and provided training to
every local department on adoption subsidy procedures. The policies
and procedures relating to required documentation were covered in
that training.
d) perform adult protective services investigations within 30 days of reported
non-emergency incidents
SSA agrees that APS investigations should be closed within 30 days, as
required by state law. The local departments have put in place standard
operating procedures to track that investigations are completed timely. It
should be noted that service delivery to the vulnerable adult begins at the
point of initial contact and is not delayed by the failure to meet the 30 day
closure timeframe. Additionally, the inclusion of financial exploitation as a
form of maltreatment in 2012 has negatively impacted the local’s ability to
complete investigations within the required timeframe as these
investigations require collaboration with financial institutions as well as
the gathering of documentation. SSA will continue to provide technical
assistance to the local departments to address this issue.
Finding 7
Users’ access to certain key computer systems was not properly restricted
and monitored.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DHR establish appropriate accountability and control
over information system access. Specifically, DHR should ensure that the
LDSSs
a. maintain a properly completed and approved authorization form for all
user accesses granted, and assign access capabilities appropriate to each
employee’s job duties (repeat); and
b. perform formal, periodic monitoring of employee system access and
promptly delete the access of former employees (repeat).
The Department’s Response:
DHR has procedures that can be found in the DHR Information Systems Security
Handbook that provides guidelines in establishing appropriate accountability and
control over information access. OTHS currently provides annual Security
Monitor Training for new and existing Security Monitors that provides the
procedures on how to request and revoke information access for users to DHR
systems. Security Monitor Training will be a mandatory training that will be

--- Page 39 ---
provided every six months. In addition, OTHS will perform periodic reminders to
Directors, Supervisors and Security Monitors of the responsibilities in the
handbook regarding the below recommendations. DHR is also developing a
process to periodically review the timeliness of access request and to ensure
proper access has been updated for change of duties and deleted for separation
or termination.
a. Assign access capabilities appropriate to an employee’s job duties and
maintain properly completed and approved authorization forms for all user
access granted
Supervisors of the employees should complete and forward the appropriate
security transaction form(s) to the Security Monitor when an employee needs to
be added to or deleted from a system; have his/her system access level
modified; or have a name changed. All forms need to be sent to the Security
Monitor in a timely manner. This is in-line with the guidelines of the Information
System Security Handbook.
b. Perform formal, periodic monitoring of employee system access and promptly
delete the access of former employees.
Supervisors of the employees are required to review at least annually (usually at
the employee’s annual performance review or when an employee's job
responsibilities changes) the employees' current job duties and compare them to
the employee’s current security access level to determine if any modification(s) is
(are) needed. This information should be available from the Security Monitor. If it
is not and a report of security access is deemed necessary, a Work Request
should be submitted to the OTHS. This is in-line with the guidelines of the
Information System Security Handbook.
Furthermore, in order to ensure that the security access of employees who
separate from the Department (as a result of termination, transfer,
resignation/retirement, or death) is promptly revoked from key computer systems,
HRDT has completed preliminary development of a new business process
designed to eliminate delays in notification to OTHS that an employee is leaving
DHR. We anticipate socializing this process to the Local Departments and
implementing this new procedure by June 1, 2015.
As currently conceived, the process requires the supervisor or personnel officer
to immediately complete an off-boarding form as soon as they receive notice of
the departure of an employee. Once submitted, OTHS as well as the security
monitor will receive the form submission so that the necessary actions can be
taken for each submission. The security monitors will continue to submit the
access request forms for add, update, and delete. The Off-Boarding form will
serve as a notification to submit the deletion requests. OTHS will follow up on
any requests that were not received.

--- Page 40 ---
Finding 8
Medicaid eligibility determinations for long-term care recipients were not
always proper.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DHR ensure that the Bureau of Long-Term Care
properly performs Medicaid eligibility determinations (repeat).
The Department’s Response
The Department agrees with the recommendations.
We recommend that DHR ensure that the Bureau of Long-Term Care properly
performs Medicaid eligibility determinations
FIA has guidance and training in place, instructing case managers to use several
different electronic tools (CARES, SOLQ, SDX, Document Imaging/Scanning) to
capture and maintain eligibility verification documents for LTC Cases. We
reinforce these policy requirements in basic case manager training as well as
"refreshers."
1. Refresher Training on the 5 Year look-back was completed June 2014. This
training will be conducted once per year.
2. Utilization of all online resources. BLTC staff were introduced to the newly
identified sources.
3. BLTC staff were trained on initiating Liens in July 2014. This training will
be conducted once per year.
4. System Screen Prints will be uploaded to ECMS for all cases.
Supervisory/Pre-Review process will include this review.
5. Documents regarding cases completed by the BLTC out-stationed staff are
uploaded to ECMS upon completion. Currently there is a process in place to
have the records uploaded. This process will continue as long as there are
Co-pay case managers working at off-site locations.
6. BLTC is tracking the 6-month lifecycle of the MA application using a newly
created database (LTC PIRAMID). CARES does not track any actions taken
on the application after an eligibility decision is made.
Automated "Requests for Outstanding Information" generated in
the LTC PIRAMID are sent to the applicant/authorized representative in the 4th
and 5th month of the 6-month consideration period.

--- Page 41 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Senior Auditor
Amanda M. Jones
Kathryn A. Jones
Staff Auditors