Title: Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration
Date: 02/17/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746ea
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:51:11.471054
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
February 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Fixed Route Transit Systems Passenger Fare Recovery Rates 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Light Rail Capital Projects
Finding 1 – MTA Did Not Verify the Accuracy of Billed Direct Labor Rates 9
for the Red and Purple Lines’ Architectural and Engineering Contracts
Mobility Paratransit Program (MPP)
Finding 2 – MTA Incorrectly Calculated Billing Rates Resulting in a 11
$10 Million Overpayment to MPP Vendors for Fuel Costs
Finding 3 – The MPP Eligibility Process Was Not Sufficiently Controlled 12
Finding 4 – MTA Paid State Excise Taxes for Fuel Used in MPP Service 13
Vehicles Although It May Be Exempt
Contract Monitoring and Payments
Finding 5 – MTA Did Not Ensure Costs Associated With a $24 Million 14
Change Order on a Commuter Rail Services Contract Were Reasonable
and Certain Billed Costs Were Not Adequately Verified
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 6 – MTA Did Not Always Comply With State Procurement 16
Regulations for Sole Source Contracts and Contract Awards
Finding 7 – Proper Internal Controls Were Not Established Over the 17
Processing of Purchasing and Disbursement Transactions
Transit Fare Collections
Finding 8 – MTA Did Not Have Adequate Procedures to Ensure All 18
Fare Collections Were Properly Secured and Deposited
Equipment
* Finding 9 – MTA Did Not Accurately Maintain Detail Records and Properly 20
Account for Its Equipment
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 23
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA)
February 2015
 MTA did not verify the accuracy of contractor-billed direct labor rates
for four architecture and engineering contracts for the Red and Purple
light rail line projects. The accuracy of these rates also affects the cost of
overhead and profit because both include a component based on total
billed direct labor rates. According to contract documents, the total
potential costs impacted by these direct labor charges were $232.8 million
(Finding 1).
MTA should perform verifications of the billed direct labor rates with the
contractors’ records of rates used to pay its employees.
 MTA’s error in calculating the vendors’ service hour billing rates for the
Mobility Paratransit Program (MPP) resulted in vendor overpayments
for fuel costs. Upon OLA bringing this error to MTA’s attention, MTA
determined that the error resulted in it overpaying approximately $10
million for fuel costs during the period from February 2013 to August
2014 (Finding 2). In addition, the MPP eligibility process was not
sufficiently controlled (Finding 3).
MTA should ensure that service hour billing rates are properly calculated in
the future and take appropriate action to recover the overpayments for fuel
from the MPP vendors. MTA should also establish the recommended controls
over the MPP eligibility process.
 MTA continued to pay State excise taxes for fuel used in MPP service
vehicles although State law appears to exempt MTA from paying these
taxes. During fiscal year 2012, MTA paid approximately $498,300 in
State excise taxes (Finding 4).
MTA should obtain a formal legal opinion from the Office of Attorney
General to determine if MTA is exempt from the payment of State excise
taxes for fuel used in MTA’s MPP service vehicles.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 MTA accepted a contractor’s price quote of $24 million for additional
commuter rail services under a change order, without preparing an
independent cost analysis to determine whether the price was reasonable.
In addition, MTA did not adequately verify the propriety of certain billed
charges relating to this contract, which totaled $6 million during fiscal
year 2014 (Finding 5).
MTA should ensure independent cost estimates are prepared to support and
evaluate change order amounts. MTA should also perform a documented
review of the supporting documentation for billed costs.
 MTA did not always comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, certain sole source contracts were not adequately justified,
the date of receipt of bid documents on competitive procurements was not
always recorded, and contract awards were frequently not published, as
required (Finding 6).
MTA should comply with State procurement regulations.
 Effective controls were not established over fare collections, purchases
and disbursements, and equipment inventory (Findings 7, 8, and 9).
MTA should ensure that appropriate controls are established and followed.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA), a unit of the Maryland Department
of Transportation, is responsible for the construction, operation, and maintenance
of the Baltimore metropolitan area transit system and for commuter services in
suburban areas of the State. Transit modes in operation primarily include bus,
Metro subway, light rail, and the Maryland Rail Commuter (MARC) service.
MTA is headquartered in Baltimore City and maintains a workforce of
approximately 3,100 employees. According to State records, during fiscal year
2013, MTA’s operating and capital expenditures totaled approximately $1.06
billion. These expenditures were funded by special funds totaling approximately
$853 million and federal funds totaling approximately $207 million.
Fixed Route Transit Systems Passenger Fare Recovery Rates
MTA reported that it did not attain passenger fare revenue levels during fiscal
years 2011, 2012, 2013,
and 2014 as required. Bus, Light Rail, and Metro Fare
Recovery Rates Combined
State law provides that
Actual and Required
the MTA shall recover
35 percent of its
40%
operating costs by
30%
establishing reasonable
20%
fares and implementing
10%
necessary cost
0%
containment measures. 2011 2012 2013 2014
However, as noted in this Required 35% 35% 35% 35%
Actual 29% 27% 27% 26%
chart, during fiscal years
2011 through 2014, Source: Farebox Recovery Reports
MTA’s combined
farebox recovery rates for its bus, Metro subway, and light rail operations failed
to meet required levels in each year. As reported upon in our preceding audit
report, required levels have not been attained since fiscal year 2005.
For example, during fiscal year 2014, MTA’s reported net passenger fare
revenues totaled approximately $83 million and net operating expenses totaled
approximately $319 million. To have satisfied the State law requiring a 35
percent farebox recovery rate during fiscal year 2014, MTA would have needed to
realize additional passenger fare revenues of approximately $28.6 million or
implement cost containment measures to reduce its system operating costs by
approximately $81.6 million (or a combination thereof).
7

--- Page 10 ---
According to Chapter 429, Laws of Maryland 2013, beginning in fiscal year 2015,
MTA is required to increase base fare prices and the cost of multiuse passes, to
the nearest 10 cents, for all transit services except commuter rail and commuter
bus service, based on a specified biennial increase in the Consumer Price Index
(CPI). Every five years thereafter, MTA must increase one-way zone fare prices
and the cost of multiuse passes, to the nearest dollar, for commuter rail and
commuter bus service by at least the same percentage as the five-year increase in
a specified CPI and by any additional amount MTA determines is necessary after
considering certain factors affecting commuting costs. These required fare
increases are not subject to specified public hearing requirements.
According to its fiscal year 2014 Farebox Recovery Report dated January 8, 2015,
MTA determined that, to comply with the aforementioned 2013 law, fares will
need to increase by at least $0.10 before the end of fiscal year 2015.
Nevertheless, this required fare increase, based on the CPI, would not solely
enable MTA to achieve the 35 percent farebox recovery rate in 2015.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 11 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated February 17, 2012. We determined that MTA
satisfactorily addressed 10 of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Light Rail Capital Projects
Background
In 2010, the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) obtained approval from the
Board of Public Works to contract with four architectural and engineering (A&E)
joint venture entities related to two light rail transit capital projects under
development – the Baltimore Red Line and the Washington Area Purple Line.
Both projects have experienced increases in estimated A&E and construction
costs and changes to the scope and schedules at various times since the
preliminary engineering phase. The Red Line was originally planned to cost $2.2
billion and, as of September 2014, has increased to $3 billion, and the Purple
Line’s original estimated cost of $1.9 billion has increased to $2.4 billion.
Sources of funding are to include the State’s Transportation Trust Fund, federal
funds, public-private partnerships, and local governments.
At the time of our audit, contracts for construction had not been awarded;
however, four A&E contracts had been awarded with original maximum not-to-
exceed amounts totaling $280 million. In July 2013 the value of the A&E
contracts was increased to $547.1 million, which included approximately $19.1
million in profit and approximately $528 million in estimated reimbursable costs
(direct labor costs of $91.1 million, overhead costs of $122.6 million, travel and
office expenses of $13.6 million, and subcontractor costs of $300.7 million).
According to MTA’s project reports, as of September 2014, A&E expenditures
totaled approximately $302.4 million ($170.2 million for the Red Line and $132.2
million for the Purple Line).
Finding 1
MTA did not verify the accuracy of billed direct labor rates for the
architectural and engineering (A&E) contracts for the Red and Purple Lines.
Analysis
MTA did not verify the accuracy of contractor-billed direct labor rates for the Red
and Purple Lines’ four A&E contracts by periodically reviewing contractor
records to substantiate those rates. The related contracts were cost-plus-fixed fee,
with the contractor receiving payment for the actual cost of direct labor for
individuals working on the project and other relevant expenses, plus an overhead
rate, and a fixed rate to provide a profit for the contractors. In accordance with
the payment terms, each contractor’s overhead rate and the fixed rate profit are
calculated using a formula based on the total billed direct labor costs.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Direct labor costs were based on an hourly labor rate and the billable hours
worked by contractor employees on the MTA projects. The hourly labor rates
were not specifically identified in the contracts, except to limit the maximum
hourly rate to $80. Each contractor was to notify MTA of its actual hourly rates
based on their actual employee costs, including any subsequent rate increase,
which MTA was to pre-approve. The monthly contractor billings were
accompanied by a payroll report, certified by a contractor official as to accuracy
and completeness, which identified the contractor employees, their hourly rates,
and the number of hours worked on the MTA project.
MTA did not have a comprehensive procedure to verify the propriety of labor
rates billed. Although MTA had sufficient procedures in place to approve
changes to labor rates, had verified hours worked by individuals, and had
monitored the overall progress of the work, MTA did not conduct periodic
verifications of the contractors’ payroll reports. Consequently, there was a lack of
assurance that the billed rates agreed with the actual labor rates the contractors
used to pay their employees. Furthermore, MTA did not compare the billed labor
rates on the contractors’ invoices to the rates that MTA previously approved to
ensure agreement. Besides directly affecting billed direct labor charges, the use
of inappropriate billing rates would also impact the overhead charges and fixed
rate profit, since these are based on the direct labor costs.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. perform verifications of contractor labor rates, at least on a test basis, to
ensure that billed labor rates reflect the actual labor rates paid to
contractors’ employees; and
b. agree the billed labor rates on contractor invoices to the MTA pre-
approved rates.
Mobility Paratransit Program (MPP)
Background
MTA operates the federally mandated Mobility Paratransit Program (MPP) for
individuals who are unable to use the MTA’s fixed route bus, Metro subway, or
light rail services due to a disability. The MPP provides door-to-door service
within a three-quarter mile range from any fixed route system. Participants must
generally pay the $1.85 fare or provide an MTA prepaid fare ticket to the driver
prior to obtaining a ride. According to MTA records, there were 24,860 certified
participants as of June 30, 2013.
10

--- Page 13 ---
MTA awarded contracts to three vendors in February 2013 to provide MPP
services. The current contracts are for a three-year period (and allow for two one-
year renewal options) and collectively total approximately $231.9 million. The
vendors provide the service using MTA-owned vehicles and are responsible for
providing the drivers, fuel, and vehicle maintenance. MTA receives monthly
invoices for MPP services performed by the three vendors. The amounts invoiced
primarily related to amounts due for service hours (hours worked by the vendors’
drivers), fixed costs (such as maintenance), and fuel costs. In addition, invoices
were reduced for fares collected by the drivers. As of July 2014, payments to
these vendors since inception of the contracts totaled approximately $89.9
million.
Finding 2
An MTA error resulted in the MPP vendors being overpaid for fuel costs by
approximately $10 million during the period from February 2013 to August
2014.
Analysis
MTA’s error in calculating the vendors’ service hour billing rates resulted in
vendor overpayments. When awarding the contracts to each vendor, MTA used
the vendor’s financial proposal information to calculate a service hour billing rate
for each vendor to use when invoicing MTA. However, MTA incorrectly
included the annual estimated fuel costs in its calculation. Since the contracts
required MTA to reimburse the vendors for actual fuel costs separately, the
inclusion of the estimated fuel costs in the service hour billing rates over-stated
the billing rates and resulted in overpayments. For example, our test of three
invoice payments totaling $5.2 million to one vendor disclosed that the $4.1
million for service hour charges included approximately $511,400 for estimated
fuel costs. Since the aforementioned three invoices also included a direct charge
of $683,600 for actual fuel costs, MTA had overpaid the vendor by $511,400.
MTA was unaware of this overbilling issue until we brought it to management’s
attention in July 2014. MTA investigated the matter and agreed with our
conclusion. We noted that there was no evidence that the calculation of the
service hour billing rates prepared by an MTA management employee was
independently reviewed. On October 6, 2014, MTA determined that, during the
period from February 2013 to August 2014, it had overpaid the vendors
approximately $10 million for estimated fuel costs included in the service hour
payments. We determined MTA’s calculation of the overpayment was
reasonable. MTA also met with each of the three vendors to communicate the
overbilling issue and formally notified them on October 27, 2014 that the service
hour billing rates would be corrected for fiscal year 2015, beginning in July 2014.
11

--- Page 14 ---
MTA made certain retroactive adjustments for the July and August 2014 bills,
which addressed $1.2 million of the total calculated overpayment. As of
November 2014, MTA, in consultation with its legal counsel, was assessing
potential actions to be taken to pursue recovery of the remaining $8.8 million it
overpaid for fuel during the months prior to July 2014.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that service hour billing rates are properly calculated in the
future, and
b. work in conjunction with its legal counsel to determine the appropriate
action to be taken to recover the aforementioned overpayments from the
vendors.
Finding 3
The MPP eligibility process was not sufficiently controlled.
Analysis
MTA lacked adequate procedures and controls over the MPP eligibility process.
An individual requesting MPP services is required to submit an application signed
by a healthcare professional documenting his or her disability and the reason(s)
the applicant is unable to use MTA fixed route transportation services. Each
applicant is interviewed by an MTA eligibility specialist who is responsible for
reviewing the application and supporting documentation and determining the
applicant’s eligibility. Once approved, each applicant receives a photo
identification (ID) card, which must be presented to the driver before each trip. In
addition, the card allows these individuals free access to MTA’s fixed route
system.
 The employee performing the daily independent review to verify that ID cards
were properly issued and accounted for did not document the completion of
the review. Specifically, a certain number of ID cards were issued daily to be
used for MPP applicants. At the end of the day, an independent review was
performed to verify all ID cards had either been issued to MPP applicants or
had been returned as unused.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 MTA conducted monthly reviews of a select number of approved applicants
to ensure proper determinations had been made by the eligibility specialists.
However, the reviews provided insufficient control because the eligibility
database identifying the population of applicants who received approval was
not used as the source for selecting eligibility determinations. Rather, the
physical files containing supporting documentation for the eligibility
determinations were used to select approved applicants for review.
Consequently, there is a risk that MTA would not detect applicants who were
approved for eligibility without the appropriate supporting documentation.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA
a. document the independent verifications conducted to determine that ID
cards were properly issued and accounted for, and
b. use the eligibility database as the source for selecting eligibility
determinations to review for completeness and accuracy.
Finding 4
MTA continued to pay State excise taxes to the Comptroller of Maryland for
fuel used in MPP service vehicles, although MTA may be tax exempt.
During fiscal year 2012, MTA reimbursed vendors approximately $498,300
for State excise taxes.
Analysis
MTA continues to pay State excise taxes to the Comptroller of Maryland for fuel
used in MPP service vehicles. There appears to be conflicting legal advice
regarding MTA’s exemption from paying State taxes.
In our preceding audit report we commented that MTA had not attempted to
obtain refunds of both federal and State fuel excise taxes for MPP vehicles. MTA
was able to successfully recover federal excise taxes. At that time, MTA pursued
its exemption from and recovery of State fuel excise taxes from the Comptroller
based on the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code. However, in February
2013, the Comptroller’s legal counsel advised MTA that its MPP service did not
qualify for an exemption and refund under that law since MPP service did not
operate on regular fixed schedules and routes, which was one of the criteria for
recovery.
However, according to the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, with the exception of water and sewer charges imposed by the State or
any of its agencies or political subdivisions, MTA (including its activities and the
property it owns or controls) is exempt from all taxes, assessments, and charges,
13

--- Page 16 ---
whether State or local. We brought this law to the attention of MTA’s legal
counsel in June 2014. MTA’s legal counsel agreed that the law applied to MPP
service vehicles, which are owned by MTA, exempting MTA from the payment
of State excise taxes and permitting recovery of excise taxes paid. As of October
2014, MTA’s legal counsel was planning to request a formal legal opinion from
the Office of the Attorney General to resolve the issue.
According to MTA’s federal fuel (diesel and gasoline) excise tax refund records,
MTA purchased 2.1 million gallons of fuel for MPP vehicles during fiscal year
2012. Based on the State’s fiscal year 2012 excise tax rate for fuel ($0.2425 per
gallon for diesel and $0.2350 cents per gallon for gasoline), we estimate MTA
paid approximately $498,300 for State excise taxes during that year alone. MTA
has continued to pay State excise taxes during fiscal years 2013 and 2014, but the
amount of taxes paid was not readily available.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA obtain a formal legal opinion from the Office of
Attorney General to determine if it is exempt from the payment of State
excise taxes for fuel used in MTA’s MPP service vehicles. If the opinion
concludes that MTA is exempt from such taxes, MTA should seek recovery
of the taxes paid.
Contract Monitoring and Payments
Finding 5
MTA did not ensure the value of a $24 million contract change order that
was determined by a contractor was reasonable, and certain billed contract
costs were not adequately verified.
Analysis
MTA did not ensure the value of a $24 million change order on a MARC
commuter rail services contract was reasonable in relation to the services
provided. In addition, variable costs billed under the original contract were not
adequately verified.
In October 2012, MTA entered into a five-year and eight-month contract (with
one five-year renewal option), with a base term valued at approximately $204.7
million, for the operation and management of two of its three MARC commuter
rail lines. As part of the contract’s scope, the contractor was to provide personnel
to operate and manage the service and inspect and maintain the service
equipment, facilities, and property. The cost to provide these services consisted
of both fixed and variable cost components. A contract change order, effective
14

--- Page 17 ---
December 2013, increased the fixed cost component by approximately $24
million to provide additional services, including new service operations and the
maintenance of a new train storage facility, bringing the maximum total contract
value to $228.7 million (including $80.8 million in variable costs).
 MTA did not prepare an independent cost analysis to determine the
reasonableness of the aforementioned $24 million contract change order.
Instead, MTA accepted the contractor’s price quote for the additional services,
which was based on certain assumptions MTA supplied to the contractor
(such as the number of personnel to run the additional services). MTA
management personnel responsible for monitoring the contract advised us that
verbal negotiations were conducted with the contractor to determine the final
change order amount. Although, under these circumstances such negotiations
were permissible, MTA’s Procurement Policies and Procedures require an
independent cost analysis to be performed for change orders to ensure the
costs proposed by contractors are reasonable.
Additionally, MTA paid the contractor approximately $362,400 during fiscal
year 2014 for one-time mobilization costs associated with the new services
(that is, to move contractor equipment to the facility site) even though
mobilization costs were not included in the approved change order. This
differed from the original contract which separately identified mobilization
costs as a variable cost component. Consequently, the Board of Public Works
(BPW) did not approve these one-time mobilization costs when it approved
the change order.
 Payments for supplemental work, including the purchases of rolling stock
parts and improvements to facilities, under the original contract’s variable cost
component, were not adequately verified. MTA did not document its review
of supporting documentation submitted by the contractor, such as sub-
contractor invoices, prior to approving contractor invoices for payment.
Rather, we were advised by MTA management that it only reviewed a cost
summary schedule provided by the contractor. Accordingly, MTA lacked
assurance that these variable costs for supplemental work were reasonable and
properly supported and were not included in the fixed costs separately billed
for maintenance of equipment and facilities. As of March 31, 2014, MTA
paid approximately $6 million for supplemental work during fiscal year 2014.
15

--- Page 18 ---
According to State accounting records, as of July 10, 2014, payments to the
contractor since the beginning of the contract totaled approximately $29.7 million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure independent cost estimates are prepared to support and evaluate
change order amounts as required,
b. pay only for costs supported by an approved contract or change order,
c. amend the change order to identify the mobilization costs and submit it
for retroactive approval from BPW, and
d. perform a documented review of the supporting documentation for
variable costs to ensure the costs are reasonable and were not already
provided for in the fixed costs.
Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 6
MTA did not always comply with State procurement regulations with respect
to sole source procurements and contract award requirements.
Analysis
MTA did not always comply with State procurement regulations for sole source
contracts, recording bids received on competitive bid contracts, and publishing
contract awards.
 Sole source contracts were not always procured in accordance with State
procurement regulations. Our test of 13 sole source procurements totaling
approximately $4 million disclosed that, for 8 procurements totaling $2.4
million, MTA did not have adequate justifications to support that only the
contracted vendors could provide the necessary goods or services, as required.
For example, for 2 sole source procurements totaling $1.6 million, for
information technology services and bus engines, the documentation merely
claimed that the vendors were reliable and could provide the goods and
services in a cost-effective or reasonable manner. For 5 other procurements
totaling $690,300, we identified other potential vendors that could possibly
provide similar goods within MTA’s specifications.
 MTA did not always record when bid documents were received, as required.
Our test of seven contracts totaling approximately $681.2 million disclosed
that MTA could not provide any documentation (such as a date stamp on the
bid documents) that bids had been received by the submission deadlines for
six contract awards totaling approximately $645.1 million. For example, the
16

--- Page 19 ---
bid documents for a $156.5 million contract for overhauling light rail vehicles
were not recorded upon receipt. Accordingly, there is no assurance that the
bids met the bid submission deadline and therefore were qualified for
consideration of an award.
 MTA did not routinely publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace
(eMM), as required. Based on our review of eMM records, MTA had 153
contracts with bid opening dates of January 24, 2012 through December 15,
2013; however, no awards were published on eMM, as of June 27, 2014, for
135 contracts, including the aforementioned $156.5 million light rail contract.
State procurement regulations require that the justifications for sole source
procurements be prepared and approved prior to contract award and that they be
documented in writing, that a record be maintained of the date of receipt of
contract bids, and that contract awards greater than $25,000 be published on eMM
within 30 days of the contract award.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MTA comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, we recommend that MTA
a. procure sole source contracts only when a single vendor can meet the
requirements and adequately document its justification,
b. record bid documents when they are received, and
c. publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Finding 7
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of
purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Analysis
The security features available on the State’s Financial Management Information
System (FMIS) were not fully used by MTA to establish proper internal control
over certain purchasing and disbursement transactions. Specifically, MTA had
not established adequate electronic approval paths over all critical purchasing and
disbursement transactions for 17 of its 27 departments.
Consequently, 14 employees could process critical transactions in departments
with inadequate or no approval paths. Specifically, 8 employees could initiate
and approve purchase orders and 5 other employees could initiate and approve
disbursements in multiple departments (for example, bus inventory), without
independent approval. Additionally, one employee with the aforementioned
abilities also had the capability to initiate and approve both purchasing and
17

--- Page 20 ---
disbursement transactions in the accounts payable grants office. Furthermore, 3
of the employees who could initiate disbursements could also approve and release
the disbursements for payment.
Although our testing did not disclose any improper disbursements, unauthorized
transactions could be processed which may not be readily detected. During fiscal
year 2013, MTA used FMIS to process disbursements totaling approximately
$804 million.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MTA fully use available FMIS security controls by
establishing independent electronic approval requirements for all critical
purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Transit Fare Collections
Finding 8
MTA did not have adequate procedures to ensure all fare collections were
deposited and security over the collections needs improvement.
Analysis
Collections were not adequately verified to bank deposit and security over the
collections needs improvement. MTA collects cash and credit card passenger
fares through ticket vending machines for light rail and Metro subway and
collects bus fares through on-board fareboxes. All passenger fare collections are
recorded in an automated fare collection system upon receipt. Although various
fare collection system reports are generated, we found that MTA was not using all
the appropriate reports to verify that all recorded collections were subsequently
deposited. Furthermore, controls over employee access to fare collection
equipment were inadequate and MTA did not periodically assess its protection of
credit card information collected through ticket vending machines in accordance
with industry standards.
Bus fare collection boxes containing cash and coin are securely transferred to
safes, which are transported daily to MTA’s secured central money room. Locked
collection boxes are retrieved from Metro subway and light rail ticket vending
machines and transported daily to the money room. The collections are not
accessible until received in the money room, where the safes and locked
collection boxes are opened and the funds are counted and prepared for bank
deposit. During fiscal year 2013, collections processed through the money room
and deposited totaled approximately $47.6 million, including $32.6 million from
18

--- Page 21 ---
bus operations and $15 million from ticket vending machines. Additionally,
MTA collected credit card receipts totaling approximately $7.2 million through
the ticket vending machines.
 MTA did not use two available reports generated by its automated fare
collection system to ensure that all initially recorded fare collections were
subsequently transferred to the money room. One of these reports detailed the
daily amount of fares initially collected and recorded by each bus farebox.
The second report detailed the amount of these collections that were not
placed in a safe for transfer to the money room. Instead, MTA only used a
third report that identified the amount of these initial collections that were
actually placed in a safe for transfer to the money room. The use of all three
reports is necessary since, due to mechanical issues related to the transfer
process between the bus fareboxes and the safes, all collections for a
particular day may not always make it into a safe at the same time for
transport to the money room.
The failure to use these three reports together resulted in a lack of assurance
that all daily collections were accounted for from initial receipt to deposit.
For example, for the month of May 2013, MTA accounted for collections
totaling $2,764,212 that were placed in safes to be transported to the money
room. However, had MTA used the aforementioned two reports, it would
have identified farebox collections totaling $2,813,574 to be accounted for.
According to MTA’s records, during fiscal year 2013, the amount of cash and
coin fares collected but not placed in a safe for transfer to the money room on
the same day totaled $623,933. Consequently, there is a lack of assurance that
all farebox collections were properly accounted for and transferred to the
money room for deposit.
Although it was not documented, MTA believes that all daily farebox
collections were subsequently deposited, perhaps the next day. With the
existing records it was not possible to verify MTA’s assertion; however, our
limited review of one month’s farebox collection records and related deposits
did disclose that deposit amounts sometimes exceeded the fare collection
report totals for that day.
 MTA did not compare the deposit documentation available from the bank to
deposit totals prepared by the money room to ensure that all funds were
deposited with the bank. Furthermore, MTA did not verify that the proper
amount from credit card collections initially recorded in its automated fare
collection system agreed to reported fare collections from its credit card
processer and the amounts deposited to its bank account.
19

--- Page 22 ---
 MTA did not periodically generate and review reports of employees with
access to the fare collection equipment or the secure money room to determine
the appropriateness of the access. For example, our review of a list of 190
employees with access to various keys used in the fare collection process
identified 17 individuals with incompatible key access, which if certain keys
were used together, could allow unrestricted access to cash.
 MTA had not conducted quarterly vulnerability scans and annual self-
assessments, recommended by the Payment Card Industry (PCI), to determine
compliance with PCI’s Data Security Standard (DSS). These periodic scans
and assessments would assist in protecting cardholder data for credit card
transactions processed through its ticket vending machines. Specifically,
although MTA completed a self-assessment questionnaire on January 9, 2014,
questionnaires were not completed in previous years and vulnerability scans
were not performed. Without periodic vulnerability scans and annual self-
assessments, data security weaknesses may not be detected and corrected
timely. For example, the January 2014 self-assessment disclosed that anti-
virus software used by certain fare collection equipment was not current.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MTA
a. use available reports from its automated fare collection system to verify
all cash and credit card collections initially received are subsequently
deposited and determine if the aforementioned $623,933 has been
accounted for,
b. periodically (such as monthly) generate and review access reports to
ensure that there is a proper separation of key assignments and that only
authorized employees have access to fare collection equipment or to the
money room,
c. remove the improper key access of the aforementioned employees, and
d. perform periodic vulnerability scans and assessments of credit card
processing activities in accordance with the PCI DSS.
Equipment
Finding 9
MTA did not accurately maintain detail records and properly account for all
of its equipment.
Analysis
MTA did not adequately control its equipment and properly maintain the related
records. According to MTA’s records, its equipment inventory totaled
20

--- Page 23 ---
approximately $1.4 billion as of June 30, 2013, the majority of which was rolling
stock (such as buses and rail cars).
 MTA did not conduct a physical inventory of sensitive equipment items
during our audit period. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all
equipment was recorded in the detailed records. The last complete sensitive
inventory count was conducted in December 2010.
 Certain equipment recorded in MTA’s detailed property records could not be
located. Specifically, our test of 25 equipment items totaling $17.5 million
disclosed that MTA could not locate 4 items totaling $16.8 million. For
example, we were advised that 2 recorded items totaling $16.6 million were
actually multiple information technology and communication equipment
items; however, MTA could not identify the items included. MTA advised us
that these multiple equipment items were probably old and most likely had
been disposed of in prior years. A similar condition was commented upon in
our preceding audit report.
 MTA did not have an adequate process for identifying all purchased
equipment items required to be included in the detailed property records.
Rather, MTA relied on notifications from the employees who purchased the
equipment items and, as a result, certain items were not recorded. Our test of
25 equipment items at MTA locations disclosed that 8 items (including digital
cameras) were not recorded in the detailed property records. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
The Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual requires that a
physical inventory be conducted for sensitive items on an annual basis and that
equipment records be maintained in accordance with prescribed standards.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MTA ensure that equipment is properly accounted for
and controlled in accordance with the Department of General Services’
Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend that MTA
a. conduct sensitive inventory counts annually;
b. investigate the aforementioned missing equipment and take appropriate
corrective action (repeat); and
c. ensure all equipment, including the items noted above, is properly
recorded in the detailed property records (repeat).
21

--- Page 24 ---
22

--- Page 25 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Department of
Transportation – Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) for the period
beginning January 1, 2011 and ending December 15, 2013. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MTA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, procurement and disbursements for
capital projects and operating expenditures, payroll, federal Mobility/Paratransit
and Reduced Fare programs, state grants, federal funds, equipment, and materials
supplies. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MTA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System and the Maryland Department of Transportation’s Financial
Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the
State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are performed as part
of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits and
were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that the
data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during this audit. We also extracted data from
MTA’s union payroll and pension systems for the purposes of testing payroll and
pension transactions. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Our audit did not include certain payroll support services provided by the State
Highway Administration to MTA for its non-union management payroll. These
payroll support services are included within the scope of our audit of the State
Highway Administration. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of
internal controls for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of
MTA’s compliance with federal laws and regulations pertaining to those
programs because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm
to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including MTA.
MTA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MTA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MTA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Maryland Department of Transportation’s response, on behalf of MTA, to
our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our
review of its response.
24

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Finding 1
MTA did not verify the accuracy of billed direct labor rates for the architectural and engineering
(A&E) contracts for the Red and Purple Lines.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. perform verifications of contractor labor rates, at least on a test basis, to ensure that billed
labor rates reflect the actual labor rates paid to contractors’ employees; and
b. agree the billed labor rates on contractor invoices to the MTA pre-approved rates.
Response:
a. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. To ensure that billed labor rates reflect labor
rates paid, the MTA Office of Audits will perform verifications, on a test basis, of the prime
contractor’s payroll reports for the aforementioned A&E contracts. These payroll verifications will
be incorporated into the Office of Audits annual audit plan beginning fiscal year 2016. The
verifications will be conducted annually and will consist of testing a sample of invoices billed by the
prime contractors and verifying that the direct labor rates billed to the MTA represent the
contractor’s actual direct labor costs. This verification is an additional internal control over the
accuracy of A&E contractor billings. As noted in the analysis, A&E contractors are required to
certify the accuracy of the rates billed on every monthly invoice.
b. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The MTA Office of Transit Development and
Delivery performs a monthly reconciliation to ensure that the labor rates billed by the consultant
agree with the preapproved hourly labor rates in the Financial Management Component (FMC)
system. The FMC was specifically developed to record consultant hours worked in a Work
Breakdown Structure. The MTA Office of Transit Development and Delivery also records the
consultant hourly labor rates, overhead rates and profit percentage in the FMC system. The data in
the FMC system are then compared and reconciled to the consultant’s invoice. This reconciliation
will be documented and retained for audit purposes.
1

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Finding 2
An MTA error resulted in the MPP vendors being overpaid for fuel costs by approximately $10
million during the period from February 2013 to August 2014.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that service hour billing rates are properly calculated in the future, and
b. work in conjunction with its legal counsel to determine the appropriate action to be taken to
recover the aforementioned overpayments from the vendors.
Response:
a. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The MTA identified and reviewed the proper
formula for calculation of variable rates from the contractor’s Best and Final Offer (BAFO) cost
sheets. The MTA has provided the BAFO cost sheets to each contractor, which includes the correct
variable rates for each year of the contract term. The contractors are currently billing the MTA at the
correct variable rates based on the approved BAFO rates excluding the Estimated Fuel Cost. The
MTA will continue to closely review each submitted invoice for completeness and accuracy to ensure
that the billing rates are accurate before approving contractor invoices for payment.
b. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The MTA is actively pursuing recovery of all
overpayments. Following a meeting with the three contractors, the MTA has successfully recovered
the overpayment for one contractor and will have equal monthly amounts deducted from future
invoices to the two remaining contractors through December 2015 to ensure all overpayments have
been recovered. The MTA has recalculated the variable billing rates using the contractor’s BAFO
cost sheets. These rates were used to determine the amount of overpayments for each contractor from
prior invoiced billings.
2

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Finding 3
The MPP eligibility process was not sufficiently controlled.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA
a. document the independent verifications conducted to determine that ID cards were properly
issued and accounted for, and
b. use the eligibility database as the source for selecting eligibility determinations to review for
completeness and accuracy.
Response:
a. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The Mobility staff performs a daily review
using information from the ID Card Camera database and compares it to eligibility information from
the Mobility Client Database. An independent verification is performed, which is documented and
signed by a supervisor, to ensure the accuracy of the daily audit review.
b. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The Mobility Office has created a client
database report titled Certification Data Validation Report that is currently used when sampling
eligibility determinations to review for completeness and accuracy. The Mobility Client Database
record is reviewed for each determination in the sample selection. If an individual was certified, or
denied certification, the file is reviewed and signed by a supervisor to ensure accuracy and
completeness. These reviews will be performed monthly to allow time for all the documentation to
be scanned into the database.
3

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Finding 4
MTA continued to pay State excise taxes to the Comptroller of Maryland for fuel used in MPP
service vehicles, although MTA may be tax exempt. During fiscal year 2012, MTA reimbursed
vendors approximately $498,300 for State excise taxes.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA obtain a formal legal opinion from the Office of Attorney General to
determine if it is exempt from the payment of State excise taxes for fuel used in MTA’s MPP
service vehicles. If the opinion concludes that MTA is exempt from such taxes, MTA should seek
recovery of the taxes paid.
Response:
The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The MTA Administrator sent a letter to the
Office of the Attorney General seeking a formal legal opinion to determine if MTA is exempt from
paying State excise taxes on fuel for mobility service vehicles. Upon receipt of the formal legal opinion,
the MTA will take the appropriate follow up action, including the recovery of the taxes paid, if that
determination is made.
Finding 5
MTA did not ensure the value of a $24 million contract change order that was determined by a
contractor was reasonable, and certain billed contract costs were not adequately verified.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure independent cost estimates are prepared to support and evaluate change order amounts
as required,
b. pay only for costs supported by an approved contract or change order,
c. amend the change order to identify the mobilization costs and submit it for retroactive
approval from BPW, and
d. perform a documented review of the supporting documentation for variable costs to ensure the
costs are reasonable and were not already provided for in the fixed costs.
4

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Response:
a. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. For future contract change orders,
independent cost estimates will be prepared to support and evaluate change order amounts. The
MTA Procurement Office will add this step as part of its change order checklist and will ensure
completion prior to submitting change orders for Board of Public Works (BPW) approval. The
Procurement Office and the MTA project/contract managers will be required to submit the
independent cost analysis as part of the change order packet. The MTA change order procedures
will be updated and distributed to all project/contract managers and procurement officers by
February 28, 2015.
b. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The MTA will only pay for costs invoiced
and supported by an approved contract or change order and submitted with appropriate
documentation.
c. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. Please note that the MTA reviewed the
change order documentation and determined that the mobilization costs were identified in the
original proposal submitted by the Contractor and were subsequently approved by BPW as required.
Mobilization costs were clearly identified in the proposal as a one-time cost to be applied to the first
month invoice of the first year. The MTA will consult with the BPW staff by March 16, 2015,
regarding the details of the aforementioned change order. The MTA will take appropriate corrective
action based on the advice of the BPW staff.
d. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The MTA will perform a review of
supplemental services to determine if the services are reasonable and not already provided in the
fixed fee costs. Effective February 28, 2015, the project manager will implement an internal invoice
review and sign-off procedure, improve the task order process for Stations and Facilities and retain
monthly documentation of the invoice review.
5

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Finding 6
MTA did not always comply with State procurement regulations with respect to sole source
procurements and contract award requirements.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MTA comply with State procurement regulations. Specifically, we
recommend that MTA
a. procure sole source contracts only when a single vendor can meet the requirements and
adequately document its justification,
b. record bid documents when they are received, and
c. publish contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace as required.
Response:
a. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation and has taken appropriate measures to ensure
that all procurements of goods and services, especially sole source procurements, are conducted
within the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) and BPW advisories. The Office of
Procurement has conducted training for its procurement officers to ensure sole source procurements
are in accordance with COMAR regulations. Furthermore, the MTA is currently using a checklist
for each procurement ensuring that all procurements have the required backup documentation prior
to award: procurement officer’s determination, letter from vendor stating sole
proprietorship/manufacturer and distributor of item(s) or services (if applicable), and written
approval by the MTA Administrator or designee.
b. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The Procurement Office has created and is
currently using a bid receipt form that records the date stamp, bidder’s information, contract number
and name of the individual who received the bid. A copy of the bid receipt form is given to the
bidder’s representative and the original is maintained with the procurement file.
c. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation and will update its Standard Operating
Procedures by February 28, 2015, to incorporate posting all solicitations and awards on eMaryland
Marketplace instead of providing a link directing bidders/proposers to the MTA’s Procurement
website to download the solicitation.
6

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Finding 7
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of purchasing and disbursement
transactions.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MTA fully use available FMIS security controls by establishing independent
electronic approval requirements for all critical purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Response:
The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation and has taken the appropriate actions to establish
and limit the initiation and approval of both purchasing and disbursement transactions. Approval path
levels were updated as of February 9, 2015, for each identified area and the applicable individuals will
only have the ability to either initiate or approve transactions, not both.
Finding 8
MTA did not have adequate procedures to ensure all fare collections were deposited and security
over the collections needs improvement.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MTA
a. use available reports from its automated fare collection system to verify all cash and credit
card collections initially received are subsequently deposited and determine if the
aforementioned $623,933 has been accounted for,
b. periodically (such as monthly) generate and review access reports to ensure that there is a
proper separation of key assignments and that only authorized employees have access to fare
collection equipment or to the money room,
c. remove the improper key access of the aforementioned employees, and
d. perform periodic vulnerability scans and assessments of credit card processing activities in
accordance with the PCI DSS.
7

--- Page 35 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Response:
a. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. Effective November 1, 2014, the Office of
Fare Collection Systems & Services (formerly Treasury) began using the two reports referenced in
the finding when reconciling bus revenue. Using both reports in our bus reconciliation will ensure
that all bus revenue has been accounted for and securely deposited. By using these reports, the MTA
was able to determine that the noted fiscal year 2013 difference was actually deposited into the State
Treasury and reconciled to revenue reports. As noted by the auditors in the finding, there are inherent
mechanical issues related to the bus fare collection equipment. By utilizing these available reports,
the MTA is able to have assuance that all bus farebox collections are properly accounted for and
safely deposited in the bank.
The Office of Fare Collection Systems & Services reconciles credit sales on a monthly basis using
deposit data received from the State Treasurer’s Office and verified against the bank settlement data
segregated by Credit Card issuer. Beginning November 1, 2014, the Office of Fare Collection
Systems & Services started to compare the daily settlement reports from the Debit/Credit Switch
against the bank daily settlement reports. This review will ensure that all transactions approved by
the fare collection system Debit/Credit Switch have been processed and settled properly by the bank.
b. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. As a standard procedure, an employee’s
access to the key cabinet is revoked upon their departure from the MTA or when they no longer need
access to the keys. The Office of Fare Collection Systems & Services maintains a log of when
employees’ access has been revoked. The Office of Fare Collection Systems & Services will perform
reviews twice a year to ensure employees no longer needing access have had their permissions
revoked. These reviews will be documented and retained for audit purposes.
c. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. To prevent improper access to fare collection
revenues, the key cabinet is programmed to allow Fare Collection Systems & Services technicians to
remove only one key set from the secured cabinet at a time. This control will not allow an individual
to possess multiple key sets at any given time, therefore preventing improper access to fare collection
revenues. These controls have been in place since the key cabinets were installed five years ago.
The MTA verified that the 17 employees identified in the finding are given access to pull only one set
of keys from the key cabinet at a time.
d. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. Security scans and penetration testing is
conducted on a consistent basis with monthly reviews of our network infrastructure. This process is
conducted throughout the MTA/MDOT network and is performed by MDOT’s security department in
cooperation with MTA’s network/systems personnel. The MTA’s Office of Fare Collection Systems
& Services is currently in the process of updating the ticket vending equipment, and installing a new
anti-virus software package on 172 ticket vending machines. The anti-virus software is in
compliance with MTA/MDOT security policies. The MTA anticipates completion of the installation
by June 30, 2015. This will bring the fare collection equipment into compliance with PCI policies.
8

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2011 to December 15, 2013
Finding 9
MTA did not accurately maintain detail records and properly account for all of its equipment.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MTA ensure that equipment is properly accounted for and controlled in
accordance with the Department of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we
recommend that MTA
a. conduct sensitive inventory counts annually;
b. investigate the aforementioned missing equipment and take appropriate corrective action
(repeat); and
c. ensure all equipment, including the items noted above, is properly recorded in the detailed
property records (repeat).
Response:
a. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. A physical inventory count of sensitive items
was initiated in April 2013 and completed in June 2013. Moving forward, the MTA will perform a
physical inventory of sensitive items annually as specified in the Department of General Services’
Inventory Control Manual. The MTA is currently working on a multistep procurement for inventory
support services to assist with the comprehensive inventory. The current sensitive inventory count
will be complete in April with the final reconciliation done by June 30, 2015.
b. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The MTA is currently investigating the
missing equipment items noted in the audit finding. Based on the results of the investigation, the
appropriate corrective action will be taken by April 30, 2015.
c. The MTA concurs with the auditor’s recommendation. The MTA will strengthen its inventory
control procedures to ensure that all equipment is properly recorded in the detailed property records.
The MTA will conduct training at the various locations for all accountable officers once a year. The
Fixed Assets Division will perform a quarterly review to include updating the accountable officers
list and a succession plan with mandatory training for employees identified as the “backup”
accountable officer. In addition, Standard Operating Procedures for fixed assets will be issued and
distributed as part of the current accountable officer training, which will conclude by February 28,
2015. These controls, policies and procedures will ensure that effective communication, training and
follow-up will lead to equipment being identified, tagged and communicated to fixed assets in an
efficient manner. The MTA investigated and identified the 8 items noted in the finding, and
subsequently updated the detailed property records.
9

--- Page 37 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
James M. Fowler
Senior Auditor
Megan A. Axenfeld
Daniel J. Caldwell
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Amanda L. Howell
Annette L. Manning
Andrea G. Lynch Pyon
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Staff Auditors