Title: University System of Maryland - Coppin State University
Date: 11/18/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d724560674398
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:22:06.527193
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Coppin State University
March 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Student Accounts and Financial Aid
Finding 1 – CSU Did Not Establish Adequate Controls Over Student 9
Residency Status Determinations
* Finding 2 – CSU Lacked Controls to Ensure the Propriety of 10
Financial Aid Posted to Student Accounts
Informational Systems Security and Control
Finding 3 – The CSU Internal Network Was Not Properly Secured 11
Equipment
* Finding 4 – Equipment Was Not Properly Controlled and 12
Accounted For
Cash Receipts
Finding 5 – CSU Did Not Establish Sufficient Control Over Mail 14
Collections
Payroll
Finding 6 – Payroll Adjustments Were Not Independently Reviewed and 14
Approved and System Access Was Not Appropriate
Contract Monitoring
Finding 7 – Food Service Commission Payments Were Not 15
Adequately Verified
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on University System of Maryland (USM)
Coppin State University (CSU)
March 2016
 Student residency determinations were not independently reviewed for
propriety. Proper residency status for each student is critical to ensure
that the proper amount of tuition (in-state or out-of-state) is charged
(Finding 1).
CSU should require an independent review and approval of residency status
determinations.
 Adjustments to financial aid awards were not independently verified, and
certain employees had inappropriate access to the automated financial
aid records since they could both initiate the posting of financial aid in
student accounts and release or disburse the aid (Finding 2).
CSU should ensure that adjustments to financial aid awards are independently
reviewed and approved, and that incompatible user capabilities are eliminated.
 CSU’s computer network was not properly secured since numerous
contractor accounts provided for unrestricted network level access to all
of CSU’s administrative and student-related servers. Contractors are
used by CSU to support certain computer systems and applications
(Finding 3).
CSU should ensure that contractors have only the system access they need to
perform their job duties.
 Equipment, which totaled approximately $17.8 million as of June 30,
2014, was not accounted for and controlled as required by USM and CSU
policies. For example, CSU did not properly maintain critical equipment
records, and physical inventories of equipment were not taken as
required (Finding 4).
CSU should comply with USM and CSU equipment policies and procedures.
 CSU did not establish sufficient control over mail collections, which
totaled approximately $612,000 during the six-month period ending in
June of 2014. (Finding 5).
5

--- Page 8 ---
CSU should restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt and ensure
that the initial record of collections is forwarded directly to the independent
employee responsible for ensuring that all mail collections are processed.
 Critical payroll and leave balance adjustments were not subject to a
documented independent review and approval, and unnecessary system
access capabilities were assigned (Finding 6).
CSU should ensure that adjustments to payroll and leave balances are subject
to a documented independent review and approval, and that system access
capabilities are properly assigned.
 CSU did not adequately verify commission payments from its food
services contractor, which totaled approximately $367,000 in fiscal year
2014. The contractor is required to pay CSU 15 percent of specified sales
revenue. However, CSU did not verify sales reported by the contractor to
available detailed sales reports (Finding 7).
CSU should use available sales reports to verify the propriety of commission
payments.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Coppin State University (CSU) is a comprehensive public institution of the
University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of the
USM’s Board of Regents. CSU provides a broad range of baccalaureate
programs in both traditional arts and sciences, teacher education and nursing, as
well as select professionally oriented graduate programs. Student enrollment for
the spring 2015 semester totaled 3,066, consisting of 2,578 undergraduate
students and 488 graduate students. Approximately 89 percent of CSU’s student
enrollment for the spring 2015 semester was classified as in-state and 11 percent
was out-of-state. CSU’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as
tuition and fees and a State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues,
such as federal grants and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records,
CSU’s revenues for fiscal year 2015 totaled approximately $106.6 million,
including a State general fund appropriation of approximately $42.3 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 12 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 18, 2013. We determined that CSU
satisfactorily addressed 10 of the findings. The remaining 2 findings are repeated
in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Accounts and Financial Aid
Finding 1
Coppin State University (CSU) did not establish adequate controls over
student residency status determinations.
Analysis
Student residency status determinations were not independently reviewed for
propriety. Although output reports of residency status determinations recorded in
CSU’s automated records were generated for subsequent review, the two
employees responsible for performing the reviews were also responsible for
making residency determinations and submitting them for recording in the
automated system. As a result, improper residency status determinations could be
recorded without being readily detected.
The University System of Maryland’s (USM) Board of Regents Policy on Student
Classification for Admission and Tuition Purposes states that an individual
seeking in-state status shall have the burden of providing clear and convincing
evidence that he or she satisfies the requirements and standards set forth in the
Policy. Accurate student residency determinations are critical because of the
significant differences between in-state and out-of-state student tuition rates. For
example, full-time undergraduate tuition and fee charges for the Spring 2015
semester totaled $3,312 for Maryland residents and $5,942 for nonresidents. CSU
records all students as out-of-state upon admission and adjusts residency status to
in-state for those students who are eligible. According to CSU’s records, there
were approximately 900 residency status changes from out-of-state to in-state
processed during fiscal year 2014.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CSU establish procedures requiring a documented
independent review, at least on a test basis, of in-state residency
determinations recorded in its automated system to ensure that the residency
status was proper.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 2
CSU had not established proper controls over financial aid posted to student
accounts.
Analysis
Internal controls were not sufficient to ensure the propriety of financial aid posted
to student accounts. According to CSU’s records, during fiscal year 2014,
financial aid awarded to students, including grants and scholarships, totaled
approximately $31.1 million.
 Adjustments to financial aid award amounts were not independently verified
for propriety. CSU’s system automatically calculates award amounts and
generates recommended financial aid award packages for students based on
various eligibility criteria. CSU employees may manually record adjustments
to those award amounts based on individual student situations, such as when a
student drops classes and may no longer be eligible for the original award
amount. However, our review disclosed that these adjustments were not
subject to supervisory review and approval to ensure their propriety.
 Three employees had system access capabilities that allowed them to
manually initiate the recordation of financial aid in student accounts, as well
as to release (disburse) the aid with no further system approval requirements.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CSU
a. establish procedures to ensure that financial aid award adjustments are
reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel based on a review of
supporting documentation (repeat); and
b. eliminate incompatible user capabilities so that the same individual
cannot initiate the recordation of financial aid and release (disburse) the
aid (repeat).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
CSU’s Information Technology Division provides information systems support to
CSU through the operation and maintenance of campus-wide administrative
applications, such as the student administration/human resources and the
financials systems. The Division also operates an integrated administrative and
academic computer network, which provides connections to multiple servers used
for administrative applications and related databases. The campus network also
includes separate file servers, Internet connectivity, and a pair of redundant
perimeter firewalls. In addition, CSU connects to the Maryland Research and
Education Network for Internet access and to send and receive data to and from
other USM institutions.
Finding 3
The CSU internal network was not properly secured.
Analysis
The CSU internal network was not properly secured. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 Contractors had unnecessary network level access to the CSU network,
placing various devices at risk. CSU utilized contractors to remotely support
certain CSU systems and applications. Our analysis, performed during June
2015, determined that there were 14 contractor accounts defined to the CSU
domain that had unrestricted network level access to all of CSU’s
administrative and student-related servers and to three additional network
segments containing numerous network devices. These contractors worked
remotely via a virtual private network connection to the CSU network. We
were advised by CSU personnel that these contractors should only have
network level access to specified devices (for example, servers specifically
related to their projects). However, these contractors had unnecessary
network level access to numerous other critical CSU devices (for example
unrelated servers and workstations). The USM IT Security Standards Version
3.0 mandates that institutions implement authentication and authorization
processes that uniquely identify all users and appropriately control access to
systems.
 Authentication controls over administrative access to CSU’s two perimeter
firewalls were inadequate because password requirements for length,
complexity, age, and history were not enforced. The firewalls performed the
authentication of users attempting to administer the firewalls. The USM IT
11

--- Page 14 ---
Security Standards identify specific requirements for password length,
complexity, age, and history, and state that institutions shall follow strong
password characteristics and management practices, requiring users to adhere
to institutional usage, construction, and change requirements.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CSU
a. restrict each contractor’s network level access to only those devices that
each contractor needs to access, and
b. ensure that its firewalls’ authentication and password control settings
comply with the minimum standards required by the USM IT Security
Standards.
Equipment
Finding 4
CSU did not establish adequate procedures to account for and control its
equipment inventory.
Analysis
CSU did not establish adequate procedures to account for and control its
equipment inventory in accordance with USM and CSU policies. According to
CSU’s records, equipment totaled approximately $17.8 million as of June 30,
2014.
 An equipment control account was not maintained. A control account should
be maintained as a continuous summary of transactions and to serve as a total
dollar value control over amounts included in the detail records.
 CSU did not adequately account for equipment, including sporting and audio-
visual items, in its Physical Education Complex by properly tagging and
recording the equipment in its records. During our preceding audit, CSU
advised us that these procedures had not been performed because this
equipment had been purchased with State capital funds under the oversight of
the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA). At that time, CSU provided us with
a listing of expenditures totaling approximately $8.5 million that CSU claimed
were equipment items in the Complex; however, that list lacked specificity,
such as the identification of individual pieces of equipment. We were advised
by CSU management that, as of February 2015, they had not identified in their
detail records the equipment items in the Complex, and had not placed
equipment tags on the items to identify them as State property. Regardless of
12

--- Page 15 ---
the original source of funding, the equipment is in the custody of CSU and
should be properly accounted for.
 CSU did not conduct physical inventories of equipment as required. As of
February 2015, CSU had not conducted a physical inventory of all sensitive
and non-sensitive equipment during our current or preceding audit periods,
and was not able to determine when the last inventory was taken.
 In addition to the aforementioned equipment in the Physical Education
Complex, our test of 11 items from the detailed equipment listings and
purchase records noted that 6 of these items had not been tagged with a unique
tag number or otherwise identified as State property. Furthermore, our test of
nine sensitive computer-related items (including tablets and laptop computers)
totaling approximately $9,000 purchased during our audit period disclosed
that seven items totaling $5,600 had not been recorded in CSU’s detail records
as of February 2015.
Similar conditions regarding a lack of adequate procedures and controls over
equipment were commented upon in our preceding audit report. USM’s Board of
Regents Policy for Capitalization and Inventory Control sets guidelines for the
minimal level of control for equipment and requires institutions to establish a set
of formal written policies. Additionally, the Policy indicates that equipment
inventory records should include any items of equipment for which the institution
is the custodian. The Policy also requires that complete physical inventories be
performed and reconciled to the related records at least biennially. CSU’s Policy
on Capitalization and Inventory Control requires that inventory be tagged and
records maintained for sensitive equipment items with a cost of $300 or more, for
all computers, and for other equipment with a value over $5,000.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CSU
a. establish a control account and periodically reconcile the account to the
corresponding detail records (repeat);
b. ensure that all equipment purchases, as well as the aforementioned items
purchased through MSA, are properly recorded in the detail records
(repeat);
c. perform documented periodic physical inventories of equipment items,
reconcile the results to the related detail records, and investigate any
missing or unaccounted for items (repeat); and
d. ensure that equipment items are tagged with a unique property tag
number identifying the items as State property.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
CSU did not establish sufficient control over mail collections.
Analysis
CSU did not establish sufficient control over mail collections that, according to
CSU’s records, totaled $612,000 over a six-month period in fiscal year 2014.
Specifically, checks received in the mail by the Bursar’s Office were not
immediately restrictively endorsed for deposit only. Rather, the checks were
endorsed after they were received by the cashier’s office and recorded on CSU’s
automated cash register system. Furthermore, the initial record of mail
collections was not forwarded to the employee responsible for verifying all
collections received had been recorded in the cash register system. Instead, the
documents, along with the mail collections, were first given to other employees
for processing. Consequently, the initial record of collections could be altered to
conceal a misappropriation of the collections prior to recording on the cash
register system.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CSU
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt; and
b. ensure that the employees who prepare the initial record of collections
forward the record, or a copy of the record, directly to the independent
employee responsible for verifying that collections received in the mail
were processed in the automated cash register system.
Payroll
Finding 6
CSU did not ensure that adequate controls existed over the recordation of
critical payroll transactions and that employee access to record transactions
was appropriate.
Analysis
CSU did not ensure that adequate controls existed over the recordation of critical
payroll transactions and that employee access to record transactions was
appropriate.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 Four employees had system access to process payroll adjustments, such as to
add new employees and change pay rates, without adequate supervisory
review and approval. Although an output report of adjustments processed was
generated for purposes of supervisory review, our test of 10 adjustments
processed during October and November 2014 noted that there was no
documentation that 7 of these adjustments had been reviewed. Furthermore,
one of these four employees was responsible for approving certain
adjustments, such as accumulated leave payouts for terminated employees.
 Eight employees could modify employee leave balances, including their own,
and these leave adjustments were not subject to independent supervisory
review. Furthermore, six of these employees did not require this access.
According to industry best practices, as described by the State of Maryland
Information Security Policy Access Control Requirements, system access should
be limited to the appropriate authorized individuals and be properly controlled.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014, CSU’s payroll
expenditures totaled approximately $38.7 million.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CSU
a. ensure that adjustments to payroll and leave balances are subject to a
documented independent review and approval; and
b. assign system access capabilities only to those employees who require
such capabilities to perform their job duties, and remove the
aforementioned unnecessary access capabilities.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 7
CSU did not adequately verify commissions received from its food services
vendor.
Analysis
CSU did not adequately verify commissions received from the vendor contracted
to manage its food services operations. CSU’s food services contract required the
vendor to pay commissions to CSU totaling 15 percent of the vendor’s annual
board, retail, and external catering sales revenue or $350,000, whichever was
greater. However, CSU did not verify sales amounts reported by the vendor to
detailed sales reports to help ensure the propriety of commission payments
received. Our review of five commission payments during fiscal years 2014 and
15

--- Page 18 ---
2015 totaling approximately $335,000 disclosed that CSU did not verify the
reported sales totals. During fiscal year 2014, commissions received from the
vendor by CSU totaled approximately $367,000.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CSU verify commission payments for propriety by
comparing gross sales upon which the commission payments are based to
detailed sales reports.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Coppin State University (CSU) for the period beginning
March 27, 2012 and ending November 19, 2014. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CSU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts
receivable, cash receipts, information systems security and control, payroll,
student financial aid, corporate purchasing cards, and equipment. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services (such as endowment accounting
and bond financing) provided to CSU by the USM Office. These support services
are included within the scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our
audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of CSU’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including CSU.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
CSU’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
17

--- Page 20 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from CSU’s financial system for the
purpose of testing certain areas, such as student accounts receivable and financial
aid. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
CSU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect CSU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to CSU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
18

--- Page 21 ---
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of CSU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
19

--- Page 23 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY
MARCH 27, 2012 TO NOVEMBER 19, 2014
Student Accounts and Financial Aid
Finding 1
Coppin State University (CSU) did not establish adequate controls over
student residency status determinations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CSU establish procedures requiring a documented
independent review, at least on a test basis, of in-state residency
determinations recorded in its automated system to ensure that the residency
status was proper.
University response
The University agrees with these recommendations.
CSU is compliant with implementing and conducting independent review of a
10% sample size (new student undergraduates). The following procedures have
been implemented to address the issue of independent review of residency
determinations:
The Vice President for Enrollment Management is responsible for evaluating new
student residency determinations as indicated by reporting from the Office of
Information Technology (OIT) identifying cyclical entry of residency coding for
students. Currently, the position of Vice President for Enrollment Management is
vacant and the university is undergoing a hiring search. In the interim, until the
position of Vice President for Enrollment Management is filled, the Residency
Coordinator will be performing this function.
The Vice President for Enrollment Management (the Residency Coordinator in
the interim), receives the OIT report and use indicators (source office/personnel,
effective dates in the system, term of entry for student) to qualify the residency
determination.
The Vice President for Enrollment Management, Residency Coordinator in the
interim, researches and documents for department attributed students’ the
justifications for residency coding changes (e.g. submission of residency
information form & supporting evidence, Residency Appeals Petition, etc.)
making notation within the Residency (Audit) Changes Report to verify the
determination.

--- Page 24 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY
MARCH 27, 2012 TO NOVEMBER 19, 2014
Finding 2
CSU had not established proper controls over financial aid posted to student
accounts.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CSU
a. establish procedures to ensure that financial aid award adjustments are
reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel based on a review of
supporting documentation (repeat); and
b. eliminate incompatible user capabilities so that the same individual
cannot initiate the recordation of financial aid and release (disburse) the
aid (repeat).
University response
The University agrees with these recommendations and has implemented the
following corrective actions:
a. With respect to Pell Awards, an Information System program that is already
available was utilized beginning in the Fall (2015) to adjust individual Pell
Awards to the “enrollment status” – i.e., credit load – of each student. An
exception report has been developed to identify all non-Pell award
adjustments. This report is reviewed and approved on a monthly basis. Hard
copies of the report will be signed off as documentation of the review and
approval process.
b. Electronic packaging is a batch process without manual intervention.
Accordingly, there is no meaningful separation between the initiation and
release of the resulting aid packages. An exception report has been developed
to identify all Cost of Attendance reviewed and approved adjustments. This
process is completed on monthly basis by the Director of Financial Aid.
Currently, the Associate Director of Financial Aid is serving as the Interim
Director of Financial Aid until a new permanent Director is identified.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 3
The CSU internal network was not properly secured.

--- Page 25 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY
MARCH 27, 2012 TO NOVEMBER 19, 2014
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CSU
a. restrict each contractor’s network level access to only those devices that
each contractor needs to access, and
b. ensure that its firewalls’ authentication and password control settings
comply with the minimum standards required by the USM IT Security
Standards.
University response
The University agrees with these recommendations and has implemented the
following corrective actions:
a. Vendor access was already restricted at two levels: the server level and the
application level. Per the recommendation, CSU will add the network level
restrictions as well.
b. CSU currently uses the password standards on individual accounts as required
for monitoring account activity. The password currently used on firewalls by
the network staff uses the CSU password complexity scheme. Also, the
firewall can only be accessed from certain servers on the network which has
the CSU password complexity. Per the recommendation, CSU has enabled the
password control settings on the firewall.
Equipment
Finding 4
CSU did not establish adequate procedures to account for and control its
equipment inventory.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CSU
a. establish a control account and periodically reconcile the account to the
corresponding detail records (repeat);
b. ensure that all equipment purchases, as well as the aforementioned items
purchased through MSA, are properly recorded in the detail records
(repeat);
c. perform documented periodic physical inventories of equipment items,
reconcile the results to the related detail records, and investigate any
missing or unaccounted for items (repeat); and

--- Page 26 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY
MARCH 27, 2012 TO NOVEMBER 19, 2014
d. ensure that equipment items are tagged with a unique property tag
number identifying the items as State property.
University response
The University agrees with these recommendations and has implemented the
following corrective actions:
a. In March 2015 the University brought online an Asset Management
System (AMS). All capital and sensitive equipment assets are currently
being recorded in the AMS by the Controller’s Office Fixed Asset
Accountant. Control accounts have been established in the general ledger.
Asset transactions recorded in AMS are imported into the general ledger
monthly. The general ledger control accounts and AMS totals are
reconciled as part of the month-end close process.
b. At March 31, 2015 the Controller’s office began loading into the AMS
equipment located and tagged from the physical inventory process.
Additionally, newly purchased capital equipment items are entered into
AMS central detailed records on a monthly basis. The remaining work to
be completed includes the breakout of MSA purchased equipment cost
initially included in building cost for the Physical Education Complex
(PEC) and Health and Human Services Building (HHSB) and the process
to locate and tag the equipment. Recent changes in staffing have resulted
in delays in efforts to complete this process. Estimated completion time
which includes training new staff on Asset Management System is August
2016.
c. Procedures established in the implementation of the AMS include an
annual inventory of recorded and tagged equipment. The first annual
inventory is scheduled to begin in June 2016.
d. The University implemented an equipment inventory process (February
2015) which includes University property tags with a unique number
system and color coded for capital (blue) and sensitive (red) equipment.

--- Page 27 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY
MARCH 27, 2012 TO NOVEMBER 19, 2014
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
CSU did not establish sufficient control over mail collections.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CSU
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt; and
b. ensure that the employees who prepare the initial record of collections
forward the record, or a copy of the record, directly to the independent
employee responsible for verifying that collections received in the mail
were processed in the automated cash register system.
University response
a. Procedures implemented immediately upon discussion with OLA (February
2015), require the staff person responsible for the money mail log to use a
restrictive endorsement stamp for checks received in the mail at time of
receipt and recording on the money mail log.
b. Procedures implemented immediately upon discussion with OLA (February
2015), require the staff person responsible for the money mail log to provide a
copy of the original log directly to the person performing verification
procedures.
Payroll
Finding 6
CSU did not ensure that adequate controls existed over the recordation of
critical payroll transactions and that employee access to record transactions
was appropriate.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CSU
a. ensure that adjustments to payroll and leave balances are subject to a
documented independent review and approval; and

--- Page 28 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY
MARCH 27, 2012 TO NOVEMBER 19, 2014
b. assign system access capabilities only to those employees who require
such capabilities to perform their job duties, and remove the
aforementioned unnecessary access capabilities.
University response
a. The University agrees to improve documentation of “independent review”
(which may not be equivalent to “supervisory approval”) of adjustments to
payroll. The root cause of these shortcomings was due to inadequate staffing
levels. These issues were addressed by modifying the business processes
within the payroll function. In addition, access for the Training Specialist has
been adjusted to “view only,” and access for Assistant Vice President for
Human Resources was adjusted to “approve only”.
b. The University agrees with this recommendation and has taken, or will take,
the following actions: On February 27, 2015 the HR system was changed to
prevent anyone from being able to modify and approve his/her own leave
record. Of the seven employees cited as not requiring the capability to modify
leave records, the Junior Human Resources Information Systems Analyst does
need to retain this access. This position is the back-up to Human Resources
Information System Manager. However, a process for independent review of
leave adjustments was implemented on August 1, 2015. Redesign of the
security roles of the other six employees is underway and will be completed
by March 31, 2016.
Contract Monitoring
Finding 7
CSU did not adequately verify commissions received from its food services
vendor.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CSU verify commission payments for propriety by
comparing gross sales upon which the commission payments are based to
detailed sales reports.

--- Page 29 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY
MARCH 27, 2012 TO NOVEMBER 19, 2014
University response
In January 2015, the Director of Auxiliary Services was terminated and the
Department was reorganized. Contract Management was moved to the Office of
Procurement Services, and functional management of Dining and Housing was
moved to Student Affairs. In response to the OLA examination of these matters,
the Contract Manager implemented a procedure of verifying Commission
payments by comparing detailed sales records to gross sales amounts used to
calculate the Commissions.

--- Page 30 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Robert A. Wells, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Jaime A. DeWitt, CPA
Charles F. Drasher, III
Reni V. Lazova
Staff Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditors