Title: Maryland Department of Health - Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents - Baltimore
Date: 01/05/2018
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745ce
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:31:47.803942
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents
Baltimore
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Admissions
Finding 1 – The Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – 5
Baltimore (RICA) did not maintain an admission team to make
admission determinations as required by State regulations, and
certain critical documentation was not maintained.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2 – There was a lack of segregation of duties in collection 6
processing and accounts receivable record keeping.
Contractual Services
* Finding 3 – RICA did not use a competitive procurement process for 8
certain services, as required.
Finding 4 – RICA did not have a process to ensure that all vendor 8
amounts billed agreed to the related contractual terms and conditions.
Budgetary Transactions
Finding 5 – RICA did not report unprovided for payables totaling 10
$700,000 to the Comptroller of Maryland at the 2015 fiscal
year-end, as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
*
Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Baltimore (RICA) is a
residential and day treatment center that provides mental health treatment,
educational and rehabilitative services to children and adolescents and their
families from counties throughout the State of Maryland and Baltimore City. The
services provided include inpatient and outpatient treatment. In fiscal year 2016,
RICA provided housing for an average daily population of 36 residential students
and provided treatment for an average daily population of 55 outpatient students.
According to State records, RICA’s expenditures for fiscal year 2016 totaled
approximately $14.2 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding fiscal compliance audit report dated June 30, 2014. We
determined that RICA satisfactorily addressed one of the findings. The remaining
finding is repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Admissions
Background
The Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents – Baltimore (RICA) offers
two options to admit eligible children and adolescents: a school-only program and
a full-time residential treatment program, which includes an educational
component. The residential program assists youth throughout the State.
Educational services are provided by staff from a local school system under a
memorandum of understanding with RICA, which reimburses the system for the
related salaries and other costs. Referring agencies may include the child’s school
system, the Maryland Departments of Juvenile Services, Health, or Human
Services, other public or private agencies, and mental health professionals.
After receiving a referral for its residential program, RICA fills out an internally
developed “referral face sheet” for the potential students that documents
demographical information and is used to begin the process of gathering
additional documentation, such as psychological evaluations. The information
gathered is used by RICA to pre-screen the referral to assess if the placement
would be appropriate. If a determination is made that the referral may be
appropriate, RICA will schedule a pre-admission interview with the prospective
student and that student’s parent(s) or guardian(s). Subsequently, RICA will
make a decision to accept or decline the student based on admission criteria
established in State regulations.
According to State regulations, RICA has 10 business days to accept or reject the
student after the application is completed. Regulations require RICA to notify
both the referring agency and the youth’s guardian of its determination decision.
According to its records, RICA approved admissions for 44 referrals during fiscal
year 2016.
Finding 1
RICA did not maintain an admission team to make admission
determinations as required by State regulations, and certain critical
documentation was not maintained.
Analysis
RICA admitted students within its residential program without the approval of an
admission team as required by State regulations. In addition, RICA did not
consistently document certain important dates in the admission process such as
approval date.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 RICA did not utilize an admissions team to make student residency admission
decisions. Instead, RICA relied primarily on the approval of one management
employee who is a licensed certified social worker-clinical. State regulations
require an admission team consisting of a physician, mental health and
educational professional and other persons, as appropriate, to determine
whether the applicant meets the State-established admission standards, such as
the individual has a long-term and severe mental disorder. Our testing of a
selection of admission decisions – both acceptances and rejections – showed
that RICA had made those admission decisions in accordance with the criteria
established in State regulations.
 RICA did not consistently document certain important dates in the admission
process such as approval date and the date when all referral information
required by State regulations had been received. Our review of ten referrals
that resulted in admission determinations during the period from August 2015
to September 2016 found that for seven, the referral completion date and/or
the date of the admission decision was not documented. For two of the seven
we were able to use other means to determine that the admission decisions
were made timely, while for five we could not assess if the determination
decision was rendered within 10 days as required.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that RICA
a. ensure that student residency admission determinations are made by an
admissions team as required by State regulations, and
b. ensure that all critical dates are documented and monitored.
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
There was a lack of segregation of duties in collection processing and
accounts receivable recordkeeping.
Analysis
Controls were inadequate over collection processing and accounts receivable
recordkeeping, as one employee was responsible for virtually all the related
processes. According to State accounting records, collections, consisting of
checks, totaled approximately $2.2 million during fiscal year 2016 and primarily
related to payments from applicable local jurisdictions for educational services
provided by RICA to students from the respective jurisdictions.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Although collections were recorded on pre-numbered receipt forms and
restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt, the responsibility for additional
processing rested with one employee. Specifically, after recordation and
endorsement, the collections were given directly to an employee who was
responsible for depositing the funds and performing the deposit verification. In
addition, this employee also prepared the invoices to local jurisdictions (related to
the collections) and recorded the related payments in the accounts receivable
records; both without any independent review. Consequently, this employee had
complete control over the collections. In addition, we noted that there was no
formal documented accounting for pre-numbered receipt forms (as to issued,
voided, and on-hand). Under these conditions, errors or other discrepancies could
occur without timely detection.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including adequate
separation of cash receipt handling duties from the accounts receivable records;
independent verification of collections to deposit; and an accounting for the
numerical sequence of pre-numbered receipts forms as to issued, voided, and on
hand.
Since the majority of these collections are from local jurisdictions for educational
services provided, the controls could be strengthened by requiring the
jurisdictions to use electronic funds transfer.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that RICA
a. ensure the employee responsible for the maintenance of accounts
receivable records does not have access to the related collections;
b. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts handling
functions verifies the deposit of all collections;
c. formally account for receipt forms as to issued, voided, and on hand; and
d. pursue the use of electronic funds transfer for payments from local
jurisdictions.
We advised RICA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Contractual Services
Finding 3
RICA did not use a competitive procurement process for certain services, as
required.
Analysis
RICA did not use a competitive procurement process for certain services, as
required by State procurement regulations. From our test of 11 invoices totaling
$123,250, we identified one contract that was not competitively procured.
Specifically, during the period May 2014 through May 2017, RICA repeatedly
obtained educational services from one vendor, totaling approximately $230,000,
without any justification for the continued use of the vendor. RICA entered into a
one-year agreement in May 2014 with the vendor that included automatic one-
year renewals (there was no maximum dollar amount included in the agreement or
the renewals); however, RICA did not conduct any competitive bidding although
our review found two other vendors were providing similar services. During the
aforementioned period, these services were procured through 19 separate
purchases from this vendor ranging in amounts from $5,000 to $25,000.
A similar condition regarding the need to comply with State procurement
regulations was commented upon in our preceding audit report. State
procurement regulations require that contracts for goods or services of $5,000 or
more be awarded based on competitive bidding and require Board of Public
Works (BPW) approval for service contracts valued at $200,000 or greater.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that RICA
a. comply with State procurement regulations and ensure procurements are
properly solicited and documented (repeat), and
b. retroactively submit the educational services contract to the BPW for
approval.
Finding 4
RICA did not have a process to ensure that all vendor amounts billed agreed
to the related contractual terms and conditions.
Analysis
RICA’s process for approving certain contractor invoices did not include a
verification that all billed costs were in accordance with contract terms and
conditions. During our audit, we identified two education-related service
8

--- Page 11 ---
vendors, whose invoices were not subject to adequate review to ensure the
propriety of the billings.
 RICA did not review appropriate supporting documentation when approving
invoices from a local education agency (LEA) that provided teachers and
instructional assistants to RICA under a memorandum of understanding
(MOU). Specifically, a RICA employee tracked the LEA’s employees’ time
worked and when leave was taken (including leave without pay, for which
RICA was not financially responsible), which was forwarded to the LEA.
From this document, the LEA invoiced RICA the salary costs for each LEA
employee for that pay period. However, the RICA employee responsible for
approving the LEA invoice did not have access to the original RICA-
maintained time records and thus could not ensure the propriety of the hours
RICA was billed for. Furthermore, LEA employees’ pay scales were not
included in the MOU or otherwise provided to RICA. RICA also paid a two
percent administrative fee associated with services provided under this MOU,
which totaled approximately $38,000 in fiscal year 2016, even though the fee
was not specified in the MOU. All payments to this LEA totaled
approximately $2 million during fiscal year 2016.
 RICA obtained additional educational services from a non-LEA, valued at
$230,000 during the period of May 2014 to May 2017 (see Finding 3).
However, the RICA employee responsible for approving the related invoices
did not have a copy of the rates established in the contractual agreement. In
fact, RICA could not locate a copy of the agreement and after one was
obtained, at our request, we did note that the vendor periodically billed rates
that differed from the rate specified in the agreement (although the billed rates
were less than the rate in the agreement).
Recommendation 4
We recommend that RICA establish a process to ensure that employees
approving invoices have all appropriate supporting documentation necessary
to determine the propriety of the related billings in accordance with the
contracts terms and conditions and ensure those documents are used during
the approval process.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Budgetary Transactions
Finding 5
RICA did not report unprovided for payables totaling $700,000 to the
Comptroller of Maryland at the 2015 fiscal year-end, as required.
Analysis
RICA did not report unprovided for payables to the Comptroller of Maryland –
General Accounting Division (GAD) totaling $700,000 during the fiscal year
2015 closeout process, as required by GAD procedures. At the 2015 fiscal year-
end, RICA had outstanding invoices on hand relating to services that had been
provided to RICA between January and June 2015 that exceeded its available
appropriation. Consequently, RICA paid these invoices with funds from their
fiscal year 2016 appropriation, but did not report these unprovided for payables to
GAD as part of the fiscal year 2015 closeout process. The fiscal year-end closing
instructions issued by GAD require a schedule to be completed when accounts
payable and accrued expenditures were not recorded in accordance with the State
Policy on Accounts Payable, Accrued Expenditures, and Encumbrances.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that, in the future, RICA report fiscal year-end unprovided
for payables to GAD, as required.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Regional Institute for
Children and Adolescents – Baltimore (RICA) of the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH), for the period beginning March 24, 2014 and ending May 14,
2017. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine RICA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included admissions, procurements and disbursements, and
payroll. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding
audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to RICA by MDH.
These support services (such as certain payroll and purchasing functions,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are included
within the scope of our audit of MDH’s Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
RICA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
11

--- Page 14 ---
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
RICA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect RICA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to RICA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from MDH, on behalf of RICA, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise MDH regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 1
RICA did not maintain an admission team to make admission
determinations as required by State regulations, and certain critical
documentation was not maintained.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that RICA
a. ensure that student residency admission determinations are made by an
admissions team as required by State regulations, and
b. ensure that all critical dates are documented and monitored.
RICA’s response
a. RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective September 2017, all
student residency admission determinations will be made by an Admissions
Team consisting of the Director of Admissions; Clinical Director or designee;
IEP Coordinator or designee; Medical Director/Psychiatrist; and the Director
of Nursing or designee.
b. RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective September 2017, the
referral face sheet has been amended to account for all required application
documents including critical dates and will be monitored and maintained by
the Director of Admissions.

--- Page 17 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 2
There was a lack of segregation of duties in collection processing and
accounts receivable recordkeeping.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that RICA
a. ensure the employee responsible for the maintenance of accounts
receivable records does not have access to the related collections;
b. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts handling
functions verifies the deposit of all collections;
c. formally account for receipt forms as to issued, voided, and on hand; and
d. pursue the use of electronic funds transfer for payments from local
jurisdictions.
We advised RICA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
RICA’s response
a. RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective immediately the Assistant
to the CEO will receive, endorse and record all cash receipts in pre-numbered
receipt books; the Fiscal Services Technician will prepare and process the
deposits; the Accounts Payable Technician will maintain the accounts
receivable records.
b. RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective immediately all cash
receipt deposits will be verified by the Chief of Fiscal Services.
c. RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective immediately all
accounting for receipt forms will be conducted by the Accounts Payable
Technician.
d. RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective immediately RICA will
pursue the use of electronic transfer for local jurisdictions for payments.

--- Page 18 ---
Contractual Services
Finding 3
RICA did not use a competitive procurement process for certain services, as
required.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that RICA
a. comply with State procurement regulations and ensure procurements are
properly solicited and documented (repeat), and
b. retroactively submit the educational services contract to the BPW for
approval.
RICA’s response
a. RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective immediately RICA
will comply with all State procurement regulations and ensure
procurements are properly solicited and documented.
b. RICA concurs with the recommendation. RICA will retroactively submit
the educational services contract to the BPW for approval.

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 4
RICA did not have a process to ensure that all vendor amounts billed agreed
to the related contractual terms and conditions.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that RICA establish a process to ensure that employees
approving invoices have all appropriate supporting documentation necessary
to determine the propriety of the related billings in accordance with the
contracts terms and conditions and ensure those documents are used during
the approval process.
RICA’s response
RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective immediately employees
responsible for approving all contract/vendor payments will obtain, verify and
maintain all necessary documents proper to submission to Accounts Payable for
payment process.

--- Page 20 ---
Budgetary Transactions
Finding 5
RICA did not report unprovided for payables totaling $700,000 to the
Comptroller of Maryland at the 2015 fiscal year-end, as required.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that, in the future, RICA report fiscal year-end unprovided
for payables to GAD, as required.
RICA’s response
RICA concurs with the recommendation. Effective immediately all fiscal year-
end unfunded liabilities will be reported to GAD on the required schedule in
accordance with State Policy.

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Jessica A. Cacho, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Kush C. Patel
Staff Auditor