Title: University System of Maryland - Towson University
Date: 12/18/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746e6
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:50:52.117751
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
Towson University
November 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1 – Changes in the residency status of students receiving 6
Provost Scholarships were not adequately monitored, resulting in
overpayments totaling $123,500 to 9 out of 21 students tested.
Finding 2 – Employee access capabilities to critical financial aid 7
functions on TU’s financial management system had not been
adequately restricted.
Interagency Agreements
* Finding 3 – TU entered into three consecutive interagency agreements 8
with another State agency that enabled the agency to fill its Chief
Information Officer position in a manner that was inconsistent
with State law.
Student Residency
Finding 4 – TU did not have adequate procedures to ensure that changes 9
to student residency status (which impact student tuition charges)
were proper.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Sensitive personally identifiable information was not 10
properly protected by TU.
Finding 6 – Procedures for maintaining and securing TU’s numerous 11
computers against malware were not sufficient.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7 – Collections received by TU’s Athletics Department were 12
not adequately accounted for and controlled since checks were not
recorded and endorsed upon receipt.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Payroll
Finding 8 – TU did not establish adequate controls over the addition of 13
contractual employees to its payroll as well as rate changes for these
employees.
Finding 9 –TU did not adequately investigate the propriety of payments 14
to its employees who were on multiple State payrolls.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 16
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Towson University (TU) is a comprehensive public institution of the University
System of Maryland and operates under the jurisdiction of the System’s Board of
Regents. TU provides a broad range of baccalaureate programs in both traditional
arts and sciences and in applied professional fields, as well as selected
professionally oriented graduate and doctoral programs. Student enrollment for
the Fall 2015 semester totaled 22,284, including 19,049 undergraduate students
and 3,235 graduate and doctoral students. TU’s budget is funded by unrestricted
revenues, such as tuition and fees and a State general fund appropriation, as well
as restricted revenues, such as federal grants and contracts. According to the
State’s accounting records, TU’s revenues for fiscal year 2015 totaled
approximately $445.7 million, including a State general fund appropriation of
approximately $103 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 18, 2013. We determined that TU
satisfactorily addressed five of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1
Towson University did not have an adequate process to monitor and adjust
Provost Scholarship awards for changes in students’ residency status,
resulting in overpayments of scholarships totaling $123,500 to 9 out of 21
students tested.
Analysis
Towson University (TU) did not have an adequate process to monitor Provost
Scholarship awards to ensure that students were receiving the correct scholarship
award amounts based on their current residency status. The Provost Scholarship
is a competitive merit-based scholarship offered by TU. During fiscal year 2015,
TU awarded 1,057 Provost Scholarships totaling $5.7 million. Our test of 21
scholarship recipients disclosed overpayments totaling $123,500 to 9 students.
To compensate for the difference between in-state and out-of-state tuition costs,
students with out-of-state residency status are awarded a higher scholarship
amount compared to in-state students with similar academic records. For
example, for the 2014 – 2015 academic year, qualifying out-of-state students
received Provost Scholarship award amounts ranging from $6,000 to $14,000,
depending on their grade point average and test scores; qualifying in-state
students received award amounts ranging from $3,000 to $6,000. While TU
monitored scholarship recipients for academic requirements, it did not have a
process to ensure that, if a recipient’s status changed from out-of-state to in-state,
there was a corresponding reduction in the student’s scholarship award.
Our test of 21 Provost Scholarships awarded during the period between January
2012 and June 2015 disclosed that 9 students received an award amount based on
out-of-state residency status even though they were classified as in-state students
at that time (paying in-state tuition), resulting in award overpayments totaling
$123,500. These 9 students received refunds totaling approximately $68,000 and
the remainder of the overpayments ($55,500) was posted to their student accounts
and was available to cover other costs incurred.
Provost Scholarship award overpayments reduce the amount of scholarship funds
available to other eligible students. TU obtained advice from its general counsel
stating that TU is not able to recoup these scholarship overpayments because the
scholarship award letters and the related terms and conditions did not specifically
state that awards would change depending on residency status and because the
6

--- Page 9 ---
award amounts did not exceed State and federal limits of the cost of attendance.
TU advised us that the terms and conditions of the award letters were clarified and
certain procedures were implemented in early fiscal year 2016 to better monitor
Provost Scholarship awards in relation to each student’s residency status.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that TU adequately monitor Provost Scholarship awards to
ensure that award amounts reflect the student’s current residency status.
Finding 2
TU did not adequately restrict employee access capabilities for critical
functions related to recording financial aid awards in its financial
management system.
Analysis
TU did not adequately restrict employee access capabilities for critical functions
related to recording financial aid awards in its financial management system.
Consequently, certain employees had the capability to adjust critical financial aid
data and alter financial aid award amounts without independent supervisory
review and approval.
Our review of 17 critical functions related to financial aid determined that five
system users were assigned inappropriate system access capabilities to one or
more of the functions. For example, three system users who were responsible for
ensuring that verification audits of selected student federal financial aid
application data were conducted, as required by the United States Department of
Education, had system capabilities that allowed them to make adjustments to the
application data. Furthermore, these three employees were responsible for
ensuring that financial aid data, including award amounts, were properly posted to
student accounts, but also had system capabilities allowing them to change award
amounts on the student financial aid system.
We were advised by TU management that output reports of changes made to
financial aid data on the automated system were generated for review by
independent personnel to ensure that improper changes to student financial aid
were not processed. However, TU did not retain documentation of these reviews.
The University System of Maryland (USM) IT Security Standards specify that
institutions must segregate functions to ensure the appropriate separation of duties
for system users.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that TU
a. restrict user access capabilities for critical financial aid functions in a
manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties, and
b. maintain documentation to support independent supervisory reviews of
critical transactions processed.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 3
TU entered into three consecutive interagency agreements with the
Maryland State Department of Education that enabled the Department to fill
its Chief Information Officer position in a manner that was inconsistent with
State law.
Analysis
TU’s Division of Innovation and Applied Research (DIAR), formerly known as
the Division of Economic and Community Outreach, entered into three
consecutive interagency agreements with the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE) that enabled MSDE to fill its Chief Information Officer (CIO)
position in a manner that was not consistent with State law. Furthermore, the
arrangement was inconsistent with DIAR’s mission.
The agreements provided for DIAR to provide an individual to function as
MSDE’s CIO, rather than MSDE hiring an employee to fill its budgeted position.
Under the agreements, one individual served as the CIO for the first two
agreements and a second individual served in this capacity for the third
agreement. The three agreements covered the period from November 2011
through June 2015 with payments made by MSDE to DIAR totaling
approximately $771,000 (including administrative fees of 15 percent for the first
two agreements and 28 percent for the third agreement). DIAR advised us that
this arrangement was discontinued after June 30, 2015.
MSDE’s use of the interagency agreement with DIAR to provide its CIO was not
consistent with State law which provides that State employees should perform all
State functions in preference to contracting with the private sector. MSDE had an
existing budgeted position for a CIO but used the interagency agreement to
procure the services of a CIO at an enhanced salary. While DIAR is a State
entity, the individual who provided the CIO services in the most recent agreement
was not a TU employee; rather, the individual was hired contractually by DIAR
specifically for MSDE.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Furthermore, the limited involvement by DIAR and the hiring of these individuals
to serve as MSDE’s CIO was inconsistent with DIAR’s mission, which is to
leverage the highly qualified research and project talent of the University to solve
critical issues facing Maryland’s workforce and economy. As noted above, the
individual was not a TU employee. DIAR’s involvement was generally limited to
hiring the employees, paying the salaries of the individuals provided, and
invoicing MSDE for those costs, which included DIAR’s administrative fees.
MSDE controlled the selection of the individual hired under the third agreement,
and was solely responsible for the daily supervision and monitoring of the
individual obtained under all the agreements, including ensuring responsibilities
were performed. Information regarding the selection process for the first two
agreements was not available since TU did not retain the documentation.
We confirmed with staff at the Board of Public Works that the use of interagency
agreements to procure personnel was not appropriate. A similar condition with a
different State agency was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that TU avoid entering into such contract arrangements in
future interagency agreements (repeat).
Student Residency
Finding 4
TU did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure that changes to
student residency status were proper.
Analysis
TU did not establish sufficient controls over changes to the student residency
status (in-state or out-of-state) recorded in student accounts. Accurate student
residency determinations are critical because of the significant differences
between in-state and out-of-state student tuition rates. For example, the
undergraduate tuition charge for the Spring 2015 semester was $3,062 for
Maryland residents and $8,841 for non-residents, a difference of $5,779.
Although output reports of student residency changes were available for
supervisory review and approval, these reports were not used to verify the
propriety of changes made by most departments. Specifically, only changes made
by the Registrar’s Office were reviewed for propriety. According to TU’s
records, during fiscal year 2015, there were 4,663 residency changes made from
out-of-state to in-state residency status, of which 4,447 were made by departments
9

--- Page 12 ---
for which the verification process had not been performed. Furthermore, these
reviews were not independent since the employee responsible for generating the
aforementioned reports and selecting the residency status changes to review also
had system access capabilities allowing the employee to make changes to
residency status in the automated system. Consequently, TU lacked assurance
that all student residency changes made were appropriate. Our testing did not
disclose any improper residency status changes.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that TU
a. review output reports of changes made to student residency by all
departments, at least on a test basis;
b. ensure that such reviews are documented; and
c. ensure that the employee responsible for generating output reports,
selecting the items for review, and performing the reviews does not have
system access capabilities to make residency status changes to student
accounts.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
TU’s Office of Technology Services (OTS) provides information technology
support to TU by maintaining campus-wide administrative applications, such as
the student administration system and the financial system. OTS also operates an
integrated administrative and academic computer network, which provides
connections to multiple servers and critical network devices. The campus
network includes separate file servers, connectivity to the Internet, and an
extensive wireless network with access across the entire campus. The network
includes two redundant firewalls which are used to restrict access from the
Internet, students, and other un-trusted third parties.
Finding 5
Sensitive personally identifiable information was not properly protected by
TU.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information was not properly protected.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was stored in a critical
database in clear text. Specifically, we noted that as of July 7, 2015 this
10

--- Page 13 ---
database contained sensitive PII for 334,771 unique individuals in clear text.
This database included the individuals’ full names and social security numbers
(PII) in addition to dates of birth and addresses. Furthermore, we determined
that this sensitive information was not protected by other substantial
mitigating controls.
• Thirty accounts assigned to 32 individuals had unnecessary read access to
sensitive personally identifiable information stored in the aforementioned
database. This included the individuals’ full names, and social security
numbers (PII) and dates of birth and addresses.
This PII, which is commonly associated with identity theft, should be protected by
appropriate information system security controls. The USM IT Security
Standards state that protection measures for confidential data can include the
deletion of unneeded confidential information, encryption, or other equally secure
safeguards, and if encryption is used to protect confidential information the USM
encryption standards must be used. In addition, the USM IT Security Standards
require that institutions must implement measures to protect nonpublic
information from disclosure including the periodic review of access controls.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that TU
a. ensure PII is properly protected by encryption or other substantial
mitigating controls, as required by the aforementioned USM IT Security
Standards; and
b. restrict access to sensitive PII to only those individuals who require such
access.
Finding 6
Procedures for maintaining and securing TU’s numerous computers against
malware were not sufficient.
Analysis
Procedures for maintaining and securing TU’s numerous computers were not
sufficient.
• Certain workstations were configured with users having administrative rights.
Administrative rights are the highest permission level that can be granted to
users and allow users to install software and change configuration settings.
Our test of 51 workstations disclosed that 15 employees’ user accounts were
inappropriately defined with administrative rights rather than with user rights.
11

--- Page 14 ---
However, TU personnel advised that two of these users needed such rights
and that procedures existed for requesting, authorizing, and approving specific
employees to have administrative rights on their local computers. However,
documentation supporting that these two users were approved to have
administrative rights did not exist. As a result, if the workstations used by
accounts with administrative rights were infected with malware, the malware
would run with administrative rights and expose these workstations to a
greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated
with only user rights.
• TU did not ensure that malware protection software was installed and
operational on all of its 6,847 active computers. We identified 173 of these
computers either did not have malware protection client software installed or
the installed client software was not operational. The USM IT Security
Standards state that institutions must install software to protect systems from
malicious programs such as viruses, trojans, and worms.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that TU
a. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to only
system and network administrator personnel, and individuals authorized
in writing to have such rights; and
b. ensure that all of its computers have the necessary anti-malware software
installed and operational.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
Collections received by TU’s Athletics Department were not adequately
accounted for and controlled since checks were not recorded and endorsed
upon receipt.
Analysis
Collections received by TU’s Athletics Department were not adequately
accounted for and controlled. Our review disclosed that checks were not recorded
immediately upon receipt. Instead, they were recorded in a log when they were
forwarded to the Bursar’s Office for deposit, which may be several days after
receipt. In addition, checks that could not be readily identified as to their purpose
were not restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt, but were endorsed after
they had been investigated and resolved.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Without immediate recordation of collections, TU was unable to verify that all
Athletics Department collections were accounted for and subsequently submitted
in a timely manner to the Bursar’s Office for deposit. For example, in October
2015 we sighted two checks totaling $85,200 in the Athletics Department safe.
Neither of the checks had been endorsed or recorded in a log, including one dated
June 6, 2015 in the amount of $85,000. TU advised us that, due to certain
transfers of personnel, the check had been overlooked. Because of the delay in
depositing the check, it had become non-negotiable. After we brought this to the
attention of TU personnel, we were advised that replacement checks were
obtained for both checks.
According to Athletics Department records, collections forwarded to the Bursar’s
Office for deposit totaled approximately $3 million during fiscal year 2015. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires cash receipts
be restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon receipt.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that TU
a. restrictively endorse and record all checks immediately upon receipt; and
b. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts function verifies
that all recorded collections are forwarded, in a timely manner, to the
Bursar’s Office for deposit.
Payroll
Finding 8
TU had not established adequate controls over the addition of contractual
employees to its payroll as well as rate changes for these employees.
Analysis
TU had not established sufficient controls over the addition of contractual
employees to its automated payroll records and rate changes for these employees.
According to the State’s records, TU had 949 contractual positions in fiscal year
2015 with corresponding expenditures totaling approximately $42.8 million.
• TU did not perform an adequate review of contractual employees added to its
payroll records. Although these additions underwent two reviews prior to
final processing, both were ineffective. Specifically, employees performing
the first review also had the capability to add a contractual employee to the
payroll records and, although an independent supervisor performed a
13

--- Page 16 ---
secondary review of additions, the review was inadequate because supporting
documentation was not examined.
• TU generated output reports of rate changes processed for contractual
employees on a bi-weekly basis for supervisory review and approval.
However, we found that not all rate changes were included on the reports, and
therefore, not all changes were subject to supervisory review. Our test of five
rate changes processed in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 disclosed that four were
not included on the respective output reports, and therefore, were not subject
to supervisory review and approval. TU believes that this deficiency in the
reports was caused by certain system errors.
As a result of these conditions, unauthorized additions or rate changes could be
made for contractual employees without detection.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that TU
a. perform an independent supervisory review, including a review of
supporting documentation, of all contractual employees added to the
payroll records; and
b. take appropriate action to ensure that output reports of rate changes
processed for contractual employees include all rate changes for the
respective period.
Finding 9
TU did not adequately investigate the propriety of payments to its employees
who were on multiple State payrolls.
Analysis
TU did not ensure that quarterly reports received from the Comptroller of
Maryland’s Central Payroll Bureau (CPB) of TU employees appearing
simultaneously on multiple State payrolls (that is, employees worked for both TU
and another State agency) were investigated. The CPB report for the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2015 identified 120 TU employees who worked at both TU
and another State agency. TU’s Payroll Department received the reports;
however, the reports were not reviewed to ensure the propriety of the payroll
payments for simultaneous periods worked by these employees. TU personnel
advised us that the manner in which the information was presented on the reports
prevented them from investigating the propriety of the dual employment in an
efficient manner.
14

--- Page 17 ---
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, there were 137 TU
employees who received payments totaling approximately $2.1 million from both
TU and other State agencies for the same pay periods. The payments to these
employees for the same pay periods do not necessarily indicate overpayments
since there may not have been any overlapping hours reported to have been
worked at TU and the other State agencies.
CPB has directed State agencies to investigate all employees appearing on the
quarterly reports to ensure that the employees were not claiming the same work
hours for multiple jobs during the same time periods. According to the State’s
records, during fiscal year 2015, TU’s payroll expenditures totaled approximately
$185.5 million.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that TU
a. review quarterly CPB reports and investigate employees on multiple
payrolls in a timely manner;
b. retain documentation to support these investigative efforts; and
c. as necessary, work with the CPB to obtain reports that provide the
information in a manner that TU deems to be more useful.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – Towson University (TU) for the period beginning December
12, 2011 and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine TU’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, student accounts receivable,
purchases and disbursements, corporate purchasing cards, student financial aid,
payroll, contracts and grants, and information technology systems. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to TU by the USM
Office. These support services (such as bond financing) are included within the
scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of TU’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including the components of the USM.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
TU’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the items were selected.
16

--- Page 19 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during the audit. We also extracted data from TU’s financial systems for the
purpose of testing certain areas, such as student accounts receivable and financial
aid. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
TU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect TU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to TU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
17

--- Page 20 ---
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of TU, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 22 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
TOWSON UNIVERSITY
DECEMBER 12, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
Student Financial Aid
Finding 1
Towson University did not have an adequate process to monitor and adjust
Provost Scholarship awards for changes in students’ residency status,
resulting in overpayments of scholarships totaling $123,500 to 9 out of 21
students tested.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that TU adequately monitor Provost Scholarship awards to
ensure that award amounts reflect the student’s current residency status.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
In FY 2016, the Financial Aid Office identified a need to improve how we
monitored Provost Scholarship awards and then made the necessary adjustments.
During our review, we identified student awards that needed adjustments for
subsequent semesters including two of the nine noted by the audit. The remaining
seven students noted by the audit were not enrolled in semesters subsequent to
spring 2016 and therefore could not be adjusted.
Monitoring and corrective procedures were implemented in October 2015, and
have been automated since March 2016. An automated query is generated and
reviewed periodically to determine any residency changes to students who are
recipients of the Provost scholarships. Necessary adjustments are made to adjust
awards to reflect the residency status of the students. The Financial Aid Office
will continue efforts to monitor to ensure award amounts comply with the
scholarship criteria.
Finding 2
TU did not adequately restrict employee access capabilities for critical
functions related to recording financial aid awards in its financial
management system.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that TU
a. restrict user access capabilities for critical financial aid functions in a
manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties, and

--- Page 23 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
TOWSON UNIVERSITY
DECEMBER 12, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
b. maintain documentation to support independent supervisory reviews of
critical transactions processed.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. Once this finding was brought to our attention, we removed access to two
capabilities from two employees that did not always require this access.
All other employees require the access to complete their job duties. The
Financial Aid Office is challenged with operating with limited staff who
must conduct multiple functions while exercising the proper controls. To
this regard, the Financial Aid Office has compensating controls which
include generating and reviewing multiple automated queries to determine
if there are any improper changes to financial aid awards. In addition,
manual independent reviews are completed to ensure financial aid
information is accurate.
b. The Associate Director of the Financial Aid Office was responsible for
conducting the independent reviews. Due to his departure from the
University in 2015, we were unable to locate the documents to support the
completion of the reviews. We will continue these reviews and will ensure
they are documented and retained for future reference.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 3
TU entered into three consecutive interagency agreements with the
Maryland State Department of Education that enabled the Department to fill
its Chief Information Officer position in a manner that was inconsistent with
State law.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that TU avoid entering into such contract arrangements in
future interagency agreements (repeat).
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
Procedures have been implemented within Division of Innovation and Applied
Research (DIAR) and the Office of Sponsored Programs and Research to avoid
entering into such contract arrangements in future interagency agreements.

--- Page 24 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
TOWSON UNIVERSITY
DECEMBER 12, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
The interagency agreement between DIAR and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE) was not intended to be used by MSDE to fill a staff position
in a manner that was not consistent with State law or procurement regulations.
Our intent was to assist another state agency with information technology support
that was necessary for the successful implementation of several of the projects
under the Race to the Top (RTT) grant.
Our plans to terminate the original agreement in June 2014 was extended due to
the abrupt departure of the previous employee on this contract. Once the RTT
grant successfully ended, we mutually agreed to end this agreement with MSDE
effective 6/30/2015.
Student Residency
Finding 4
TU did not have adequate procedures in place to ensure that changes to
student residency status were proper.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that TU
a. review output reports of changes made to student residency by all
departments, at least on a test basis;
b. ensure that such reviews are documented; and
c. ensure that the employee responsible for generating output reports,
selecting the items for review, and performing the reviews does not have
system access capabilities to make residency status changes to student
accounts.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. Residency changes are made by the Registrar’s Office and the Admissions
Office. Both offices had procedures to review output reports of changes made
to student residency by their respective departments. The Admissions Office
residency status change reviews were completed for 2013 and 2014. However
in FY 2015, there was a transition of employees. During the transition, the
reviews were not initiated and completed. However since February 2016, we
completed all outstanding reviews for 2015 and are current with all the
reviews. In addition, to prevent future lapse in the completion of the reviews,
the Admissions Office has documented procedures which are retained in a

--- Page 25 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
TOWSON UNIVERSITY
DECEMBER 12, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
central location and have trained additional employees to perform these
reviews.
b. The Admissions and Registrar's Offices will continue to conduct independent
reviews of the residency status changes and retain documentation for future
reference.
c. We removed the access for the noted Registrar’s Office employee,
immediately upon notification from the auditors in February 2016. We were
not aware that the employee had this access and should be noted that she did
not make any residency status changes to student accounts during the current
audit period. With the removal of this employee's access, the review is
independent.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5
Sensitive personally identifiable information was not properly protected by
TU.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that TU
a. ensure PII is properly protected by encryption or other substantial
mitigating controls, as required by the aforementioned USM IT
Security Standards; and
b. restrict access to sensitive PII to only those individuals who require
such access.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. As of August 2016, all databases containing PII have been encrypted. In
April 2015, Towson University began efforts to encrypt databases
containing PII. During that time, extensive testing of encryption of all
databases containing PII had to be completed.
In addition, Towson University has an extensive Risk Management
program that identified PII in all systems and applications. Per the Risk
Management program, Towson University removed unneeded PII and had
implemented appropriate controls over PII data and the aforementioned

--- Page 26 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
TOWSON UNIVERSITY
DECEMBER 12, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
database. As Towson University worked on implementing encryption, we
had other safeguards to secure PII.
b. As of August 2016, none of the 32 noted individuals have access to the
sensitive PII as defined in the USM IT Security Standards. During the
audit, the University began working on a project to further protect PII.
Since, many individuals required access to the non-sensitive information
in the noted database, redaction of PII was the only option. Our attempts
for redaction were not successful in July 2015 due to a system bug which
was remediated in spring 2016. Since then, we put our efforts towards
testing and subsequently implementing redaction.
Safeguarding sensitive PII is important to us and we will continue our
efforts to secure the information. We have procedures to conduct annual
reviews to determine access needs of individuals and take appropriate
measures to safeguard this information.
Finding 6
Procedures for maintaining and securing TU’s numerous computers against
malware were not sufficient.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that TU
a. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to only
system and network administrator personnel, and individuals authorized
in writing to have such rights; and
b. ensure that all of its computers have the necessary anti-malware software
installed and operational.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. Towson University completed a project in July 2016, which evaluated
administrative rights on workstations across campus and has removed
unnecessary administrative rights from all workstations and restricted the
use of administrative rights on workstations based on security, risk and
functionality of software and the user. TU has documented the
authorization for individuals who require administrative rights and will
continue to retain such documentation.

--- Page 27 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
TOWSON UNIVERSITY
DECEMBER 12, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
b. Since the audit, we have implemented a monthly process to review and
ensure that all computers have the necessary anti-malware software
installed and are operational. We have reviewed the 173 noted computers
and determined that they were low risk and most of them were located in
labs. We have since taken appropriate measures to ensure anti-malware is
installed and operating on these computers.
Cash Receipts
Finding 7
Collections received by TU’s Athletics Department were not adequately
accounted for and controlled since checks were not recorded and endorsed
upon receipt.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that TU
a. restrictively endorse and record all checks immediately upon receipt;
and
b. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts function
verifies that all recorded collections are forwarded, in a timely
manner, to the Bursar’s Office for deposit.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. Since November 2015, with the addition of the Associate Athletic Director
of Finance, appropriate procedures have been implemented to ensure
proper internal controls over cash receipts. Specifically, all checks are
restrictively endorsed and recorded immediately upon receipt.
b. Independent monthly reviews of all recorded collections are completed to
verify they have been forwarded to the Bursars Office for deposit in a
timely manner.

--- Page 28 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
TOWSON UNIVERSITY
DECEMBER 12, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
Payroll
Finding 8
TU had not established adequate controls over the addition of contractual
employees to its payroll as well as rate changes for these employees.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that TU
a. perform an independent supervisory review, including a review of
supporting documentation, of all contractual employees added to the
payroll records; and
b. take appropriate action to ensure that output reports of rate changes
processed for contractual employees include all rate changes for the
respective period.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. We have developed written procedures to perform an independent,
supervisory review, including a review of supporting documents of all
contractual employees added to the payroll records. Effective May 2016,
the Human Resources (HR) Manager independently verifies all supporting
documents for all newly hired contractual employees on a weekly basis.
The HR Manager also independently verifies the information on the
supporting documentation against the approval report.
b. We have corrected the output report of the contractual employee rate
changes to include all rate changes for the respective period. An extra day
had to be added to the timeframe criteria of the report to ensure all data is
included. Effective April 2016, we started to run the reports weekly and
pull data for a range of 8 days.
Finding 9
TU did not adequately investigate the propriety of payments to its employees
who were on multiple State payrolls.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that TU
a. review quarterly CPB reports and investigate employees on multiple
payrolls in a timely manner;

--- Page 29 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
TOWSON UNIVERSITY
DECEMBER 12, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2015
b. retain documentation to support these investigative efforts; and
c. as necessary, work with the CPB to obtain reports that provide the
information in a manner that TU deems to be more useful.
University response
We agree with the recommendation.
a. Since February 2016, we have started to conduct quarterly reviews of the
employees listed in the CPB dual employment report. The majority of
individuals listed on this report are the same part time faculty who often
teach at various institutions. Therefore, we waited for a system wide
process that we received in February 2016 from University System of
Maryland as guidelines to perform this review. We have completed two
quarterly reviews so far and will continue this process.
b. Documentation of all reviews are retained for future reference.
c. We will continue to work with CPB to obtain reports that will provide
information in a manner that will help us complete the reviews in a more
efficient manner.

--- Page 30 ---
AUDIT TEAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Walter L. Horan, IV
Amanda L. Howell
Maryia Kuzina
Winnie J. Tenekam
Staff Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Staff Auditors