Title: Office of the Register of Wills - Harford County
Date: 06/05/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d19cc9d724560674630
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:35:24.558317
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Register of Wills
Harford County, Maryland
June 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Information
The Office of the Register of Wills is a public office established under the
Constitution of Maryland. An office is established in each of the 24 Maryland
subdivisions. These offices oversee the administration of decedents’ estates
within their jurisdictions and provide assistance (such as providing the proper
forms) to individuals administering estates. The offices collect inheritance taxes
and other fees as provided by law.
Inheritance tax collections (less the commissions earned by an office on those
collections) are remitted to the State’s General Fund. The fees collected and
commissions earned by an office are first used to finance the operating expenses it
is responsible for paying directly. Generally, the remaining balance of fees and
commissions is periodically remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland to finance
other operating expenses (such as payroll) that the Comptroller pays on behalf of
the offices. On a collective basis, the offices’ fees and commissions that exceed
their operating expenses are credited to the General Fund.
According to the records of the Office of the Register of Wills for Harford
County, its fiscal year 2014 gross receipts totaled $2,375,509, which consisted of
inheritance tax collections (net of commissions) of $1,577,369 and fees and
commissions of $798,140. The Office’s fiscal year 2014 operating expenses
totaled $649,644.
Findings and Recommendations
Disbursements
Finding 1
Adequate controls were not established over disbursements.
Analysis
The Office had not established adequate controls over disbursements as two
employees had the capability to process disbursements in the Office’s automated
records without independent approval and were authorized check signers. As a
result, these individuals could potentially process an unauthorized disbursement
without detection. According to Office records, during fiscal year 2014, the
3

--- Page 6 ---
Office processed disbursements totaling approximately $2.4 million, of which the
majority represents taxes and fees remitted to the Comptroller of Maryland.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office segregate duties so that the employees
responsible for processing disbursements are no longer authorized to sign
checks. We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of
duties using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Register of
Wills for Harford County, Maryland for the period beginning August 31, 2011
and ending January 4, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, cash disbursements, bank accounts,
and administration of estates.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services (such as payroll, maintenance of accounting records, and related
fiscal functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
4

--- Page 7 ---
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding that we consider to be a significant deficiency in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Office’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit did not
disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. A less significant finding was communicated to the Office that did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Office’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Office regarding the
results of our review of its response.
5

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditor