Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - South Region


NOTE: Effective July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization which established three regions within the State, including the South Region. The financial activities of the Jessup Correctional Institution, Maryland Correctional Institution - Jessup, Maryland Correctional Institution for Women, Brockbridge Correctional Facility, Jessup Pre-Release Unit, Southern Maryland Pre-Release Unit, and Eastern Pre-Release Unit, (previously audited under the DPSCS - Central Region Finance Office), as well as the Eastern Correctional Institution, and Poplar Hill Pre-Release Unit (previously audited under the DPSCS - Eastern Shore Region), and the Dorsey Run Correctional Facility were reorganized under the newly created South Region.

The financial activities of the following facilities and units that were previously audited under the DPSCS - Central Region Finance Office have since been absorbed by the South Region as a result of this reorganization: Patuxent Institution; Metropolitan Transition Center; Maryland Reception, Diagnostic and Classification Center; Baltimore Pre-Release Unit; Baltimore City Correctional Center; Central Maryland Correctional Facility; and certain activities of the Chesapeake Detention Facility.
Date: 10/28/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745b8
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:28:59.622283
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
South Region
October 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change 7
South Region Audit Scope 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Inmate Funds
* Finding 1 – The Region Had Not Fully Reconciled its Inmate Fund 9
Records With Corresponding Comptroller Records
Finding 2 – Controls Were Lacking Over Certain Inmate Fund 11
Transactions and Records
Purchases
Finding 3 – The Region Made Repeated Purchases From Two Vendors 12
Without Competitive Bids and Written Contracts
Potential Ethics Violation
Finding 4 – A Management Employee Was In a Position to Influence the 13
Region’s Decision to Hire an Immediate Family Member
Payroll
Finding 5 – Procedures and Controls Over Overtime Payments and Leave 15
Recordkeeping Need Improvement
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - South Region
October 2015
 The Region’s Jessup and Eastern Correctional Institution (ECI) Offices
had not fully reconciled inmate fund records with corresponding records
maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland. At the time of our review,
the last reconciliation performed for each Office was for July 2014
activity, prior to the implementation of a new inmate funds
recordkeeping system. For example, the last reconciliation prepared for
the Jessup Office indicated that its balance exceeded the Comptroller’s
records by $182,000 and, as a result, the Region lacked assurance that
inmate funds on deposit with the Comptroller will be sufficient to cover
the balance of the inmate accounts. Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services (DPSCS) management advised us that it had been
unable to provide the necessary reports to perform the reconciliations
since the implementation of the new recordkeeping system (Finding 1).
The Region should work with the DPSCS – Office of the Secretary to obtain
the needed system reports and ensure that inmate fund reconciliations are
conducted timely and differences are resolved.
 The Jessup Office lacked certain critical controls over inmate fund
transactions and records. Transactions were not verified to ensure they
were posted to the proper inmate accounts, user access to modify fund
records was not properly restricted, and the Office’s checking account
used to process inmate fund disbursements had not been reconciled since
April 2014 (Finding 2).
The Jessup Office should develop and implement procedures to ensure the
propriety of inmate fund transactions and records.
 The Region made frequent purchases of fresh produce primarily from
two vendors during fiscal years 2012 through 2014, totaling $2.7 million,
without consolidating and competitively bidding these purchases and
executing written contracts. During this period, hundreds of individual
purchases were made.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The Region, in conjunction with the DPSCS – Office of the Secretary, should
consolidate and competitively procure fresh produce, and execute written
contracts.
 A management employee was in a position to influence the Region’s
decision to hire an immediate family member as a contractual employee
within the management employee’s unit. The employment contract was
awarded without a formal recruitment and interview process. These
actions may have violated conflict of interest provisions of the State’s
Ethics Laws (Finding 4).
The Region should immediately refer this matter to the State Ethics
Commission and take appropriate action as directed by the Commission.
 Payroll procedures and controls at the Jessup Office need improvement.
Certain employees received monetary payments for overtime even though
the employees were ineligible based on their employment classifications.
In addition, leave recordkeeping deficiencies were noted (Finding 5).
The Region should establish appropriate payroll and leave recordkeeping
procedures and controls as recommended.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Organizational Change
The South Region of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) consists of the following correctional facilities that house sentenced
inmates and the community supervision offices for offenders serving terms of
probation or parole in the State’s southern and eastern shore areas:
 Jessup Correctional Institution
 Maryland Correctional Institution Jessup
 Maryland Correctional Institution for Women
 Brockbridge Correctional Facility
 Jessup Pre-Release Unit
 Southern Maryland Pre-Release Unit
 Eastern Pre-Release Unit
 Eastern Correctional Institution (including Poplar Hill Pre-Release Unit)
 Dorsey Run Correctional Facility
Effective July 1, 2012, DPSCS completed a departmental reorganization that
established three regions within the State (North, Central, and South). The
reorganization created a regional approach to providing inmate-related functions,
including incarceration, probation, parole, and reentry into society. This report
represents the results of our first fiscal compliance audit of the South Region.
South Region Audit Scope
Our audit of the South Region included the financial activities of the South
Region’s correctional facilities that became part of the Region via the
departmental reorganization. These facilities were previously audited under the
DPSCS – Central Region Finance Office and the Eastern Shore Region. The
region has fiscal offices in Jessup, Maryland (Jessup Office) to support southern
correctional facilities and in Westover, Maryland (Eastern Correctional Institution
Office) to support eastern shore correctional facilities. The fiscal offices also
support certain other DPSCS facilities and units to which the South Region
provides support services as discussed below.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Our audit also included the financial activities of a number of facilities and units
in other Regions for which the South Region provides support services:
 Patuxent Institution
 Metropolitan Transition Center
 Maryland Reception, Diagnostic and Classification Center
 Baltimore Pre-Release Unit
 Baltimore City Correctional Center
 Central Maryland Correctional Facility
Our audit of the South Region also included certain activities (maintenance of
inmate fund records and processing federal reimbursement requests) of the
Chesapeake Detention Facility (CDF) and payroll support services for
transportation staff of the Security Operations Unit of the Deputy Secretary for
Operations within the DPSCS – Office of the Secretary. The activities of the
above facilities and units included in our audit were previously audited under the
DPSCS – Central Region Finance Office (CRFO).
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014, the expenditures for
South Region administration and correctional facilities, Central Region
correctional facilities, Patuxent Institution, and CDF totaled $489.7 million.
These facilities housed 11,770 inmates as of June 30, 2014. In addition,
according to agency records, payroll expenditures for the transportation staff of
the Security Operations Unit totaled $20.5 million during fiscal year 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit reports of DPSCS – Central Region Finance Office dated
August 6, 2012 and DPSCS – Eastern Shore Region dated July 13, 2012. We
determined that the Region satisfactorily addressed four of these six findings.
The remaining two findings are repeated as one finding in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Inmate Funds
Background
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – South
Region maintains inmate funds, which are non-budgeted funds initially deposited
with the State Treasurer and recorded in the inmates’ personal accounts on the
Maryland Offenders Banking System (MOBS). MOBS serves as the official
record of each inmate’s account activity, including funds received and disbursed,
as well as the available balances. DPSCS replaced MOBS with the Maryland
Offenders Banking System II (MOBSII) as the record of each inmate’s account
activity, beginning in August 2014.
Disbursements of inmate funds are made using a check or cash withdrawal from a
working fund checking account, and the applicable inmate accounts on MOBSII
are charged. Disbursements may be paid directly to inmates in certain
circumstances, such as upon their release, or to third parties as directed by the
inmates. Working funds are initially established by an advance received from the
Comptroller of Maryland and are replenished as needed by the Comptroller.
Finding 1
The Region’s Jessup and Eastern Correctional Institution (ECI) Offices had
not fully reconciled the inmate fund records with corresponding records
maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland.
Analysis
The Jessup and ECI Offices had not fully reconciled the aggregate balances of the
inmate personal fund accounts, as recorded on MOBS, with the corresponding
records maintained by the Comptroller of Maryland. In this regard,
reconciliations performed were not conducted timely and significant differences
were not resolved. Specifically, as of February 2015, the most recent
reconciliation at both Offices was performed for July 2014 activity and both of
those reconciliations included an unresolved difference. DPSCS management
advised us that it has been unable to provide the reports needed by the Region to
perform the reconciliations since the DPSCS Office of the Secretary implemented
MOBSII in August 2014. Our review of inmate fund reconciliations for both
offices disclosed the following conditions:
9

--- Page 12 ---
 The Jessup Office’s July 2014 reconciliation indicated that the MOBS balance
($1,552,000) exceeded the related Comptroller’s balance ($1,370,000) by
approximately $182,000. This unresolved difference indicates that inmate
funds on deposit with the Comptroller may not be sufficient to cover the
aggregate balance of inmate accounts in MOBS. Furthermore, this difference
includes the effect of a June 2014 transfer of $200,000 from the DPSCS
administrative appropriation to the Comptroller’s inmate funds account, which
was made in accordance with the April 2013 Joint Chairmen’s Report to
reduce the difference between the two balances. Prior to the June 2014
transfer, the Jessup Office’s reconciliation showed a consistent monthly
unreconciled difference of $382,000 dating back to the May 2013
reconciliation. This condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
reports of the Central Region Finance Office (CRFO) and the Jessup Region.
For example, in our August 6, 2012 audit report of CRFO, we reported that
the MOBS balance exceeded the related Comptroller’s balance by
approximately $309,000 as of June 30, 2011. Prior to the creation of CRFO,
this condition had appeared in three preceding audit reports of the former
Baltimore Region dating back to 2002.
 The ECI Office’s July 2014 reconciliation indicated that the Comptroller’s
balance ($547,000) exceeded the related MOBS balance ($483,000) by
approximately $64,000. This difference has been noted consistently since the
October 2012 reconciliation. In addition, our review of the ECI Office’s
reconciliations for fiscal year 2014 disclosed that reconciliations were
performed from 44 to 183 days after the end of the related months. We have
noted similar conditions in our six preceding audit reports of the former
Eastern Shore Region.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Region
a. work with DPSCS Office of the Secretary to obtain the needed reports
from MOBSII;
b. on a timely basis, reconcile the aggregate balance of individual inmate
accounts in MOBSII with the corresponding records of the Comptroller
of Maryland, and investigate and resolve all differences (repeat); and
c. consult with the Comptroller’s General Accounting Division and the
Department of Budget and Management as to the proper disposition of
the aforementioned differences of $182,000 related to the Jessup Office
and $64,000 related to the ECI Office if the differences cannot be resolved
(repeat).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
The Region’s Jessup Office lacked certain critical controls over inmate fund
transactions and records.
Analysis
The Region’s Jessup Office lacked certain critical controls for ensuring the
propriety of inmate fund transactions and records. According to MOBSII, inmate
fund receipts in the Jessup Office totaled approximately $2.5 million and
disbursements totaled $1 million for the three-month period ending October 2014.
 Transactions recorded in the inmate fund accounts were not independently
reviewed to ensure that the transactions were posted to the proper individual
inmate accounts. Prior to implementing MOBSII in August 2014, supervisory
personnel verified that postings, in the aggregate, were correct; however, this
is not sufficient to ensure the propriety of individual inmate accounts. No
such verifications have been performed since July 2014.
 User access over inmate account records in MOBSII was not properly
restricted for certain employees. Specifically, improper access to record or
modify transactions was granted to four employees who did not require this
access to perform their job duties. In certain instances, employee access
capabilities allowed the employee to perform incompatible functions. For
example, one of these four employees was responsible for the supervisory
review and approval of inmate fund check disbursements.
 As of October 2014, the Office’s working fund checking account used to
process inmate fund disbursements had not been reconciled with the
corresponding bank records since April 2014. In addition, previous
reconciliations completed were not timely and supervisory review was not
always evident. Specifically, 5 of the monthly reconciliations for the 12-
month period ending April 2014 were prepared 46 to 62 days after the end of
the related months. Furthermore, 6 of these reconciliations had not been
signed and dated to indicate they had been subject to supervisory review. The
DPSCS’ Financial Operations Manual requires this checking account to be
reconciled and reviewed on a monthly basis.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Region
a. ensure that transactions are independently reviewed, at least on a test
basis, to provide assurance that transactions are posted to the proper
inmate accounts;
11

--- Page 14 ---
b. work in conjunction with DPSCS Office of the Secretary to restrict
employee user access capabilities on MOBSII to employees requiring
such access and eliminate the ability to perform incompatible duties; and
c. ensure monthly inmate working fund reconciliations are prepared,
reviewed, and approved timely.
Purchases
Finding 3
The Region made frequent purchases of fresh produce primarily from two
vendors without competitive bids and written contracts.
Analysis
The Region (both the Jessup and ECI Offices) made frequent purchases of fresh
produce but did not consolidate and competitively bid those purchases in
accordance with State procurement regulations.
 The Region did not consolidate its fresh produce purchases; rather, it
repeatedly purchased fresh produce primarily from two vendors on a case-by-
case basis without written contracts. According to State records, during fiscal
years 2012 through 2014, the Jessup Office made 934 individual payments to
these two vendors totaling approximately $2 million and the ECI Office made
234 individual payments to these two vendors totaling approximately
$652,000. Since the purchases were not consolidated, the Region’s leverage
as a high-volume purchaser may have not been maximized. If the purchases
were consolidated, Department of General Services (DGS) approval would
have been required.
 The Region made frequent purchases of fresh produce without competitive
bids. We judgmentally selected for review nine fresh produce purchases
(seven from the Jessup Office and two from the ECI Office) totaling
approximately $50,000. We noted that the Jessup Office did not obtain bid
quotations for any of its seven purchases, which each individually exceeded
$5,000. State procurement regulations require quotations be obtained for
purchases in amounts between $5,000 and $25,000.
Region management personnel advised us that it believed that competitive
procurement was not feasible for fresh produce because it spoils quickly and
delivery must be timely and frequent. Management further advised us that
fluctuations in market pricing could not be adequately accommodated in a
contract. We discussed this with representatives of DGS, which delegated the
12

--- Page 15 ---
procurement of fresh produce to DPSCS, although contracts exceeding $25,000
would require DGS approval. We were advised that State procurement
regulations must be complied with and that a formal competitive procurement
would be required in this situation. DGS personnel further stated that concerns
regarding delivery times and market pricing could be addressed through the
procurement process and drafting of the bid specifications and related contract.
Finally, DGS personnel advised us that DPSCS could request that DGS conduct
the procurement on its behalf or assist DPSCS in the procurement to ensure its
needs would be met.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Region comply with State procurement regulations
when procuring fresh produce. Specifically, we recommend that the Region
a. work with DPSCS Office of the Secretary and DGS to competitively
procure fresh produce in a manner that will meet the needs of the Region
and ensure that produce is obtained at the best value, and
b. ensure that formal written contracts are executed and DGS approval is
obtained, as needed.
Potential Ethics Violation
Finding 4
A management employee was in a position to influence the Region’s decision
to hire an immediate family member as a contractual employee within the
management employee’s unit. Such actions could be a potential violation of
State Ethics Laws. Furthermore, the Region did not comply with State
Personnel Laws and hiring practices and DPSCS policies with respect to this
hiring.
Analysis
A management employee who made human resources decisions for the Region
was in a position to influence the Region’s decision to hire, as a contractual
employee, an immediate family member of the management employee.
Furthermore, the contractual employee was assigned to the unit overseen by this
management employee. These actions could be a potential violation of the
conflict of interest provisions of State Ethics Laws. State Personnel Laws and
hiring practices and DPSCS policies were also not followed in this situation.
 The contractual position was awarded to this individual in April 2014 without
any recruitment and interview process. Region human resources personnel
advised us that the contract was awarded based on the individual’s previous
13

--- Page 16 ---
application and interview for a similar position. In February 2013, this
individual (the family member) applied and interviewed for an administrative
support contractual position at a different location within the Region, but was
not awarded the position.
While the Department of Budget and Management’s (DBM) Guidelines for
the Recruitment and Selection of Contractual Employees allow for agencies to
maintain a registry of previously qualified individuals for filling contractual
positions, the Guidelines require that all individuals on the registry be notified
when subsequent positions are available; however, this notification did not
occur in this case. Furthermore, we noted that the family member awarded
the April 2014 contract was equally ranked with another individual from the
2013 interview process who was not considered for this subsequent contract.
 The Region did not provide a justification for the contractual position and why
the functions could not be performed by existing employees. The DPSCS’
Financial Operations Manual requires that the recruitment and selection of
contractual employees follow a competitive process and further requires that
written justification be documented for hiring contractual employees and why
those functions cannot be performed by existing employees.
 The management employee was recorded as the contract monitor on the
contractual employee’s contract. While another individual appeared to
supervise this contractual employee’s daily activities, this supervisor reported
to the management employee. This relationship allowed the management
employee to influence the contractual employee’s working activities and
conditions. Our review of the contractual employee’s 14 timesheets for the
period from April 9, 2014 through October 21, 2014 disclosed that the
management employee approved two of these timesheets. Our review further
disclosed five timesheets (including these two) in which the hours worked
exceeded the maximum of 37 hours of work per week allowed by the
employment contract. In total, the individual worked 30 hours over the
maximum allowed by the employment contract during these five pay periods.
The State Personnel and Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
stipulates that an employee may not directly supervise the employee’s parent,
spouse, sibling, or child.
Region executive management was not aware of this relationship until we brought
the relationship to its attention. Effective October 7, 2014, after our inquiries, the
Region transferred the contractual employee to a different unit within the Region,
not under the supervision of the management employee, and the Region
subsequently extended the employment contract through June 30, 2016. As of
14

--- Page 17 ---
May 19, 2015, the contractual employee’s earnings totaled approximately
$28,000. Effective April 28, 2015, the management employee retired from State
service.
Senior management personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that the
aforementioned conditions could violate several conflict of interest provisions of
the State Ethics Laws. The General Provisions Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland prohibits a State employee or official from participating in a matter in
which a qualifying relative has an interest in the matter and the official or
employee knows of the interest. The Ethics Laws further state that an employee
may not use prestige of office for that employee’s private gain or that of another.
Any final decision related to violations of the State Ethics Laws would ultimately
be determined by the State Ethics Commission.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Region
a. immediately refer this matter to the State Ethics Commission and take
appropriate action as directed by the Commission; and
b. in the future, comply with aforementioned State Ethics and Personnel
Laws, DBM guidelines, and DPSCS policies.
Payroll
Finding 5
Procedures and controls over overtime payments and leave recordkeeping
need improvement in the Jessup Office.
Analysis
The Region had not established adequate procedures and controls over overtime
payments and leave recordkeeping in the Jessup Office. During fiscal year 2014,
the Jessup Office processed payroll totaling approximately $268.6 million.
 Certain employees received payments for overtime even though the
employees were ineligible based on their employment classifications. We
judgmentally selected for testing 10 overtime payments totaling $45,000 made
during our audit period for propriety. Our test disclosed one instance in which
an employee, who was in an employment classification that had not been
approved as eligible to earn overtime by the Department of Budget and
Management, was improperly paid $3,540 in overtime. We then judgmentally
selected for testing 10 additional overtime payments totaling $14,450 made to
employees whose employment classifications generally would not be
considered as eligible for overtime. We noted that 9 of the 10 employees
15

--- Page 18 ---
were improperly paid $12,810 in overtime. In total, 10 ineligible employees
were paid $16,350 in overtime during our audit period based on these limited
tests.
We were advised that the improper overtime payments noted in our tests were
generally the result of data entry errors, such as recording shift differential
hours as overtime hours, and that the Region was in the process of recovering
any resulting improper payments. While the Jessup Office had a process to
review overtime calculations on a test basis, the review procedures did not
include ensuring overtime payments were made only to eligible employees.
According to the State’s records, during calendar year 2013, the Jessup Office
paid overtime totaling approximately $18 million.
 The Jessup Office had not established procedures to ensure employee
compensatory leave earned in lieu of cash overtime payments did not exceed
maximum amounts allowed by the State’s collective bargaining agreement.
We reviewed leave balance reports generated from the Jessup Office
automated leave system for January 2013 and January 2014 and selected 20
significant balances related to 15 employees. We noted 10 instances (related
to 8 employees) where these compensatory leave balances exceeded
maximum allowed amounts by a total of 2,080 hours (ranging from 64 to 648
hours). Region personnel advised us that they relied on automated leave
system controls to prevent compensatory leave balances from exceeding the
allowed maximums but agreed, based on our tests, that these controls were not
in place for compensatory leave earned in lieu of cash overtime. The State’s
collective bargaining agreement for DPSCS employees stipulates that
balances of accumulated compensatory leave earned in lieu of cash overtime
be limited to a maximum of either 240 or 480 hours depending on the job
classification. According to the Jessup Office records, compensatory leave
earned in lieu of cash overtime balances totaled 25,432 hours, as of January
21, 2014.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Region
a. enhance review procedures and guidance to ensure that overtime is only
paid to eligible employees;
b. establish procedures, such as automated system controls, to ensure that
compensatory leave balances earned in lieu of cash overtime payments do
not exceed maximum amounts allowed; and
c. investigate the aforementioned excessive compensatory leave balances
and ineligible overtime payments and take appropriate action, such as
recovery of payments or reduction of leave balances.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – South Region. Because of a departmental
reorganization (which is explained on page 7 of this report), our audit of the South
Region included the activities of the following DPSCS units for these periods:
South Region – July 1, 2012 to June 30, 2014
Central Region Finance Office – August 22, 2011 to June 30, 2012
Eastern Shore Region – October 3, 2011 to June 30, 2012
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, cash receipts,
payroll, inmate funds, and equipment. Our audit also included the financial
activities (such as payroll processing, purchasing, maintaining inmate fund
records, maintaining accounting records, and conducting related fiscal functions)
of the Central Region’s correctional facilities, the North Region’s Patuxent
Institution, certain financial activities of the Central Region’s Chesapeake
Detention Facility (maintenance of inmate fund records and processing federal
reimbursement requests), and payroll support services for transportation staff of
the Security Operations Unit under the Deputy Secretary for Operations. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit reports for
the DPSCS – Central Region Finance Office and the Eastern Shore Region.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Region’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
17

--- Page 20 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Region’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Region that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from DPSCS, on behalf of the Region, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of its response.
18

--- Page 23 ---
c. consult with the Comptroller’s General Accounting Division and the
Department of Budget and Management as to the proper disposition
of the aforementioned differences of $182,000 related to the Jessup
Office and $64,000 related to the ECI Office if the differences cannot
be resolved (repeat).
We agree.
a. The Region worked with the DPSCS Office of the Secretary to obtain the
needed reports from MOBSII. The Region is currently utilizing the MOBS
II reports to complete the MOBSII/FMIS reconciliation. Anticipated
Completion: Completed.
b. The Region will, on a monthly basis, reconcile the aggregate balance of
individual inmate accounts in MOBSII with the corresponding records of
the Comptroller of Maryland, and investigate and resolve all differences.
Anticipated Completion: Past due reconciliations will be completed by
04/30/16 and completed on monthly basis thereafter.
c. The Region has consulted with the Comptroller’s General Accounting
Division (GAD) and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM)
as to the proper disposition of the aforementioned differences of $182,000
related to the Jessup office and $64,000 related to the ECI Office. As a
result, the Region obtained approval to write off $100,000 of the $182,000
difference related to the Jessup office. The Office will continue to consult
with GAD and DBM as to the proper disposition of the remaining $82,000
difference in the Jessup office and the $64,000 related to the ECI office.
The Office will complete this as part of a Department-wide reconciliation
of Inmate Funds for all regions. Anticipated Completion: 06/30/16
Finding 2:
The Region’s Jessup Office lacked certain critical controls over inmate
fund transactions and records.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that the Region
a. ensure that transactions are independently reviewed, at least on a test
basis, to provide assurance that transactions are posted to the proper
inmate accounts;
b. work in conjunction with DPSCS Office of the Secretary to restrict
employee user access capabilities on MOBSII to employees requiring
such access and eliminate the ability to perform incompatible duties;
and
c. ensure monthly inmate working fund reconciliations are prepared,
reviewed, and approved timely.
We agree.
a. The Region will establish procedures to ensure that transactions are
independently reviewed, at least on a test basis, to provide assurance that
2

--- Page 24 ---
transactions are posted to the proper inmate accounts. Anticipated
Completion: 02/29/16
b. The Region will work in conjunction with the DPSCS Office of the
Secretary to restrict employee user access capabilities on MOBSII to
employees requiring such access and eliminate the ability to perform
incompatible duties. Anticipated Completion: 02/29/16
c. The Region will ensure monthly inmate working fund reconciliations are
prepared, reviewed, and approved timely. Anticipated Completion:
02/29/16
Finding 3:
The Region made frequent purchases of fresh produce primarily from
two vendors without competitive bids and written contracts.
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that the Region comply with State procurement
regulations when procuring fresh produce. Specifically, we recommend
that the Region
a. work with DPSCS Office of the Secretary and DGS to competitively
procure fresh produce in a manner that will meet the needs of the
Region and ensure that produce is obtained at the best value, and
b. ensure that formal written contracts are executed and DGS approval
is obtained, as needed.
We agree.
a. The Region will work with the DPSCS Office of the Secretary and DGS to
competitively procure fresh produce in a manner that will meet the needs
of the Region and ensure that produce is obtained at the best value.
Anticipated Completion: 07/31/16
b. The Region will ensure that formal written contracts are executed and
DGS approval is obtained, as needed. Anticipated Completion: Effective
immediately, the Region will obtain DGS approval, as required, for all
future contracts.
Finding 4:
A management employee was in a position to influence the Region’s
decision to hire an immediate family member as a contractual employee
within the management employee’s unit. Such actions could be a
potential violation of State Ethics Laws. Furthermore, the Region did not
comply with State Personnel Laws and hiring practices and DPSCS
policies with respect to this hiring.
Recommendation 4:
We recommend that the Region
a. immediately refer this matter to the State Ethics Commission and take
appropriate action as directed by the Commission; and
3

--- Page 26 ---
cc: William Stewart, Deputy Secretary, Administration
Steven F. Geppi, Director, Secretary’s Office of Investigation,
Intelligence and Fugitive Apprehension
Joseph M. Perry, Inspector General
Kevin Mercer, Deputy Inspector General
Christopher McCully, Director, Financial Services
William Johnson, Deputy Director of Finance
Aubrey Bascombe, Program Manager III
Rosetta Butler, Director, Procurement Services
Michael Stelmack, Executive Director, HRSD
Patricia Goins-Johnson, Acting Commissioner, DOC
Patricia A. Moore, Assistant Commissioner, DOC
Brenda M. Shell, Commissioner, DPDS
Felicia Hinton, Deputy Commissioner, DPDS
5

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock
Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joshua A Naylor
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA
Staff Auditors