Title: Department of Human Services - Social Services Administration
Date: 11/20/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1acc9d7245606746a8
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:44:12.051014
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Human Services
Social Services Administration
November 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Quality Assurance Program
Finding 1 – The Social Services Administration (SSA) did not have 9
comprehensive quality assurance processes to adequately monitor
the administration of child welfare program services by the State’s
local departments of social services (LDSSs).
Monitoring Compliance With Foster Care Requirements
Finding 2 – SSA had not established procedures to monitor the LDSSs 10
to ensure that foster children were placed in the least restrictive
environment and received required services. Further, reports from
CHESSIE did not accurately reflect services provided to children in
foster care, which hampered the ability of SSA to monitor service
delivery.
Monitoring of Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Assistance
Finding 3 – SSA did not establish procedures to ensure that the LDSSs 13
complied with State regulations regarding the initial approval of
foster care providers, as well as ongoing monitoring requirements
for foster care providers, adoptive parents, and guardians.
Finding 4 – SSA had not establish procedures to ensure that children 16
who remained in the foster care, adoption, or guardianship programs
after they reached the age of 18 were eligible to do so and, for
certain cases we reviewed, there was a lack of documentation
supporting continued eligibility.
Federal Funds
Finding 5 – SSA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that it 19
received federal reimbursement for all children eligible for Title IV-E
funding. Our tests disclosed instances in which children were
incorrectly determined to be ineligible, resulting in a potential loss
of federal funds totaling approximately $1 million.
3

--- Page 6 ---
* Finding 6 – SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal funds for 21
children who were eligible to receive Supplemental Security Income.
Child Protective Services
Finding 7 – SSA did not monitor the timeliness of child abuse and 23
neglect investigations conducted by the LDSSs. In addition, reviews
and investigations of allegations were not always performed timely.
Finding 8 – SSA did not monitor the timeliness of required assessments 25
of substance-exposed newborns completed by the LDSSs. In,
addition these assessments were not always completed within the
required time frames.
Finding 9 – SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were 26
immediately notified of children born to individuals who had
previously had their parental rights terminated for abuse or neglect.
In addition, SSA did not ensure that the LDSSs completed an
assessment of these families and offered services when appropriate.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Finding 10 – SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to certain 28
providers of child placement services were identified and resolved
in a timely manner.
Finding 11 – SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption 29
assistance payments were suspended, terminated, or as permitted,
renegotiated with the adoptive parent when an adopted child was
removed from the adoptive home.
Finding 12 – Ancillary expenditures incurred by the LDSSs to further 30
support children in social services programs were not adequately
controlled.
Finding 13 – SSA did not approve certain adoption assistance rates being 31
paid by LDSSs as required by SSA policy.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Interagency Agreements
* Finding 14 – SSA did not ensure that payments made to a State 32
university for three interagency agreements were adequately
supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed, and
were made in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 35
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 205, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective July 1, 2017, changed the name
of the Department of Human Resources to the Department of Human Services.
The Department of Human Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration
(SSA) supervises, directs, and monitors social services programs conducted by the
local departments of social services (LDSSs), which are located in each of the
State’s 24 local subdivisions. These programs are designed to prevent or remedy
abuse, neglect, and exploitation of children and families, and include foster care,
adoption and guardianship assistance, and child protective services.
Foster Care Program
The foster care program provides alternate settings and supportive services to
children who are unable to live at home for various reasons, such as abuse and
neglect. Children are assigned foster status as the result of legal action by the
applicable courts or through voluntary placement. SSA monitors the program and
the LDSSs are responsible for placing these children in the most appropriate
setting. According to State regulations, the LDSSs are responsible for placing
children, in order of preference, with a relative, in a family foster home, or in a
group care setting. Children with serious emotional, behavioral, medical, or
psychological conditions may be placed in treatment foster care. The goal of the
foster care program is to secure a permanent living arrangement (such as
reunification, adoption, or guardianship) for these children.
Adoption and Guardianship Assistance Programs
SSA provides financial assistance for individuals who adopt or become the legal
guardians of foster children. Adoptive parents are given all the legal rights and
responsibilities that once belonged to the biological parents, while guardians have
the full legal responsibility for the applicable child without terminating the
parental rights of the child’s biological parents.
Child Protective Services Program (CPS)
CPS is a social service provided by SSA to assist children believed to be
neglected or abused by parents or other adults having permanent or temporary
care or custody, or parental responsibility. The program also offers services to
household or family members who may require intervention to decrease the risk
of any continuing harm to children.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Children’s Electronic Social Services Information Exchange
SSA and the LDSSs use a computerized child welfare information system, the
Children’s Electronic Social Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE), as a
statewide child welfare, foster care, and adoption case management tool.
CHESSIE is also used to process transactions, such as payments made on behalf
of children under SSA’s supervision and is the official record of all social services
program activity.
According to SSA’s records, during fiscal year 2016, CHESSIE was used to
process transactions totaling approximately $270.2 million (see table below).
SSA processes expenditures to foster care providers, adoptive parents, and
guardians monthly based on rates established in State regulations or through a
negotiation process. These maintenance expenditures are to cover the costs for
basic physical care, food, clothing, and shelter for the children. In addition to
these maintenance expenditures, SSA provides the LDSSs with funds to purchase
goods and services to support a family’s service plan when no other resource is
available. For example, these ancillary funds may be used for special educational
services, psychological treatment, vocational training, transportation costs,
personal care supplies, day care services, furniture, appliances, and automobile
operating and maintenance costs.
Fiscal Year 2016
Expenditures Processed via CHESSIE
Number of Number of
Expenditures
Category Children Providers /
(In Millions)
During Year Parents
Treatment Foster Care 2,249 33 $ 71.1
Group Foster Care 1,368 63 64.1
Adoption Assistance 7,092 4,785 63.0
Guardianship Assistance 3,057 2,168 25.6
Family Foster Care 2,648 1,490 12.5
Teen Mother Foster Care 101 8 4.1
Other Foster Care 636 453 2.3
Subtotal (Maintenance) 17,151 9,000 $ 242.7
Ancillary 27.5
Total Expenditures $ 270.2
Source: SSA records.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 7, 2014. We determined that SSA
satisfactorily addressed one of these findings. The remaining two findings were
repeated in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Quality Assurance Program
Finding 1
The Social Services Administration (SSA) did not have comprehensive
quality assurance processes in place to adequately monitor the
administration of child welfare program services by the State’s local
departments of social services (LDSSs).
Analysis
SSA did not have comprehensive quality assurance processes in place to ensure
that child welfare programs for which SSA is responsible, such as foster care,
adoption, guardianship, and child protective services, were being effectively
administered by the State’s LDSSs. The LDSSs are responsible for providing and
overseeing specific program services and functions as dictated by State law and
regulations with policy direction from SSA, and SSA is responsible for ensuring
that the LDSSs perform their responsibilities in accordance with those laws,
regulations, and policies.
Critical program functions performed by the LDSSs include, for example,
approving foster care providers; placing children with appropriate providers;
ensuring that children continuously receive necessary services, such as medical
and dental care; performing monthly visitations with children under care;
verifying provider compliance with regulatory requirements; and reviewing,
assessing, and investigating child abuse allegations. Without effective and
comprehensive quality assurance processes, SSA cannot be assured that all
required program services and functions were being effectively and properly
carried out by the LDSSs.
The findings in this report detail specific instances, most relating to the
aforementioned programs, in which SSA lacked procedures for ensuring that
critical program services and functions had been conducted by the LDSSs, as
required. These findings also indicate certain recordkeeping deficiencies,
including a lack of critical documentation maintained by SSA and the LDSSs for
specific program cases we reviewed.
Comprehensive quality assurance processes would include (1) the implementation
of effective monitoring procedures of specific program activities, including those
further detailed in this report, as well as (2) the implementation and oversight of
quality assurance reviews of cases conducted at each LDSS. For example, the
Department of Human Services (DHS) Family Investment Administration (FIA)
9

--- Page 12 ---
has a quality assurance case review process which requires that supervisory
personnel at each LDSS perform quality assurance reviews of a specified number
of case files for adherence to FIA policies and for the accuracy and propriety of
related payments. The process is also subject to FIA administrative oversight.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance
processes to ensure its child welfare programs are effectively and properly
administered by the LDSSs. Specifically, we recommend that SSA develop,
implement, and oversee
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and
functions to ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and
policies; appropriate and timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of
supporting documentation relating to services and functions performed;
and
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS.
Monitoring Compliance With Foster Care Requirements
Finding 2
SSA had not established procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure that
foster children were placed in the least restrictive environment and received
required services. Further, reports from the Children’s Electronic Social
Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE) did not accurately reflect
services provided to children in foster care, which hampered the ability of
SSA to monitor service delivery.
Analysis
SSA had not established procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure there was
documentation supporting that foster children were placed in the least restrictive
environment (with a relative) and received required services. SSA could not
provide documentation supporting compliance with foster care requirements for
numerous cases we reviewed. Furthermore, CHESSIE did not accurately reflect
the status of compliance with these requirements.
SSA routinely provided a report to each LDSS generated from CHESSIE that
identified all of the services provided to each child in foster care based on data
recorded into CHESSIE by the LDSSs. For example, according to the January 3,
2017 report, 2,280 or 78 percent of the 2,903 children that had been in foster care
for at least the past 13 months had not had a medical exam within the past year.
However, SSA did not use this report to monitor the LDSSs’ performance to
10

--- Page 13 ---
ensure required services were provided or noncompliance was addressed.
Furthermore, based on our tests, we found that this report could not be relied upon
to accurately reflect services provided to children as the LDSSs did not always
properly record this information in CHESSIE, as noted below.
We reviewed records related to 57 children for which payments totaling $2.3
million were made during fiscal year 2016. The records reviewed were
judgmentally selected from payment reports to ensure coverage of children
residing in both family foster homes and group care settings that received
significant payments and included children monitored by 10 different LDSSs. For
each child, we tested compliance with the requirements noted in the table below,
when the requirement was applicable to the child. In total, 251 separate
requirements were tested. Through a separate test, we determined that the LDSSs
were conducting required monthly face-to-face meetings with these 57 children.
In total, our test disclosed discrepancies related to approximately 40 percent of the
separate requirements tested. Specifically, we noted 104 discrepancies related to
these 251 separate requirements (that is documentation could not be provided or
the recordation of the requirement was inaccurate in CHESSIE). At least one
discrepancy was noted for 50 of the 57 children tested, and the discrepancies were
noted in 9 of the 10 LDSSs tested. In 78 instances (31 percent), documentation of
compliance with the requirement tested could not be provided even though, in 37
of these instances, CHESSIE reflected that the requirements had been met. Our
tests also disclosed 26 instances in which CHESSIE did not reflect that the
requirement had been met even though documentation was provided.
Results of our Test of Foster Care Requirements
Documentation
Foster Care Documentation Provided –
Tested Total
Requirements Not Provided Not Recorded
in CHESSIE
Legal Basis for Child
57 9 0 9
Entering Foster Care
Effort to Place with
57 35 0 35
Relatives
Medical Exam since Child
57 12 10 22
Entered Foster Care
Dental Exam since Child
53 14 10 24
Entered Foster Care
Attended School During
27 8 6 14
Fiscal Year 2016
Total 251 78 26 104
11

--- Page 14 ---
Placement of Children
SSA was unable to provide the legal documents, such as a court order, associated
with the initial placement for 9 of the 57 children tested. These documents are the
legal basis for placement of a child in foster care. State regulations require that
the court order be maintained in the child’s case record.
Additionally, SSA was unable to provide documentation that the LDSSs
attempted to place the child in the least restrictive environment for 35 of the 57
children placed in their care. State law requires the LDSS to exhaust all resources
to locate a relative for initial placement. Furthermore, according to State
regulations, the LDSSs are responsible for placing children, in order of
preference, with a relative, in a family foster home, or in a group care setting.
Services Provided to Children
SSA was unable to provide documentation that a medical exam was performed for
12 children since they entered foster care, which ranged from 20 months to 17
years. In addition, the accuracy of medical exam information recorded was
questionable as the LDSSs recorded that a medical exam was performed for 10 of
these 12 children. Furthermore, the LDSSs did not record that a medical exam
was performed for 10 additional children in which SSA was able to provide
documentation of the exams. State regulations require a comprehensive health
assessment within 60 days of entering foster care, and subsequently, at a
minimum, an annual medical exam as required by the Early Periodic Screening,
Diagnosis and Treatment Program.
SSA was unable to provide documentation for 14 of the 53 children tested who
were over two years old, that a dental exam was performed since the child entered
foster care, which ranged from 20 months to 17 years. In addition, the accuracy
of dental exam information recorded was questionable as the LDSSs recorded that
a dental exam was performed for 13 of these 14 children. Furthermore, the
LDSSs did not record that a dental exam was performed for 10 additional children
in which SSA was able to provide documentation. State regulations require these
children to obtain a dental exam every six months.
SSA was unable to provide documentation that 8 of the 27 children ranging from
5 to 17 years of age attended school during fiscal year 2016. In addition, the
accuracy of information recorded was questionable as the LDSSs recorded that 5
of these children attended school during fiscal year 2016. Furthermore, the
LDSSs did not record that the child was in school for 6 additional children (of the
27 tested) in which SSA was able to provide documentation that the child
attended school. State regulations require the LDSSs to ensure that children of
school age are attending school.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Subsequent to the completion of our field work, and almost one year after our
initial inquiries, SSA was able to provide us with certain additional
documentation that reduced the total number of discrepancies from 104 to 88.
For example, SSA provided us with the court orders associated with the initial
placement of the 9 children previously commented upon.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to monitor the LDSSs to
ensure compliance with foster care requirements. Specifically, we
recommend that SSA
a. ensure that the applicable legal documentation is included in each foster
child’s case record;
b. ensure that the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive environment
and document attempts to place the child with a relative;
c. ensure compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements by
reviewing applicable documentation; and
d. ensure that all required activity is accurately reflected in CHESSIE so
that CHESSIE can be effectively used as a tool to monitor case
management activity.
Monitoring of Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship
Assistance
Finding 3
SSA did not establish procedures to ensure that the LDSSs complied with
State regulations regarding the initial approval of foster care providers, as
well as ongoing monitoring requirements for foster care providers, adoptive
parents, and guardians.
Analysis
SSA did not establish procedures to ensure the LDSSs appropriately approved and
monitored family foster care providers, and verified the continued eligibility of
family foster care providers, adoptive parents, and guardians, in accordance with
State regulations. Our tests disclosed many cases for which the LDSSs’
performance of required provider approval and monitoring procedures was not
documented and recorded in CHESSIE, thus restricting SSA’s ability to
effectively monitor these aspects of the foster care, adoption, and guardianship
programs.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Approval of Family Foster Care Providers
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that the LDSSs had evaluated and
approved new foster care providers in accordance with State regulations.
Specifically, SSA did not periodically identify all new providers added to
CHESSIE by the LDSSs and examine source documentation to confirm that all
requirements had been met. SSA policy requires this documentation to be
scanned into CHESSIE, which would facilitate SSA’s review, but no reviews
were being performed and our tests disclosed that much of this documentation
was not in CHESSIE. Consequently, SSA could not effectively monitor the
LDSSs’ evaluation and approval of family foster care providers.
State regulations require, for example, that provider applicants submit
documentation to the appropriate LDSS to support that the applicant has attended
27 hours of pre-service training, that the provider applicant and all family
members have undergone medical evaluations and submitted to criminal
background checks, that the family is financially stable, and that the home has
met fire safety requirements. These requirements are part of the LDSSs’
evaluations and approval of the providers’ applications.
We reviewed the records in CHESSIE for 10 family foster care providers that
were approved by the LDSSs during our audit period. These providers were
judgmentally selected based on having received significant payments (totaling
$317,000) during fiscal year 2016. Our review disclosed that many of the
required documents were not included in CHESSIE. For example, documentation
supporting criminal background checks for all adults in the home were not
scanned into CHESSIE for 5 providers, and the provider applications and proof of
initial provider training were not scanned into CHESSIE for 7 providers. After
our inquiries, SSA requested and obtained copies of the aforementioned
documents directly from the LDSSs. The absence of these documents in
CHESSIE does not mean that the LDSSs did not review the documents and
appropriately evaluate the applications; nevertheless, absent those documents,
SSA cannot effectively monitor the LDSSs’ compliance with processes designed
to ensure family providers have met all requirements before being approved.
Monitoring of Family Foster Care Providers
SSA had not established procedures to ensure the LDSSs were monitoring family
foster care providers in accordance with State regulations. Specifically, SSA did
not ensure that the LDSSs conducted quarterly face-to-face visits with family
foster care providers, and that these providers received annual training as required
by State regulations. Furthermore, we noted that the LDSSs did not always
document these activities in CHESSIE, thereby restricting SSA’s ability to
14

--- Page 17 ---
effectively monitor the LDSSs and ensure family providers continued to meet all
requirements.
State regulations require the LDSSs to have quarterly face-to-face visits with each
provider to obtain information about the child’s progress, care needs, medical
status, and educational needs. The regulations also require that providers obtain a
minimum of 10 hours of additional training every year.
We reviewed the records associated with 20 judgmentally selected family foster
care providers that had received significant payments (totaling $528,000) during
fiscal year 2016. Our review disclosed that the LDSSs had not recorded
documentation in CHESSIE for any face-to-face visits with 14 providers during
the year. In addition, there was no documentation that the required training had
been obtained by 12 of the 20 providers during fiscal year 2016, including 7 for
which there was no training recorded for previous years dating back to 2007.
After our inquiries, SSA obtained documentation from the LDSSs that 10 of the
12 providers had received training for fiscal year 2016.
Although visits with family foster care providers were documented in some cases,
SSA advised us that caseworkers at the LDSSs are not required to document
provider visits in CHESSIE because the caseworkers usually visit the providers
during monthly visits with the children which are documented in a narrative in the
child’s case record in CHESSIE. However, when we asked, SSA was only able to
provide us with documentation of provider visits from the child’s case records
related to 5 of the 14 children. The lack of recording in CHESSIE by the LDSSs
of documentation that these requirements have been met significantly restricts
SSA’s ability to monitor compliance with these requirements.
Continued Eligibility for Family Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship
Assistance
SSA had not established procedures to ensure the LDSSs verified, through
required annual redeterminations, the continued eligibility of providers, adoptive
parents, and guardians. State regulations require the LDSSs to conduct an annual
redetermination of each foster care provider to determine the provider’s
continuing compliance with State laws and regulations. For example, the annual
redetermination is used to provide assurance that the child continues to have
adequate sleeping arrangements and is receiving required medical examinations,
and that the home continues to comply with fire codes. Similarly, the regulations
require the LDSSs to perform an annual redetermination for each child to confirm
that adoptive parents or guardians remain eligible for financial assistance and that
the current amount of assistance is appropriate.
15

--- Page 18 ---
During fiscal year 2016, the LDSSs did not record in CHESSIE an annual
redetermination of family foster care provider eligibility for 7 of the
aforementioned 20 providers we reviewed. As of the date of our review in
November 2016, it had been 17 to 28 months since a redetermination had been
recorded in CHESSIE for these 7 providers. After our inquiries, SSA obtained
documentation from the LDSSs of redeterminations for 3 of the 7 providers;
however, these redeterminations were conducted after our inquiries. In addition,
we reviewed the records associated with 30 children in the adoption or
guardianship assistance programs. Our review disclosed that SSA could not
provide documentation supporting the completion of a redetermination for 7 of
these children even though the applicable LDSSs had recorded in CHESSIE that
the annual redeterminations were completed. As of November 2016, these
children had been in these programs for periods ranging from 17 months to almost
15 years.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SSA
a. establish monitoring procedures, including a review of documentation, to
ensure that the LDSSs approve and monitor family foster care providers
in accordance with State regulations;
b. establish monitoring procedures to ensure the LDSSs conduct required
redeterminations of the continued eligibility of family foster care
providers, adoptive parents, and guardians in accordance with State
regulations; and
c. ensure that the LDSSs correctly record/scan all necessary documentation
in CHESSIE relating to the approval, monitoring, and continued
eligibility of family foster care providers, adoptive parents, and
guardians, including documentation of quarterly meetings with family
foster care providers.
Finding 4
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that children who remained in
the foster care, adoption, or guardianship programs after they reached the
age of 18 were eligible to do so and, for certain cases we reviewed, there was
a lack of documentation supporting continued eligibility.
Analysis
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that only eligible children remained
in the State’s foster care, adoption, and guardianship programs after they reached
18 years of age. Our tests of several such cases disclosed that adequate
documentation was not always on file to support continued program eligibility.
16

--- Page 19 ---
State regulations allow children over the age of 18 to remain in these programs
until they turn 21 if they are in school, are employed for at least 80 hours a month,
or are incapable of attending school or working because of a medical condition.
According to SSA’s records during fiscal year 2016, SSA made foster care
payments totaling $24.9 million for 634 children over the age of 18, and adoption
and guardianship payments totaling $11.5 million for 1,899 children over the age
of 18. (These payments exclude Baltimore City, which is essentially exempt from
this requirement. 1)
Our review of records associated with 14 children in foster care who were
between the ages of 18 and 21 during fiscal year 2016 disclosed that SSA could
not provide documentation that the required eligibility criteria had been met for 9
of these children, including 5 for which the applicable LDSS recorded in
CHESSIE that the child had met one of the criteria to remain in foster care.
Foster care maintenance payments totaled $167,608 for these 9 children during
fiscal year 2016. Similarly, our review of records for 15 children in the adoption
or guardianship assistance programs, who were between 18 and 21 years of age
during fiscal year 2016, revealed a lack of documentation supporting continued
eligibility for 5 of the 15 children. According to SSA’s records, during fiscal year
2016, SSA made payments totaling $63,405 for these 5 children.
After our audit fieldwork had concluded, SSA provided us with court orders that
documented the court’s recognition of the foster care status for 7 of the
aforementioned 9 foster care children. For example, the court may have ordered
periodic monitoring of the child’s situation and, therefore, had effectively
authorized the child’s continued placement in foster care beyond the age of 18,
regardless of whether the stated eligibility criteria had been met. This situation
does not mitigate the need for SSA to establish monitoring procedures to ensure
that children between the ages of 18 and 21 who remain in one of these programs
meet those criteria. Rather, such monitoring procedures should include a
provision for identifying cases where the eligibility criteria have not been met,
and for determining the appropriateness of the child remaining in the applicable
program, such as because of a court order.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure that the LDSSs verify that children 18
years of age or older who remain in the foster care, adoption, or
guardianship programs are eligible to remain in the applicable program,
1 A consent decree from the United States District Court for Maryland from October 2009
effectively allows children from Baltimore City to remain in foster care until the age of 21
without meeting these conditions. Our test work in this area excluded children in Baltimore City.
17

--- Page 20 ---
and such eligibility is accurately recorded in CHESSIE and documented;
and
b. document implementation of these procedures, including the resolution of
cases for which the eligibility criteria stipulated in State regulations have
not been met.
Federal Funds
Background
SSA is eligible to receive federal reimbursement for 50 percent of the cost of care
(such as maintenance costs for food, clothing, and shelter) incurred on behalf of
children eligible under Title IV-E of the Social Security Act. State regulations
require SSA to determine eligibility for federal fund reimbursement under Title
IV-E for each child upon removal from the home, and to complete a
redetermination every year thereafter.
Each LDSS has a separate unit that is responsible for determining eligibility for
Title IV-E federal reimbursement. These LDSS employees obtain documentation,
such as to verify family income, and complete a worksheet to determine each
child’s eligibility. SSA regional supervisors, who work primarily on Title IV-E
cases at the LDSSs, are responsible for reviewing and approving each worksheet
and for ensuring the eligibility status has been correctly determined and recorded
in CHESSIE so that Title IV-E federal reimbursement may be requested.
SSA also receives Supplemental Security Income (SSI) on behalf of eligible
children in its care. The LDSSs apply for these SSI benefits and become the
representative payees. State regulations require SSI to be applied directly to the
cost of care. When children are eligible for both SSI and Title IV-E, it is SSA’s
responsibility, in conjunction with the LDSS, to ensure the maximum amount of
federal funds is obtained as allowed under federal guidelines.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2016, SSA received federal
reimbursements for Title IV-E totaling $84 million. According to a report
provided by SSA (which could not be readily validated), SSI collections during
fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately $2.6 million.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 5
SSA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that it received federal
reimbursement for all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Our tests
disclosed instances in which children were incorrectly determined to be
ineligible, resulting in a potential loss of federal funds totaling approximately
$1 million.
Analysis
SSA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that it received federal
reimbursement for all children in foster care or in the adoption and guardianship
assistance programs that were eligible for Title IV-E funding. Our test of 36
children for which Title IV-E funding was not being received disclosed problems
with the eligibility determinations or the related documentation for 29 children,
including 18 children who either were incorrectly determined to be ineligible for
the funding or were incorrectly recorded as ineligible in CHESSIE. For these 18
children, there was a potential loss of federal funds totaling approximately $1
million. We reviewed records with SSA personnel who confirmed that certain
children tested were incorrectly determined as ineligible for Title IV-E, as noted
below.
While SSA conducts, on a test basis, a secondary review of Title IV-E eligibility
determinations and redeterminations made by the LDSSs, this procedure did not
ensure the State was maximizing Title IV-E federal fund reimbursements. These
reviews only addressed children deemed eligible for Title IV-E funding, and
excluded children for whom SSA was not receiving Title IV-E reimbursement.
Given the results of our tests and the number of children deemed ineligible for
Title IV-E (for example, approximately 7,000 children as of January 2017 based
on SSA records), a comprehensive review of the eligibility decisions for such
cases appears warranted.
Initial Eligibility Determinations
We judgmentally selected for testing 25 children who entered foster care (both
family and group homes) or the adoption and guardianship assistance programs
during our audit period, had significant payments made on their behalf during
fiscal year 2016, and were recorded in CHESSIE as ineligible for Title IV-E.
Payments associated with these children totaled $1.6 million during fiscal year
2016. We requested documentation for the initial determinations performed when
these children entered the aforementioned social service programs. Overall, our
test disclosed problems with the eligibility determinations and related
documentation for 18 of these 25 children, including 9 who either were
incorrectly determined to be ineligible for the funding or were incorrectly
19

--- Page 22 ---
recorded as ineligible in CHESSIE and for which Title IV-E funding could have
been requested.
Specifically, our test disclosed that SSA could not provide eligibility
determination worksheets for 8 of the 25 children. In addition, worksheets for 4
children were not signed to indicate supervisory review and approval, and
worksheets for 2 children were not signed by the LDSS employees who prepared
them. For 8 of these 14 children, we determined that the child was improperly
classified as ineligible for Title-IV-E reimbursement. Specifically, after bringing
the results of our test to SSA’s attention, SSA obtained additional documentation
to support that these children were, in fact, eligible for Title IV-E reimbursement.
In addition, for a ninth child the worksheet indicated the child was eligible for
Title IV-E reimbursement; however, the child was recorded as ineligible in
CHESSIE.
As a result, SSA had not requested reimbursements totaling approximately
$308,000 for these 9 children for the period between February 2013 (earliest
month during which any of these children were eligible for reimbursement) and
February 2017 and will be unable to recover $73,000 of this amount because the
requests were not made within two years of the expenditure, as required by
federal law. SSA subsequently changed the designation in CHESSIE for 4 of
these children in order to obtain federal reimbursement, and agreed to pursue
federal reimbursement to the extent possible for the remaining 5 children.
Finally, SSA could not provide documentation, such as proof of family income, to
support the information reported on the worksheets for 4 other children. Family
income was a primary factor as to why these children were determined ineligible
for Title IV-E funding. Therefore, it is questionable whether these children were
correctly determined as ineligible for Title IV-E.
Redeterminations
We tested records associated with 11 children in foster care as of June 30, 2016
for which the children were determined to be eligible for Title IV-E, but for which
SSA was not receiving federal reimbursement generally because the service
providers had not been approved and thus the services were not eligible for
reimbursement. Payments associated with these children totaled approximately
$914,000 during fiscal year 2016. We requested documentation for the most
recent redeterminations performed for these children during calendar year 2016.
Overall, our test disclosed problems with the eligibility redeterminations or
related documentation for all 11 of these children, including 9 for which the
services were, in fact, eligible for Title IV-E funding.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Specifically, our test disclosed that SSA could not provide the eligibility
redetermination worksheets for 10 of the 11 children. For 8 of these children, and
for the remaining child for which the eligibility redetermination had been
performed, we determined that the services provided to the children were
improperly classified as ineligible for reimbursement. Specifically, after bringing
the results of our test to SSA’s attention, SSA obtained additional documentation
to support that these 9 children were currently with approved providers and,
therefore, Title IV-E reimbursements could have been obtained for them. As a
result, SSA had not requested reimbursements totaling approximately $690,000
for the period between December 2010 and February 2017 and will be unable to
recover $186,000 of this amount because of the aforementioned two-year federal
request requirement. SSA subsequently changed the designation in CHESSIE for
six of these children in order to obtain federal reimbursement, and agreed to
pursue federal reimbursement to the extent possible for the remaining three
children.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to ensure federal
reimbursement is obtained for all children eligible for Title IV-E funding.
Specifically, we recommend that SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is properly determined for all children
and recorded in CHESSIE;
b. ensure that determination and redetermination worksheets are completed
for all children, are signed by the preparer and reviewed and approved
by a supervisor, and include all supporting documentation;
c. review all children who are currently determined to be ineligible,
including the aforementioned cases, and obtain Title IV-E funds when
possible; and
d. include children classified as ineligible for Title IV-E federal
reimbursement in its secondary review procedures.
Finding 6
SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal funds for children who were
eligible to receive SSI.
Analysis
SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal funds for children who were
eligible to receive SSI. We reviewed records associated with 14 children who
received foster care services during our audit period and were eligible for SSI.
These children were identified primarily during our testing of foster care initial
determinations and redeterminations (Finding 5). As of January 2017, 12 of these
21

--- Page 24 ---
children were recorded in CHESSIE as ineligible for Title IV-E reimbursement
and 2 children were recorded as eligible for Title IV-E. Foster care maintenance
payments associated with these 14 children totaled approximately $1 million
during fiscal year 2016.
We determined that SSA did not maximize its recovery of federal funds for 9
children tested. Specifically, SSI recoveries for 5 of these children were not
maximized which, in total, resulted in losses of $56,000. For the 4 other children,
SSI funds were not received, but neither were Title IV-E funds, which in these
cases would have resulted in higher recoveries (as commented upon in Finding 5).
With respect to the 12 children who were recorded as ineligible for Title IV-E
funding, our test disclosed that SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal
funds for 8 children. Specifically, for 3 children SSA had not collected SSI since
these children entered foster care, dating back to 2014. In total, $42,000 was not
collected as of February 2017. For 4 children, our audit determined that, in fact,
these children were eligible for Title IV-E reimbursement which, if requested,
would have exceeded the monthly SSI amounts available of approximately $721
per child. Finally, for the eighth child, SSA did not collect SSI until 21 months
past the date the child entered foster care, which resulted in a loss of $9,000.
With respect to the 2 children who were recorded as eligible for Title IV-E
funding, our test disclosed SSA did not maximize the recovery of funds for one of
the children. The applicable LDSS prepared an analysis, dated August 2015,
indicating monthly SSI ($733) exceeded the available Title IV-E funding ($433)
and, therefore, only the SSI should have been collected. However, SSA requested
Title IV-E funding instead of collecting SSI, resulting in a loss of federal funds
totaling approximately $5,100 for services provided during the period September
2015 through January 2017. After we brought this to its attention, SSA agreed to
obtain SSI on behalf of this child. SSA maximized the recovery of federal funds
for the other child, even though the LDSS did not prepare an analysis to support
the reimbursements requested.
We commented on SSA’s failure to maximize the recovery of federal funds for
children receiving SSI in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SSA maximize the recovery of federal funds for
children who are eligible for SSI (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that
SSA
a. ensure SSI is promptly collected to cover the cost of foster care for
children who are only eligible for SSI;
22

--- Page 25 ---
b. review all SSI eligible cases and ensure federal recoveries are maximized;
and
c. for children eligible for both funding sources, prepare, document, and
implement a process to maximize federal funding for the cost of foster
care.
Child Protective Services
Background
SSA’s Child Protective Services unit provides services to assist children believed
to be neglected or abused by parents or other adults with parental responsibilities.
Allegations of child abuse or neglect are reported to the LDSSs, which are
responsible for conducting reviews and investigations. The LDSSs are required to
record allegations received and the steps taken to review and investigate each
allegation in CHESSIE. It is SSA’s responsibility to ensure these reviews and
investigations are properly performed.
This unit is also responsible for ensuring that LDSSs conduct required safety and
family risk assessments for newborns exposed to controlled substances, and when
subsequent children are born to individuals who had previously had their parental
rights terminated by court order for abuse or neglect. The assessments are
performed to assess risk and to identify resources and necessary services to be
provided.
Finding 7
SSA did not monitor the timeliness of child abuse and neglect investigations
conducted by the LDSSs. In addition, reviews and investigations of
allegations were not always performed timely.
Analysis
SSA had not established oversight procedures to ensure that the LDSSs conducted
reviews and investigations of allegations of child abuse or neglect within the time
frames established by SSA policy and State law. Our review disclosed that the
LDSSs did not always timely review and investigate these allegations. Delays in
reviewing allegations, as well as initiating and completing related investigations,
could result in children remaining in harmful environments.
SSA did not review available CHESSIE reports to monitor the timeliness of the
required actions to be taken by the LDSSs. According to reports generated from
CHESSIE, 976 of the 3,498 investigations (28 percent) completed during the
period from May through July 2016 were not completed within 60 days from
23

--- Page 26 ---
receipt of the allegations, as required by State law. For 265 of these 976
investigations, CHESSIE reports indicated that the investigations concluded that
the abuse or neglect had occurred. Furthermore, as of August 2016, there were
332 allegations that had been under investigation for 60 days or more, of which
23 had been open for more than one year. These 23 allegations were associated
with 12 different LDSSs.
Our review of allegations of child abuse or neglect that were received during July
2016 disclosed delays in the review of allegations, and in the initiation and
completion of investigations.
Allegations
LDSS supervisors did not always review allegations and make determinations as
to whether investigations were warranted within two hours from the time of
receipt, as required by SSA policy. According to available CHESSIE reports,
investigations were deemed warranted for 1,176 of the 3,048 allegations received
during July 2016. Of these 1,176 allegations, there were 208 allegations for
which LDSS supervisors did not determine if an investigation was warranted for
at least 2 days, including 40 for which a determination was not made for periods
of 6 to 16 days after receipt.
Investigations
In certain circumstances, the LDSSs did not initiate investigations timely, as
required by State law. State law requires the LDSS to initiate an investigation,
such as by visiting the child, within 24 hours of receiving an allegation of abuse
and within five days of receiving an allegation of neglect. We tested 16 of the
aforementioned 40 allegations for which the initial determination of whether an
investigation was warranted had not been performed timely. Our review
disclosed that, in some cases, investigations were started before the applicable
determinations were made. However, for 3 allegations of abuse, the LDSS did
not initiate its investigation timely, as these investigations began 4, 13, and 16
days after these allegations were received. In addition, for one allegation of
neglect, the investigation was initiated 8 days after receipt.
The LDSSs did not complete certain investigations in a timely manner, as
required by State law. For the aforementioned 16 investigations, our test
disclosed that 7 were completed between 64 and 81 days after receipt of the
allegations. In 2 of these 7 cases, the investigations concluded that abuse or
neglect had occurred. State law requires investigations of abuse and neglect to be
completed within 10 days to the extent possible, but no later than 60 days after
receipt of the allegation.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that SSA establish oversight procedures to ensure that the
LDSSs review allegations of child abuse or neglect and conduct and complete
related investigations in a timely manner, as required by SSA policy and
State law.
Finding 8
SSA did not monitor the timeliness of required assessments of substance-
exposed newborns completed by the LDSSs. In addition, these assessments
were not always completed within the required time frames.
Analysis
SSA did not establish oversight procedures to ensure that the LDSSs completed
and approved required safety and risk assessments of controlled substance-
exposed newborns in a timely manner, and our test disclosed that the LDSSs did
not always complete the assessments within the required periods. While SSA
distributed a report to assist the LDSSs in monitoring these processes, the report
was incomplete and inaccurate, and SSA did not actively use the report or any
other means to oversee LDSS compliance. According to SSA records, during
fiscal year 2016 there were 1,959 controlled substance-exposed newborn
notifications made to the LDSSs.
State regulations require health care practitioners involved in the delivery or care
of a substance-exposed newborn to notify the applicable LDSS verbally as soon
as possible, and in writing within 48 hours. State regulations also require the
LDSS to examine the infant and consult with the health care practitioner within
48 hours of this notification to assess the safety of, and risk of harm to, the
newborn. SSA policy requires the LDSSs to complete a formal safety assessment
and a family risk assessment within 7 and 30 days of the health care practitioner’s
notification, respectively. These assessments are prepared by a case worker and
approved by a supervisor. The safety assessment allows for a uniform
documentation of factors that may indicate an immediate danger to a child while
the family risk assessment is used to determine any present or future risk of harm
for all children within the family.
We reviewed the records in CHESSIE associated with 10 judgmentally selected
substance-exposed infants born during fiscal year 2016, and we noted that the
LDSSs did not always complete the assessments within the required time frames.
Because the health care practitioner notification dates were not always recorded in
CHESSIE, we performed our testing based on the dates of the LDSSs’ initial
examinations which, for these 10 infants, generally occurred within 48 hours from
25

--- Page 28 ---
the dates of birth. Our test disclosed that, in all 10 cases, although the safety
assessments were prepared within 7 days of the initial examinations of the
newborns, in 4 of 10 cases, these assessments were not approved until 15 to 31
days after the initial examinations. In addition, the LDSSs did not prepare 3
family risk assessments until 44 to 144 days after the initial examinations of the
newborns and, in these 3 cases, the LDSSs concluded that the overall family risk
was moderate. Finally, for one of the test items, the family risk assessment had
still not been prepared at the time of our test, which was 20 months after the date
of the initial examination.
SSA prepares a report from CHESSIE and provides it to the LDSSs, on a weekly
basis, for their use in monitoring assessments associated with substance-exposed
newborns. While the report included case identification information, it did not
include certain critical information that would be useful in monitoring
compliance, such as the child’s name and date of birth, and the date the LDSSs
were notified by the health care practitioner of the substance-exposed newborn.
Our aforementioned test also disclosed some critical inaccuracies with this report.
For example, the safety assessment dates were either missing or incorrect for all
10 of our test items. We determined the correct dates from other sources.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SSA
a. establish oversight procedures to ensure that LDSSs complete required
safety and risk assessments of substance-exposed newborns within the
time frames required by State regulations and SSA policy, and
b. enhance the accuracy and completeness of the aforementioned CHESSIE
report to ensure it can be reliably used to monitor compliance with these
requirements.
Finding 9
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were immediately notified
of children born to individuals who had previously had their parental rights
terminated for abuse or neglect. In addition, SSA did not ensure that the
LDSSs completed an assessment of these families and offered services when
appropriate.
Analysis
SSA lacked adequate procedures to ensure that it immediately notified the
appropriate LDSSs of children born to individuals who had previously had their
parental rights terminated by court order for abuse or neglect. In addition, SSA
did not ensure that the LDSSs completed an assessment of these families and
26

--- Page 29 ---
offered services when appropriate. Individuals who have had their parental rights
terminated for abuse or neglect no longer have legal rights and responsibilities for
the specific child(ren) named in the court order. As required by State law, SSA
provides the names of these individuals to the Maryland Department of Health
(MDH) which notifies SSA of children subsequently born to these individuals.
State law further requires SSA to immediately notify the applicable LDSS so that
the LDSS may review its records and, when appropriate, provide an assessment of
the family and offer services, if needed. According to SSA’s records, for the
period from October 2015 through August 2016, there were 89 children born to
parents whose parental rights had been terminated by the court for abuse or
neglect.
Our test disclosed that SSA did not immediately notify the LDSSs of these births,
and the LDSSs did not always initiate the assessments in a timely manner.
During February 2016, SSA received birth information from MDH for eight
children who were born to individuals who had previously had their parental
rights terminated. However, SSA did not notify the applicable LDSS for two of
these children until November 2016, after we brought them to its attention. In
addition, for three of the remaining six children, the LDSSs determined that
assessments were appropriate but did not attempt to initiate contact with the
family until May 2016, more than two months after SSA was notified of the
child’s birth by MDH.
This situation occurred primarily because SSA had not established a supervisory
review process to oversee the employee performing these notification and
monitoring duties.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that SSA establish adequate procedures and controls, such
as a requirement for supervisory review, to ensure that LDSSs are promptly
notified of children born to individuals who have previously had their
parental rights terminated by the court, and that a family assessment is
completed timely if determined to be appropriate by the LDSS.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Finding 10
SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to certain providers of child
placement services were identified and resolved in a timely manner.
Analysis
SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to certain providers of child
placement services (group homes and child placement agencies) were identified
and resolved in a timely manner. SSA’s annual contracts with these providers
stipulate that they can retain up to 10 percent of payments received from SSA in
excess of their actual operating costs to be used for certain allowable purposes,
such as future operating expenses and expanding services. Overpayments in
excess of the 10 percent threshold are to be refunded to DHS. However, financial
reports required from providers were not being reviewed on a timely basis in
order to identify any overpayments made. Fiscal year 2016 payments to treatment
and group foster care providers totaled $71.1 million and $64.1 million,
respectively.
DHS’ Office of the Inspector General (OIG), on behalf of SSA, reviews
providers’ financial reports, which are due in December for the prior fiscal year,
to identify any overpayments and to determine their proper disposition. We were
advised by the OIG that, as of September 2016, there had been no reviews
conducted of fiscal year 2015 financial reports, which were due from the
providers by December 2015. In addition, our review of documentation obtained
from the OIG relating to its review of fiscal year 2014 activity disclosed that the
OIG had not completed its review for 69 of the 82 providers it had identified for
review. Furthermore, we identified 9 additional providers that received fiscal
year 2014 payments in excess of $100,000 each that were not included in the
documentation received from the OIG of reviews to be conducted. Five of the 9
additional providers received more than $1 million each and, in total, these
providers received $9.6 million in fiscal year 2014.
According to the OIG, providers received overpayments related to fiscal year
2013 activity totaling $2.1 million, of which approximately $1.0 million was in
excess of the 10 percent threshold. We were further advised that DHS collected
$151,000 of the $1.0 million, and the remaining $849,000 has been referred to the
Department of Budget and Management’s Central Collection Unit. As a result of
delays in the review of fiscal year 2014 and 2015 financial reports, SSA was
unable to determine the extent of any overpayments made to providers during
those years. Although DHS’ OIG conducts these reviews on behalf of SSA, it is
28

--- Page 31 ---
ultimately SSA’s responsibility to ensure compliance with all provisions of the
provider contracts, including the proper disposition of any overpayments.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that SSA, in conjunction with the OIG, ensure that reviews
of financial reports from group homes and child placement agencies are
completed in a timely manner in order to promptly identity any
overpayments and ensure their proper disposition.
Finding 11
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance
payments were suspended, terminated, or, as permitted, renegotiated with
the adoptive parent when an adopted child was removed from the adoptive
home.
Analysis
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that monthly adoption assistance
payments to an adoptive parent were suspended, terminated, or, as permitted,
renegotiated with the adoptive parent if the adopted child is subsequently moved
to an out-of-home placement, such as foster care. Consequently, there was a lack
of assurance that improper assistance payments were not being made for a child
who had been removed from the adoptive home, resulting in potentially
inappropriate duplicative payments being made for the child (both adoption
assistance and foster care payments).
State regulations stipulate that adoption assistance payments funded entirely by
the State shall be suspended when an adopted child enters an out-of-home
placement. The regulations further provide that assistance payments for which
the State receives federal (Title IV-E) reimbursement shall be terminated only
when the adoptive parent is no longer legally responsible for the child or is no
longer providing financial support to the child. Legal responsibility and financial
support may or may not continue when a child is moved from an adoptive home
to an out-of-home placement. Regardless, SSA advised us that its policy is to not
terminate assistance payments when the child is Title IV-E eligible. Instead, the
case is referred to DHS’ Child Support Administration (CSA) for recovery of
child support from the adoptive parent. The regulations also provide for possible
renegotiation with the adoptive parent as to the amount of the assistance payment
to reflect, for example, continued but less financial support provided by the
adoptive parent.
29

--- Page 32 ---
According to SSA’s records, during fiscal year 2016, adoption assistance
payments totaling $281,771 were paid for 69 children who had entered foster
care. Our test of payments totaling $104,818 relating to 10 of these children (6
State-funded and 4 Title IV-E eligible) disclosed that SSA did not suspend
payments totaling $65,716 for the 6 State-funded children. Further review of one
of the six disclosed that, as of February 2017, adoption assistance payments
totaling approximately $64,000 had been made for the child after the child entered
foster care in October 2010. In addition, SSA could not document that it
submitted information to CSA for 2 of the 4 Title IV-E eligible children in order
to recover child support for the children.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure compliance with State regulations
regarding adoption assistance payments being made for a child who has
been moved from the adoptive home to an out-of-home placement; and
b. review adoption assistance payments made on behalf of children in out-
of-home placement, including for the aforementioned children, and
recover any amounts that were inappropriately paid.
Finding 12
Ancillary expenditures incurred by the LDSSs to further support children in
social services programs were not adequately controlled.
Analysis
Ancillary expenditures incurred by the LDSSs for goods and services, such as
specialized training, transportation, personal care supplies, and day care required
to further support children in social services programs, were not adequately
controlled. Specifically, the LDSSs frequently failed to obtain multiple vendor
bids for these expenditures as required by State regulations. These expenditures,
which, according to SSA records totaled approximately $27.5 million for fiscal
year 2016, were in addition to any other program payments being made for a
child, including monthly foster care maintenance payments.
Our review of 15 payments for ancillary expenditures totaling $295,963, and
ranging between $1,354 and $53,277, disclosed that the LDSSs that processed the
payments did not obtain vendor bids for any of the expenditures other than from
the vendor providing the goods or services. State regulations require three bids
for such expenditures over $500. Without obtaining at least three bids, there was
a lack of assurance that the best value was received for these payments.
30

--- Page 33 ---
According to SSA’s records, ancillary expenditures exceeding $500 made by all
LDSSs during fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately $21 million.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that SSA ensure adequate control over ancillary
expenditures made to support children in social services programs by
requiring and verifying LDSS compliance with the aforementioned State
regulations.
Finding 13
SSA did not approve certain adoption assistance rates being paid by LDSSs
as required by SSA policy.
Analysis
Monthly adoption assistance rates paid by the LDSSs that exceeded the maximum
rate allowed by State regulations, which was $965 at the time our audit, were not
always approved by SSA as required by SSA policy. An LDSS may pay a rate
higher than the maximum allowed rate for a particular child when, for example,
the child requires extra care and supervision because of special physical,
emotional, or behavioral needs. However, SSA policy requires approval to pay a
rate higher than the maximum allowed rate.
According to SSA’s records, during fiscal year 2016, monthly assistance
payments of between $1,000 and $2,038 were made on behalf of 258 children and
totaled approximately $1.7 million. Our review of records for 29 of the 258
children disclosed that SSA could not provide documentation that it had approved
the higher rate for 16 of these children. Total assistance payments made during
the year for these 16 children were $323,870. This conditions occurred, in part,
because SSA relied on the LDSSs to request the required approval, rather than
proactively identifying instances where the adoption assistance rate being paid
was greater than the maximum allowed rate.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that SSA
a. ensure each LDSS obtains SSA approval, as required, prior to processing
adoption assistance rates greater than the current maximum allowed
rate; and
b. take steps to periodically identify the use of rates greater than the
maximum allowed rate to verify that the rates were approved as
required.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Interagency Agreements
Finding 14
SSA did not ensure that payments made to a State university for three
interagency agreements were adequately supported, were reasonable in
relation to the tasks performed, and were made in accordance with the terms
of the agreements.
Analysis
SSA did not adequately monitor payments and services related to three
interagency agreements with a State university for various periods from July 2014
through June 2019 with a combined value of $15.3 million. These agreements
required the State university to (1) provide in-person and distance learning
opportunities for child welfare professionals; (2) provide assistance with
legislative reports, data integrity, evaluation and quality assurance, and project
management; and (3) prepare Bachelor of Social Work and Masters of Social
Work students for social work practice with families and children within the
State’s public child welfare services program. The agreements were not specific
enough to readily determine if the desired outcomes were achieved. SSA has had
agreements of this nature with the State university for many years.
Under the terms of the agreements, payments to the State university were
primarily based on the actual time spent and the salary costs of the applicable
university personnel. Each agreement identified the specific State university
employees who would perform the work and their salaries (including fringe
benefits), and the percentage that each employee’s time would apply to work
under the agreement. According to State records as of February 2017, payments
related to these three agreements totaled $7.4 million.
 SSA did not obtain sufficient documentation to support the labor charges
billed under the agreements and to monitor completion of tasks. SSA
received invoices with the names of each employee and the tasks worked on
during the month. However, timesheets submitted by the State university to
support the invoices frequently did not reflect the specific hours worked by
each employee and the allocation of hours by task. As a result, SSA could not
ensure the propriety of the labor charges billed and could not monitor the
State university’s efforts relative to the tasks performed. For example, 26 of
the 42 timesheets submitted for the three agreements for the pay period ending
October 17, 2015 had a “D” (duty day) designation recorded to signify that the
employee worked on a specific day, but did not specify the actual hours
worked. SSA was charged for the percentage of the employee’s time as
specified in the agreement.
32

--- Page 35 ---
 SSA did not compare labor charges billed with the State university’s payroll
records to ensure that payments for hours worked and fringe benefits were
accurate. SSA also did not ensure labor charges agreed to the amounts
specified in the agreements. Our review of fiscal year 2016 invoices disclosed
instances in all three agreements in which the amounts paid for certain
employees exceeded the agreed-upon amounts. Specifically, for 13
individuals, payments exceeded the agreed-upon amounts by $69,000.
 SSA paid the State university for work performed by employees who were not
included in the agreements. Our review of fiscal year 2016 invoices disclosed
that SSA paid labor charges, totaling $253,000, for 27 individuals who were
not included in the agreements. SSA advised us that it received verbal notice
from the State university for all personnel changes. However, SSA could not
provide documentation that it approved in advance the use of these employees
to perform work related to the agreements, and there was no provision in the
agreements addressing the process for personnel changes or additions.
 Under one agreement, SSA paid $468,000 to the State university for work
performed by subcontractors, which were three other State universities. While
the use of these subcontractors was provided for in the agreement, SSA did
not review documentation provided by the State university, such as
subcontractor billings, to ensure that the documentation was complete and
supported the payments. Furthermore, the agreement did not specify the work
to be performed by the subcontractors or identify the employees to perform
the work. Rather the agreement only stated that these subcontractors were to
provide employees to “address specific needs within Maryland’s child welfare
workforce.” The work performed by these other universities related to the
agreement to prepare Bachelor of Social Work and Masters of Social Work
students for social work practice with families and children within the State’s
public child welfare services program.
Conditions regarding the failure to obtain sufficient documentation to support
labor hours billed under these agreements have been commented upon in our three
preceding audit reports. Interagency agreements are used by State agencies to
obtain services from State institutions of higher education (State universities).
Interagency agreements are exempt from State procurement laws, including the
requirements for competitive procurement, publication of solicitations and
awards, and Board of Public Works’ approval.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Recommendation 14
We recommend that SSA
a. obtain and review detailed time records (timesheets), including hours
worked by each employee by task, to support the propriety of labor
charges billed, and to monitor the State university’s efforts to complete
the tasks (repeat);
b. compare the State university’s payroll records (payroll register) to labor
charges billed to ensure amounts billed are accurate (repeat);
c. compare labor charges for each employee with the amounts specified in
the agreement and investigate any variances;
d. amend the interagency agreements to include provisions for personnel
changes or additions and document approval for all changes in personnel,
including the costs associated with each employee; and
e. obtain and review adequate documentation to support the propriety of
amounts billed for work performed by subcontractors, such as
subcontractor billings.
34

--- Page 37 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Human
Services (DHS) – Social Services Administration (SSA) for the period beginning
January 28, 2013 and ending June 30, 2016. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SSA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal fund reimbursement, foster care, child
protective services, adoption and guardianship assistance, the Children’s
Electronic Social Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE), and interagency
agreements. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
Our audit did not included various support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by
DHS’ Office of the Secretary. Our audit also did not include an evaluation of
internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations pertaining to
federal financial assistance programs and as assessment of SSA’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including SSA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SSA’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
35

--- Page 38 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. We
extracted data from CHESSIE for the purpose of testing foster care requirements,
federal fund recoveries, child protective services investigations, and adoption and
guardianship assistance. We performed various tests of the relevant data in order
to determine data reliability. Use of the data was restricted to the situations in
which the data were deemed to be reliable for the purposes they were used.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for
background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SSA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect SSA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that SSA’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
rating were the number and significance of the audit findings contained in the
36

--- Page 39 ---
report. Our rating conclusion has been made solely pursuant to State law and
rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit Committee. The rating process is
not a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
DHS’ response, on behalf of SSA, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 21224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
37

--- Page 41 ---
The Department of Human Services (DHS) appreciates the opportunity to respond to the draft
Legislative Audit Report of the Department of Human Services – Social Services Administration
(SSA) for the period beginning January 28, 2013 and ending June 30, 2016. The Department takes
very seriously its mission to supervise, direct, and monitor social services programs provided by
the local departments of social services (LDSSs) located in each of Maryland’s 24 local
subdivisions. These programs are designed to prevent or remedy abuse, neglect, and exploitation
of children and families, and include foster care, adoption and guardianship assistance, and child
protective services.
The draft report identifies areas where DHS is in agreement that improvements can be made in our
oversight of and procedures for our programs and operations. There are also findings presented
by the report with which DHS is not fully in agreement with the assertions or conclusions
presented; notwithstanding our reservations, we do generally accept the recommendations and
have proposed appropriate, responsive corrective actions.
DHS is not in agreement with either OLA’s overall conclusion that SSA had not established a
comprehensive quality assurance program to ensure that child welfare programs were being
properly administered by the LDSSs or with OLA’s rating of unsatisfactory for accountability and
compliance. SSA had a comprehensive Quality Assurance process in place during the audit period
focusing on indicators of success in reaching program outcomes for children and families.
Auditor’s Comment: DHS’ comments regarding its quality assurance program relate to
Finding 1; see our Auditor Comment there.
Specifically, between FY13-16, a total of 12 reviews1 of LDSSs were completed across the state:
• In FY13 the following counties were reviewed: Calvert, Carroll, Frederick, Garrett,
Harford, Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot.
• Between FY14 – FY15, onsite reviews were completed for Anne Arundel county and
Baltimore City DSS, and Continuous Improvement Plans (CIP) monitoring reviews were
completed in Allegany, Baltimore, Calvert, Carroll, Dorchester, Frederick, Garrett,
Harford, Howard, Queen Anne's, Somerset, St. Mary's, Washington, Wicomico, and
Worcester counties.
• In FY16 reviews were completed for Wicomico and Worcester counties in April and May
2016.
Notwithstanding DHS’s objection, SSA does acknowledge that with regard to some of the
compliance-oriented indicators identified by the auditors in this report, enhanced and direct
1 These reviews and CIP materials have been compiled for inspection. During the audit period, the review process included the
following:
• Comprehensive self-analysis conducted by the LDSS and stakeholder focus groups (i.e. providers, attorneys, judges,
school personnel, staff, etc.) and an analysis of the aggregate results.
• Comprehensive MD CHESSIE case reviews by SSA’s Quality Assurance staff on a random sample of Investigation,
In-Home, and Out-of-Home cases (30 total; 10 from each program area).

--- Page 42 ---
monitoring by SSA may result in improved program operations and outcomes. To that end, SSA
has begun (and will continue) to increase its efforts and focus on these and other compliance
indicators.
All proposed or already implemented corrective actions are detailed below in our response to each
recommendation.
Finding 1
The Social Services Administration (SSA) did not have comprehensive quality assurance
processes in place to adequately monitor the administration of child welfare program
services by the State’s local departments of social services (LDSSs).
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SSA establish comprehensive quality assurance processes to ensure its
child welfare programs are effectively and properly administered by the LDSSs.
Specifically, we recommend that SSA develop, implement, and oversee
a. comprehensive written procedures for monitoring program services and functions to
ensure compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies; appropriate and
timely recordkeeping; and the maintenance of supporting documentation relating to
services and functions performed; and
b. a quality assurance case review process at each LDSS.
Department’s Response
Finding and Recommendations 1(a) and 1(b)
SSA disagrees with the finding, but accepts and agrees with the recommendations.
SSA respectfully disagrees with this finding. SSA established a quality assurance system several
years ago. This system focuses on key indicators of success in reaching program outcomes for
children and families (e.g. lowering recurrence of maltreatment, lowering the number of children
in foster care, increasing timely placements of foster children to permanency, and lowering the
rate of reentry after reunification). However, in an effort to establish a more comprehensive
quality assurance process over its child welfare programs, SSA is updating its current monitoring
procedures along with related system reports to assess, on a test basis, the local department’s
compliance in all critical areas. SSA therefore accepts the recommendations.
Auditor’s Comment: At the time of our audit, SSA’s quality assurance system was not
in place and operational. We were advised that the last report produced as a result of the
system had been issued two years prior to our audit. Based on SSA’s representations, the
quality assurance system focused on program outcomes. Monitoring of outcomes would
be beneficial under a fully operational system. Even so, other aspects of its social
services programs need to be addressed. SSA has acknowledged that current monitoring
procedures need to be updated to address the various program compliance issues
identified in this report.

--- Page 43 ---
Monitoring Compliance With Foster Care Requirements
Finding 2
SSA had not established procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure that foster children
were placed in the least restrictive environment and received required services. Further,
reports from the Children’s Electronic Social Services Information Exchange (CHESSIE)
did not accurately reflect services provided to children in foster care, which hampered the
ability of SSA to monitor service delivery.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to monitor the LDSSs to ensure compliance
with foster care requirements. Specifically, we recommend that SSA
a. ensure that the applicable legal documentation is included in each foster child’s case
record;
b. ensure that the LDSSs place children in the least restrictive environment and document
attempts to place the child with a relative;
c. ensure compliance with medical, dental, and education requirements by reviewing
applicable documentation; and
d. ensure that all required activity is accurately reflected in CHESSIE so that CHESSIE
can be effectively used as a tool to monitor case management activity.
Department’s Response
Finding and Recommendations 2(a) through 2(d)
SSA agrees with the finding and each recommendation.
SSA acknowledges that there are some disparities between case files maintained both
electronically and in hardcopy as well as the need to ensure these records individually represent a
complete and accurate record of compliance with the mandated requirements. Accordingly, SSA
is updating its current monitoring procedures along with related system reports to assess, on a
test basis, the local department’s compliance in these areas.

--- Page 44 ---
Monitoring of Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Assistance
Finding 3
SSA did not establish procedures to ensure that the LDSSs complied with State regulations
regarding the initial approval of foster care providers, as well as ongoing monitoring
requirements for foster care providers, adoptive parents, and guardians.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SSA
a. establish monitoring procedures, including a review of documentation, to ensure that
the LDSSs approve and monitor family foster care providers in accordance with State
regulations;
b. establish monitoring procedures to ensure the LDSSs conduct required
redeterminations of the continued eligibility of family foster care providers, adoptive
parents, and guardians in accordance with State regulations; and
c. ensure that the LDSSs correctly record/scan all necessary documentation in CHESSIE
relating to the approval, monitoring, and continued eligibility of family foster care
providers, adoptive parents, and guardians, including documentation of quarterly
meetings with family foster care providers.
Department’s Response
Finding 3 and Recommendations 3(a) through 3(c):
The SSA agrees with the finding and each recommendation.
Recommendation 3(a)
Although the referenced documentation was not scanned in MD CHESSIE, hard copies were
provided by SSA and supported the fact that the aforementioned foster care providers were
approved in accordance with State regulations. SSA is updating its current monitoring
procedures along with related system reports to assess, on a test basis, that the local department’s
compliance in this area is adequately documented.
Recommendation 3(b)
SSA is updating its current monitoring procedures along with related system reports to assess, on
a test basis, the local department’s compliance in this area.
Recommendation 3(c)
The process for approving public foster homes is a paper-based process. Therefore, supporting
documentation was maintained in hardcopy case files at LDSS sites. Nonetheless, SSA has met
with LDSS management to reinforce the importance of scanning documentation into MD
CHESSIE. SSA will monitor compliance on a test basis.

--- Page 45 ---
Finding 4
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that children who remained in the foster
care, adoption, or guardianship programs after they reached the age of 18 were eligible to
do so and, for certain cases we reviewed, there was a lack of documentation supporting
continued eligibility.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure that the LDSSs verify that children 18 years of age or
older who remain in the foster care, adoption, or guardianship programs are eligible to
remain in the applicable program, and such eligibility is accurately recorded in
CHESSIE and documented; and
b. document implementation of these procedures, including the resolution of cases for
which the eligibility criteria stipulated in State regulations have not been met.
Department’s Response
Finding and Recommendations 4(a) and 4(b):
SSA agrees with the finding and each recommendation.
Recommendation 4(a)
SSA is updating its current monitoring procedures along with related system reports to assess, on
a test basis, the local department’s compliance in these areas.
Recommendation 4(b)
The aforementioned reviews will be documented and retained for audit purposes.
Finding 5
SSA did not have adequate procedures to ensure that it received federal reimbursement for
all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Our tests disclosed instances in which children
were incorrectly determined to be ineligible, resulting in a potential loss of federal funds
totaling approximately $1 million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SSA establish procedures to ensure federal reimbursement is obtained
for all children eligible for Title IV-E funding. Specifically, we recommend that SSA
a. ensure that Title IV-E eligibility is properly determined for all children and recorded in
CHESSIE;
b. ensure that determination and redetermination worksheets are completed for all
children, are signed by the preparer and reviewed and approved by a supervisor, and
include all supporting documentation;
c. review all children who are currently determined to be ineligible, including the
aforementioned cases, and obtain Title IV-E funds when possible; and

--- Page 46 ---
d. include children classified as ineligible for Title IV-E federal reimbursement in its
secondary review procedures.
Department’s Response
Finding and Recommendations 5(a) through 5(d):
SSA agrees with the finding and each recommendation.
Recommendations 5 (a), (b), and (d)
SSA is updating its current monitoring procedures along with related system reports to assess, on
a test basis, the local department’s compliance in these areas. SSA has also taken steps to
improve the supervisory review process to ensure eligibility decisions are timely and accurately
completed in the MD CHESSIE data system.
Recommendation 5 (c)
SSA has corrected all of the cases and claims adjustments requested. The adjustments
(depending on when they were made) were either included in the last quarter claims (April, May,
June) or in the most recent quarterly claims (July, August, September) submitted on October 15,
2017.
Finding 6
SSA did not maximize the recovery of federal funds for children who were eligible to
receive SSI.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SSA maximize the recovery of federal funds for children who are
eligible for SSI (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that SSA
a. ensure SSI is promptly collected to cover the cost of foster care for children who are
only eligible for SSI;
b. review all SSI eligible cases and ensure federal recoveries are maximized; and
c. for children eligible for both funding sources, prepare, document, and implement a
process to maximize federal funding for the cost of foster care.
Department’s Response
Finding and Recommendations 6(a) through 6(c):
SSA agrees with the finding and each recommendation.
Recommendations 6(a) and 6(b)
A Title IV-E eligibility determination is completed for every child entering foster care. As part
of the Title IV-E determination, the SSI status of each child is also reviewed. If the child is
receiving SSI, a cost benefit analysis is completed. SSI eligibility is currently being performed
by a vendor specifically contracted for the purpose of securing SSI funding (when appropriate)
for children in foster care.

--- Page 47 ---
Recommendation 6(c)
SSA along with the Office of Budget & Finance is analyzing the feasibility of changing the
claiming structure for dual claims.
Child Protective Services
Finding 7
SSA did not monitor the timeliness of child abuse and neglect investigations conducted by
the LDSSs. In addition, reviews and investigations of allegations were not always
performed timely.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that SSA establish oversight procedures to ensure that the LDSSs review
allegations of child abuse or neglect and conduct and complete related investigations in a
timely manner, as required by SSA policy and State law.
Department’s Response
Finding 7:
SSA respectfully disagrees with this finding but agrees with the recommendation.
It appears that OLA’s review of investigation initiations and completions were not fairly
sampled. Specifically, the items sampled were drawn from cases already noted as having issues
with the screening process making them more likely to have experienced similar delinquencies
with initiating or subsequently completing the investigation.
Auditor’s Comment: The primary source for this finding was various CHESSIE reports
that showed for the periods reviewed that the local departments of social services had not
made determinations about the need for an investigation or completed required
investigations in a timely manner for a significant number of cases. The 16 allegations
specifically addressed in the finding, which appear to be the focus of SSA’s comments,
were only examples of some of the delays encountered for initiating and completing
investigations.
There are a variety of factors that affect the determination as to whether an investigation is
warranted (i.e. screening). For example, there may be instances when an initial report contains
insufficient information to make the determination. In an attempt to appropriately determine
whether to screen in (or screen out) a report, the screener may need to contact additional parties
(e.g. the school). These additional efforts are documented with, then reviewed by, a supervisor
to determine whether sufficient information exists to accept the report for either a CPS response
or some other Departmental service.

--- Page 48 ---
Nonetheless, the timely investigation of allegations is of critical importance to SSA in achieving
one of its central objectives, which is to ensure the protection of children from harmful
environments. Accordingly, SSA acknowledges that there is room for improvement and is
updating its current monitoring procedures, along with related system reports, to assess, on a test
basis, the local department’s compliance in these areas. Furthermore, SSA is providing guidance
to the LDSSs regarding the importance of documenting any factors that may have delayed the
initiation of an investigation.
Finding 8
SSA did not monitor the timeliness of required assessments of substance-exposed newborns
completed by the LDSSs. In addition, these assessments were not always completed within
the required time frames.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that SSA
a. establish oversight procedures to ensure that LDSSs complete required safety and risk
assessments of substance-exposed newborns within the time frames required by State
regulations and SSA policy, and
b. enhance the accuracy and completeness of the aforementioned CHESSIE report to
ensure it can be reliably used to monitor compliance with these requirements.
Department’s Response
Finding and Recommendations 8(a) and 8(c):
SSA partially agrees with these recommendations:
Recommendation 8(a)
In 100% of the cases, the face-to-face activity of a safety assessment was timely completed (e.g.
seeing the baby, speaking to the parent about safety concerns, and making a safety plan as
necessary); however, as noted in the report, the supporting SAFE-C document was not approved
timely. Each of these assessments occur in a hospital setting due to the emergent nature of the
work which also necessitates additional time to return to the office and document the assessment.
In addition, since the SEN policy was established, SSA has found that infants are presenting with
more serious symptoms due to the increased potency of the drugs involved.
Although SSA believes that appropriate safety assessments are occurring, the timely
documentation of these activities is also important. SSA is updating its current monitoring
procedures along with related system reports to assess, on a test basis, the local department’s
compliance in these areas.
Recommendation 8(b)
SSA has communicated with the local departments to reiterate the importance of ensuring the
completeness and accuracy of data entered into CHESSIE.

--- Page 49 ---
Finding 9
SSA lacked adequate controls to ensure the LDSSs were immediately notified of children
born to individuals who had previously had their parental rights terminated for abuse or
neglect. In addition, SSA did not ensure that the LDSSs completed an assessment of these
families and offered services when appropriate.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that SSA establish adequate procedures and controls, such as a
requirement for supervisory review, to ensure that LDSSs are promptly notified of
children born to individuals who have previously had their parental rights terminated by
the court, and that a family assessment is completed timely if determined to be appropriate
by the LDSS.
Department’s Response
Finding 9:
SSA agrees with the finding and recommendation.
SSA has improved the tracking process that it uses to identify and promptly notify the respective
local department of children born to individuals who have had their parental rights terminated for
abuse and neglect.
Foster Care, Adoption, and Guardianship Payments
Finding 10
SSA did not ensure that overpayments made to certain providers of child placement
services were identified and resolved in a timely manner.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that SSA, in conjunction with the OIG, ensure that reviews of financial
reports from group homes and child placement agencies are completed in a timely manner
in order to promptly identity any overpayments and ensure their proper disposition.
Department’s Response
Finding 10:
SSA, in conjunction with OIG, respectfully disagrees with this finding but agrees with the
recommendation.
There is no criterion which specifies how long it should take to complete the review of Financial
Statements for over 80 providers with approximately 170 programs. As of August 30, 2017, the
status of these reviews (i.e. determining current year’s retained surplus, overpayments, and
proper utilization of prior period’s retained surplus) is as follows:

--- Page 50 ---
 FY14 - 100% complete
 FY15 - 95% complete
 FY16 - 95 % complete
 FY17 – Financial Statements not yet due
Auditor’s Comment: We acknowledge that there is no criterion establishing a period in
which reviews of provider financial reports should be conducted. However, delays in
performing the reviews increase the risk of non-recovery of overpayments that are
identified. At the time of our review, delays in performing the reviews were close to two
years. SSA has represented that, as of August 30, 2017, the reviews are much more
current, which suggests that, even without an established SSA policy, past reviews should
have been performed more timely.
Using a risk-based approach, the OIG decided to expand the scope of the routine review to assess
the financial viability of each provider. Early detection of a provider’s financial hardship allows
the department to take the measures necessary to prevent any undue distress to children in care
and manage any significant risk exposure to DHS. OIG also decided to expand the scope of our
review to assess the adequacy of financial statements because of instances where financial
statements were not in compliance with applicable requirements and/or not audited by an
actively licensed Certified Public Accountant (CPA). These scope expansions necessitated that
additional time be expended to complete each review.
Nonetheless, the OIG has decided to complete the provider reviews as a two phase process. The
first phase includes the determination of any overpayment and retained surplus as well as an
assessment of the proper usage of the prior year’s retained surplus, if applicable. The second
phase includes performing additional steps such as assessing financial viability, completing a
compliance analysis and risk assessment along with any other necessary procedures.
Of the providers referenced as excluded from the OIG’s listing, only one was inadvertently
omitted from the internal progress tracking list; however, this provider was properly reviewed.
The other providers identified were either Out-of-State (OOS) providers or no longer in
operation. Thus, no financial statements were received in order to perform a review for these OOS
providers. The Annotated Code of Maryland Section I, Title 7, does not apply to out of state
providers.
Lastly, all related accounts receivable were pursued in accordance with State policy. As of
August 30, 2017, overpayments outstanding for FY2013 totaled $144,000 which remain for
collection with Central Collection Unit, as required.

--- Page 51 ---
Finding 11
SSA had not established procedures to ensure that adoption assistance payments were
suspended, terminated, or, as permitted, renegotiated with the adoptive parent when an
adopted child was removed from the adoptive home.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that SSA
a. establish procedures to ensure compliance with State regulations regarding adoption
assistance payments being made for a child who has been moved from the adoptive
home to an out-of-home placement; and
b. review adoption assistance payments made on behalf of children in out-of-home
placement, including for the aforementioned children, and recover any amounts that
were inappropriately paid.
Department’s Response
Finding and Recommendations 11(a) and 11(b)
SSA agrees with the findings and recommendations:
Recommendation 11(a)
SSA is updating its current monitoring procedures along with related system reports to assess, on
a test basis, the local department’s compliance in these areas.
Recommendation 11(b)
Going forward, SSA will undertake a review process to identify instances where adoption
payments were made on behalf of children in foster care and begin to implement a recovery
process in conjunction with the DHS Budget and Finance office and Office of the Attorney
General. Where possible and practical, SSA, in conjunction with the other DHS offices, will
pursue any amounts inappropriately paid.
Finding 12
Ancillary expenditures incurred by the LDSSs to further support children in social services
programs were not adequately controlled.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that SSA ensure adequate control over ancillary expenditures made to
support children in social services programs by requiring and verifying LDSS compliance
with the aforementioned State regulations.
Department’s Response
Finding 12:
SSA respectfully disagrees with this finding and recommendation.

--- Page 52 ---
SSA does not exercise fiscal oversight over the LDSS and is not responsible for (nor is it in a
position to monitor) LDSS procurements. In addition, as noted by the auditor, this audit item
more appropriately falls under the Office of the Secretary (or local department operations).
Auditor’s Comment: We have addressed controls over ancillary expenditures as part of
the SSA audit because the expenditures relate to social services program activities and
are processed through the CHESSIE system. Also, the regulations governing these
expenditures are presented under the SSA title in COMAR.
Finding 13
SSA did not approve certain adoption assistance rates being paid by LDSSs as required by
SSA policy.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that SSA
a. ensure each LDSS obtains SSA approval, as required, prior to processing adoption
assistance rates greater than the current maximum allowed rate; and
b. take steps to periodically identify the use of rates greater than the maximum allowed
rate to verify that the rates were approved as required.
Department’s Response
Finding 13 and Recommendation 13 (a) and 13 (b):
SSA agrees with this finding and recommendations.
Recommendation 13(a)
SSA has provided guidance to all LDSS concerning the requirement to obtain SSA approval, as
required, prior to processing adoption and guardianship assistance rates greater than the
approved intermediate foster rate.
Recommendation 13(b)
SSA is developing a monthly Milestones report containing all subsidies above the intermediate
board rate, indicating those approved by SSA, and those without SSA approval. From this
report, randomly selected subsidies will be reviewed to ensure that proper documentation is
maintained.

--- Page 53 ---
Interagency Agreements
Finding 14
SSA did not ensure that payments made to a State university for three interagency
agreements were adequately supported, were reasonable in relation to the tasks performed,
and were made in accordance with the terms of the agreements.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that SSA
a. obtain and review detailed time records (timesheets), including hours worked by each
employee by task, to support the propriety of labor charges billed, and to monitor the
State university’s efforts to complete the tasks (repeat);
b. compare the State university’s payroll records (payroll register) to labor charges billed
to ensure amounts billed are accurate (repeat);
c. compare labor charges for each employee with the amounts specified in the agreement
and investigate any variances;
d. amend the interagency agreements to include provisions for personnel changes or
additions and document approval for all changes in personnel, including the costs
associated with each employee; and
e. obtain and review adequate documentation to support the propriety of amounts billed
for work performed by subcontractors, such as subcontractor billings.
Department’s Response
Finding 14:
SSA respectfully disagrees with this finding.
Specifically, SSA has always obtained the deliverables as agreed upon in the referenced
interagency agreements with these sister agencies and the deliverables were to SSA’s
satisfaction.
Auditor’s Comment: SSA believes that it has obtained all deliverables, but the
agreements were not specific enough to readily determine if the desired outcomes were
achieved. Under the terms of the agreements, payments were based on the actual time
spent by each university employee. Without the recommended documentation and
review processes, SSA cannot adequately monitor the university’s efforts to complete the
tasks, including the labor charges billed.
Recommendation 14(a) and 14(b)
To prevent this finding from being repeated in future audits, SSA has implemented these more
specific recommendations. SSA instituted an improvement in the documentation supporting
each invoice received for all university contracts including a listing of staff persons (and any
notifications about staff or salary changes) associated with the agreement, areas of the scope of

--- Page 54 ---
work under which the staff worked during the month, signed timesheets relating to the staff work
during the month, and invoices relating to non-labor costs charged during the month.
SSA has approved the salaries paid under the agreement with the review and approval of the
DHS Monthly Invoice Detail Form, UMB Funding Profile of funding changes of effort, and
timesheets that are classified as payroll sheets. The prior audit stated "the invoices did not
identify the specific employees who performed services during the billing periods, the hours
worked, and the related salary costs." The documentation process instituted in response to the
prior audit does identify specific employees, the hours worked (as based on their level of effort
in a 40 hour week), and their salary costs. SSA did in good faith comply with the audit
recommendation, and this was a considerable effort adding additional time for both UMB to
produce and SSA to review as part of the monthly invoice submission/review process.
Recommendation 14(c)
These agreements have never been paid more than the budgeted amount, and although at times
the salaries of some staff members have exceeded the individual budgeted amounts, those
increases were approved through the monthly invoice documentation process, as noted above.
Recommendation 14(d)
SSA will consider amending the interagency agreements to include provisions for personnel
changes or additions and document approval for all changes in personnel, including the costs
associated with each employee. These changes are already noted on the DHS Monthly Invoice
Detail Form, which UMB completes and the DHS Project Officers approve, and changes to
employees working under the agreement are reviewed and authorized by the DHS Project
Officer.
Recommendation 14(e)
The Department is satisfied with the proof of payment.

--- Page 55 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditor
Jessica A. Cacho, CPA, CFE
Zain Khalid
Maryia Kuzina
Syed M. Taqvi
Staff Auditors