Title: University System of Maryland - University of Baltimore
Date: 07/15/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d724560674724
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:55:40.217379
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Baltimore
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Contract Monitoring and Payments
Finding 1 – The University of Baltimore (UB) did not obtain adequate 6
documentation from its marketing and advertising vendor to
support the propriety of vendor payments, and approved an
increase in the labor rate without processing a contract
modification.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 2 – UB entered into three interagency agreements with the 7
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to provide staffing, which
allowed MDH to avoid using competitive procurement processes
or seeking additional budgeted positions.
Payroll
Finding 3 – UB did not adequately segregate duties related to 8
processing critical personnel transactions.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 4 – Controls over collections were not sufficient to ensure all 9
collections received were deposited.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 5 – Non-cash credit adjustments and students’ residency 10
status were not adequately controlled.
Student Financial Aid
Finding 6 – UB lacked evidence of supervisory reviews and system 12
access was not adequately restricted to ensure the propriety of
financial aid awarded to students.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7 – Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained 13
by UB was stored without adequate safeguards.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Baltimore (UB) is a public institution of the University System
of Maryland and operates under the jurisdiction of the System’s Board of
Regents. UB is an urban university offering a career-oriented education at the
bachelor’s, master’s, and professional levels, with degree programs in law,
business, and liberal arts with an emphasis on applied and professional degrees.
UB’s enrollment for the Fall 2016 semester totaled approximately 6,000 students.
UB’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and student fees, a
State general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants
and contracts. According to the State’s accounting records, UB’s revenues for
fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately $130.4 million, including a State general
fund appropriation of $33.4 million, and its expenditures for fiscal year 2016
totaled $130.4 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated October 1, 2014. We determined that UB
satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Monitoring and Payments
Finding 1
The University of Baltimore (UB) did not obtain adequate documentation
from its marketing and advertising vendor to support the propriety of
vendor payments, and approved an increase in the labor rate without
processing a formal contract modification.
Analysis
UB did not obtain adequate documentation from its marketing and advertising
vendor to support the propriety of the vendor payments, including labor hours and
media fund advances. In addition, UB informally approved an increase in the
labor rate without processing a contract modification. UB procured a five-year
marketing and advertising contract, effective July 2014, valued at $5.5 million.
During the first two years of the contract, UB paid the vendor approximately $2
million, which included $1.4 million in media advertisements and $609,000 in
labor charges, according to UB records.
UB did not obtain vendor employee time records to substantiate the hours billed.
Upon our request, the vendor supplied time records for five invoices we selected
for testing, totaling approximately $158,000, which adequately supported the
hours billed and paid.
Our review of the vendor invoices also noted that the vendor charged UB an
hourly rate of $135 for all labor hours, instead of the $130 hourly rate stipulated
in the contract. When we brought this to its attention, UB in consultation with the
vendor advised that, prior to execution of the contract, it had verbally agreed to
the higher rate, but that the written contract erroneously included the lower rate.
UB could not adequately explain why it verbally agreed to the higher rate.
Furthermore, UB did not prepare a formal contract modification as required by
the University System of Maryland’s Procurement Policies and Procedures prior
to paying the higher rate.
Based on UB’s records, we calculated that the difference in the hourly rate
resulted in increased payments by UB of approximately $22,600 during the first
two years of the contract. Although UB and the vendor, subsequent to our
inquiries, executed a retroactive contract modification in April 2017 to raise the
hourly rate to $135, it is incumbent upon UB to ensure that required modifications
are in place prior to invoice payment, and that vendor invoices reflect actual
contract rates.
6

--- Page 9 ---
UB did not maintain an independent accounting of transactions to assess the
reasonableness of media fund advance requests, which would consider the amount
of funds held by the vendor and the length of time such balances were held prior
to spending the funds. The contract provided that UB would approve reasonable
requests from the vendor for fund advances for media purchases, and that a
process would be established to reconcile these advances with purchases made by
the vendor. The vendor provided UB with a periodic summary of costs it had
incurred on UB’s behalf. After our inquiries, the vendor provided a summary of
funds held at the end of each month for the period from January 2016 through
March 2017. According to the vendor, the fund balance averaged $104,000
during this period and ranged from a negative balance of $53,000 to a positive
balance of $405,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UB
a. obtain employee time records from the vendor to verify the propriety of
billed hours;
b. ensure that a formal contract modification is prepared as required before
changing contract requirements;
c. ensure that rates invoiced by the vendor agree with contract rates;
d. maintain an independent accounting of fund advances to the vendor and
expenditures for media purchases, and use this to evaluate the
reasonableness of the advance requests; and
e. seek legal advice regarding whether efforts should be made to collect the
aforementioned $22,600 from the vendor.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 2
UB entered into three interagency agreements, totaling $2.9 million, with the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to provide staffing for certain
services, which allowed MDH to avoid using competitive procurement
processes for these services or seeking additional budgeted positions.
Analysis
UB entered into three interagency agreements, valued at $2.9 million, to provide
staff for certain services to MDH (formerly the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene) which allowed MDH to avoid using competitive procurement processes
for these services or seeking additional budgeted positions as necessary.
Furthermore, the services provided appeared to be inconsistent with UB’s
7

--- Page 10 ---
mission. As of December 2016, approximately $1.1 million had been paid to UB,
including $166,000 in administrative fees, based on our calculation.
Under these agreements, UB’s Schaefer Center for Public Policy provided staff to
MDH, who performed services that appeared to be inconsistent with the Center’s
mission. The mission of the Center includes conducting opinion surveys and
program evaluations. However, two of these agreements provided MDH with
database administrators and the third agreement provided MDH with coordinators
for the federal Vaccines for Children program. A total of seven staff were
provided to MDH through these agreements.
The individuals provided under these agreements essentially functioned as MDH
employees. UB performed no oversight or monitoring of these employees, and its
involvement was generally limited to providing the employees and paying their
salaries. MDH was responsible for the daily oversight of these employees,
approving their timesheets, and conducting their performance evaluations. MDH
reimbursed UB for their salaries and paid UB a 15 percent administrative fee.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UB discontinue using interagency agreements which
permit another agency to avoid using competitive procurement processes or
seeking additional budgeted positions as necessary, or to provide staffing
services inconsistent with its mission.
Payroll
Finding 3
UB did not adequately segregate duties related to processing critical
personnel transactions.
Analysis
UB did not adequately segregate duties over the processing of critical
transactions, such as adding employees and changing pay rates, on its automated
personnel records. Consequently, unauthorized transactions could be processed
without detection. Specifically, three employees had system access that allowed
them to both initiate and approve transactions in the records without further
independent review. These employees were provided this access to fulfill their
job responsibilities, either in a primary or backup capacity. Although the
automated system required two approvals for processing critical transactions, this
control was ineffective since the same employee could provide both approvals.
8

--- Page 11 ---
During fiscal year 2016, UB had 721 authorized positions, and its payroll totaled
approximately $73 million.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UB ensure that all critical transactions recorded in its
personnel records are independently reviewed and approved for propriety by
supervisory personnel.
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
Controls over collections were not sufficient to ensure all collections received
were deposited.
Analysis
UB had not established adequate procedures to ensure that all collections were
initially secured and subsequently deposited. Although most of UB’s collections
were initially received and recorded at its Bursar’s Office, certain collections,
such as those related to certain grants and rental fees, were first received and
recorded at other campus offices, then transferred to the Bursar’s Office for
deposit. We reviewed collection procedures at the Bursar’s Office and at two
other campus locations. According to the State’s records, collections deposited
by the Bursar’s Office during fiscal year 2016 totaled $13.7 million, including
$4.5 million collected at these two other campus locations.
Checks received by these other two campus locations were recorded when
received, but were not restrictively endorsed until they had been transferred to the
Bursar’s Office. Furthermore, at both locations, the procedures to verify recorded
collections to the receipts provided by the Bursar’s Office were performed by the
same employees who initially received and recorded the collections, including in
the accounting records, for their respective offices. The Comptroller of
Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires cash receipts be restrictively
endorsed and recorded immediately upon receipt. The Manual also requires
reconciliation of recorded cash receipts and amounts deposited by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions.
The verification of collections received in the Bursar’s Office to the bank deposit
was also ineffective. Specifically, the initial record of the collections (cash
register tapes and accounting system reports), or a copy of the records, was not
forwarded directly to the independent employee responsible for performing the
verification. Instead, the records were first stored in an unsecured location where
9

--- Page 12 ---
they were accessible to employees who had access to collections, and were then
provided to another employee for use as part of the bank deposit preparations
process. As a result, the records could be altered and the corresponding funds
misappropriated without timely detection. The failure to forward a copy of the
initial record of collections directly to the independent employee responsible for
verifying collections to deposit was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UB
a. restrictively endorse all checks immediately upon receipt,
b. ensure that an employee independent of the collection function verifies
that all collections received at locations other than the Bursar’s Office are
submitted to and received by the Bursar’s Office for deposit, and
c. provide a copy of the initial record of collections received in the Bursar’s
Office directly to the independent employee responsible for verifying
recorded collections to deposit (repeat).
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 5
Non-cash credit adjustments and students’ residency status were not
adequately controlled.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not established over certain non-cash credit adjustments
and initial residency status determinations recorded in student accounts. The
propriety of these transactions is critical to ensure the accuracy of student billings
and accounts receivable.
 Procedures established to review the propriety of non-cash credit adjustments
processed in batches which, according to UB’s records totaled approximately
$2.1 million during fiscal year 2016, were ineffective. The supervisory
employee responsible for reviewing these adjustments also had access
capability to process and post batch adjustments and, therefore, was not
independent. In addition, UB did not generate available output reports of all
adjustments processed in batch form to facilitate this employee’s review;
rather, the supervisory employee only reviewed adjustments that were
forwarded by the employee who processed and posted the transactions.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that only proper adjustments were
10

--- Page 13 ---
processed since, under these conditions, transactions could be unilaterally
processed without independent supervisory review.
Non-cash credits to student accounts receivable are processed in batches
primarily to record tuition waivers or remissions to multiple student accounts.
For example, these adjustments may be processed for University System of
Maryland employees who are enrolled in UB classes and, therefore, qualify
for a reduction in tuition.
 Procedures to review the propriety of initial residency status determinations
for law school students were ineffective because the reviewer was not
independent. Initial residency status determinations were made by Law
School Admissions Office personnel based primarily on the student’s
application. A supervisory employee then reviewed the determinations and
any supporting documentation using an output report of initial determinations
recorded. However, this supervisory employee was not independent because
the employee also had access capability to change a student’s residency status
in UB’s automated records. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that
each student’s residency status was proper.
Accurate determinations of student residency status are critical because of the
potential significant differences between in-state and out-of-state student
tuition rates. For example, full-time tuition for Maryland residents attending
UB’s law school program was $28,134 during fiscal year 2017, whereas the
rate for out-of-state students was $41,962.
The University of Maryland’s IT Security Standards require that institutions
segregate functions to ensure the appropriate separation of duties for system users.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UB
a. ensure that an employee without the access capability to process non-cash
credit adjustments use an independently prepared output report of
adjustments processed to identify and verify adjustments to supporting
documentation, and
b. ensure that the employee responsible for reviewing and approving initial
residency status determinations for law school students in UB’s records
does not have the capability to modify a determination.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Student Financial Aid
Finding 6
UB lacked evidence of supervisory reviews and system access was not
adequately restricted to ensure the propriety of financial aid awarded to
students.
Analysis
Controls over student financial aid were insufficient because of deficiencies
relating to supervisory reviews of monitoring procedures and employee access to
automated records. According to UB’s records, during fiscal year 2016, financial
aid awarded to students totaled $74 million.
 UB lacked evidence that supervisors were ensuring that verifications of
student financial aid applications were being performed and that any needed
corrections were made to student application data. Although UB advised us
that supervisory personnel ensured that a selected percentage of application
data were being verified by obtaining documentation from the students, there
was no documentation that these supervisory reviews were performed.
 UB advised us that no supervisory reviews were performed to ensure that
satisfactory academic progress was being verified. UB established a policy
defining satisfactory academic progress for UB students, such as maintaining
a specified grade point average and completing a specified percentage of
course credits attempted for a semester. The policy stipulates that students
must continue to meet the requirements of satisfactory academic progress in
order to be eligible to receive federal, State, and institutional financial aid.
 UB did not ensure that access capabilities assigned to employees on its
financial management system were adequately restricted to prevent improper
financial aid transactions. Our review of 10 critical financial aid functions
disclosed that 10 employees had inappropriate access to one or more function.
For example, 3 of these employees, who were responsible in either a primary
or backup capacity for reviewing student financial aid award decisions, had
the capability to change financial aid award amounts and authorize the
disbursement of financial aid. Furthermore, 4 of the 10 employees were
assigned unnecessary access to at least 3 or more functions based on their job
duties. For example, these employees were able to modify the amount of
financial aid for which students could qualify.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UB
a. ensure that verifications of student financial aid application and
eligibility data are performed and documented; and
b. restrict user access capabilities for critical functions to those employees
who require such capabilities for their job duties, including those noted
above, in a manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by UB was
stored without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
Sensitive PII maintained by UB was stored in clear text. Specifically, we noted
that a critical database associated with the student information system contained
117,793 unique social security numbers stored in clear text along with names,
addresses, and dates of birth as of November 4, 2016. In addition, we were
advised that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls.
This sensitive PII is commonly associated with identity theft. Accordingly,
appropriate information system security controls need to exist to ensure that this
information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed.
The USM IT Security Standards state that USM institutions must utilize
encryption for confidential data while the data are in transit or at rest on any
media or apply compensating controls that are equally secure.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UB properly protect sensitive PII information by
encryption or other substantial mitigating controls.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Baltimore (UB) for the period beginning July
31, 2013 and ending September 12, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, information systems security and control,
payroll, student financial aid, and corporate purchasing cards. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UB by the USM
Office. These support services (such as bond financing) are included within the
scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of UB’s compliance
with those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an
independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by
State agencies, including the components of the USM.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
UB’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
14

--- Page 17 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from UB’s financial systems for the purpose of
testing certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UB that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
15

--- Page 18 ---
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UB, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
16

--- Page 20 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF BALTIMORE
JULY 31, 2013 TO SEPTEMBER 12, 2016
Contract Monitoring and Payments
Finding 1
The University of Baltimore (UB) did not obtain adequate documentation
from its marketing and advertising vendor to support the propriety of
vendor payments, and approved an increase in the labor rate without
processing a formal contract modification.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UB
a. obtain employee time records from the vendor to verify the propriety of
billed hours;
b. ensure that a formal contract modification is prepared as required before
changing contract requirements;
c. ensure that rates invoiced by the vendor agree with contract rates;
d. maintain an independent accounting of fund advances to the vendor and
expenditures for media purchases, and use this to evaluate the
reasonableness of the advance requests; and
e. seek legal advice regarding whether efforts should be made to collect the
aforementioned $22,600 from the vendor.
University response
The University of Baltimore agrees with these five recommendations. A
corrective action plan will be finalized by March 2018, which will ensure an
independent accounting and tracking of media purchases and fund advances to the
vendor. We will consult the Office of the Attorney General regarding the $22,600
recoupment.
Interagency Agreements
Finding 2
UB entered into three interagency agreements, totaling $2.9 million, with the
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to provide staffing for certain
services, which allowed MDH to avoid using competitive procurement
processes for these services or seeking additional budgeted positions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UB discontinue using interagency agreements which
permit another agency to avoid using competitive procurement processes or

--- Page 21 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF BALTIMORE
JULY 31, 2013 TO SEPTEMBER 12, 2016
seeking additional budgeted positions as necessary, or to provide staffing
services inconsistent with its mission.
University response
The University of Baltimore accepts this recommendation. It was not the intent of
the Schaefer Center for Public Policy (or UB) to improperly provide staff for
DHMH. The goal was to provide temporary staffing resources to assist our
agency partner in successfully implementing and satisfying externally funded
initiatives and projects. Going forward, the Schaefer Center has established
procedures to avoid entering into interagency agreements to provide staffing
services unrelated to the Center’s mission. Two of the referenced agreements have
already expired and were not renewed. The third agreement expires on March 31,
2018 and will not be renewed.
Payroll
Finding 3
UB did not adequately segregate duties related to processing critical
personnel transactions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UB ensure that all critical transactions recorded in its
personnel records are independently reviewed and approved for propriety by
supervisory personnel.
University response
The University of Baltimore agrees with this recommendation. To enhance the
segregation of critical duties, a new security role for supervisory approval was
developed and implemented in October 2017.
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
Controls over collections were not sufficient to ensure all collections received
were deposited.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UB
a. restrictively endorse all checks immediately upon receipt,

--- Page 22 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF BALTIMORE
JULY 31, 2013 TO SEPTEMBER 12, 2016
b. ensure that an employee independent of the collection function verifies
that all collections received at locations other than the Bursar’s Office are
submitted to and received by the Bursar’s Office for deposit, and
c. provide a copy of the initial record of collections received in the Bursar’s
Office directly to the independent employee responsible for verifying
recorded collections to deposit (repeat).
University response
The University of Baltimore agrees with these three recommendations and
implemented each of them, effective July 1, 2017.
Student Accounts Receivable
Finding 5
Non-cash credit adjustments and students’ residency status were not
adequately controlled.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UB
a. ensure that an employee without the access capability to process non-
cash credit adjustments use an independently prepared output report of
adjustments processed to identify and verify adjustments to supporting
documentation, and
b. ensure that the employee responsible for reviewing and approving initial
residency status determinations for law school students in UB’s records
does not have the capability to modify a determination.
University response
The University of Baltimore agrees with these two recommendations. We have
implemented an independent review and approval of all noncash credit
adjustments, including a verification of supporting documentation. Additionally,
we have removed the ability to modify residency determination from the
aforementioned School of Law’s Admissions Office personnel.

--- Page 23 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF BALTIMORE
JULY 31, 2013 TO SEPTEMBER 12, 2016
Student Financial Aid
Finding 6
UB lacked evidence of supervisory reviews and system access was not
adequately restricted to ensure the propriety of financial aid awarded to
students.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UB
a. ensure that verifications of student financial aid application and
eligibility data are performed and documented; and
b. restrict user access capabilities for critical functions to those employees
who require such capabilities for their job duties, including those noted
above, in a manner that ensures a proper segregation of duties.
University response
The University of Baltimore agrees with this recommendation and:
a. Began documenting supervisory review over financial aid award effective the
2017-2018 award year.
b. Has begun the detailed analysis needed to restrict user access capabilities for
critical functions to those employees who require it for their job duties, and
ensures proper segregation of access between functional users and supervisors
performing review of these functions. We anticipate the access being adjusted
no later than March 1, 2018.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 7
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by UB was
stored without adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UB properly protect sensitive PII information by
encryption or other substantial mitigating controls.
University response
The University of Baltimore agrees with this recommendation and on March 24,
2017, implemented data encryption for the student information system to protect
confidential data at rest.

--- Page 24 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Christopher J. Fowler
Walter L. Horan, IV
Winnie J. Tenekam
Staff Auditors