Title: Maryland School for the Deaf
Date: 04/03/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743ac
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:23:27.786380
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland School for the Deaf
December 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland School for the Deaf (MSD) provides a comprehensive educational
program for school-age deaf students. MSD only charges tuition to non-State
residents. MSD also provides a family education/early intervention program,
through cooperative agreements with local health departments, that involves
working with young deaf children and their families in the development of early
language skills. MSD, with campuses located in Frederick and Columbia, is
governed by a 19-member Board of Trustees appointed by the Governor.
According to State records, as of June 2014, 507 students were enrolled in MSD,
and expenditures totaled approximately $33 million during fiscal year 2014.
Findings and Recommendations
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 1
Corporate purchasing card transactions were not always reviewed and
approved by appropriate supervisory personnel and documentation was
lacking for a certain aspect of the new card issuance process.
Analysis
MSD lacked adequate controls over its corporate purchasing cards (CPC). During
fiscal year 2014, expenditures charged to 10 corporate purchasing cards totaled
$270,716. Specifically, we found that monthly CPC activity logs and the related
purchasing cardholder statements from the bank were not approved as required.
Our review of 11 activity logs prepared during the period from April 2013
through January 2015 with charges totaling approximately $76,000, disclosed that
in each case the completion of the required review and approval of the logs and/or
statements by the appropriate supervisory official was not properly documented.
For example, although in many cases there was some indication of a review, 10 of
the 11 activity logs were not signed by the supervisor designated on the CPC
Program Authorized Reviewer Agreement on file as accepting responsibility for
the cardholder’s purchase activity. By accepting responsibility, the designated
supervisor can face disciplinary actions for the failure to follow established
procedures, including reimbursement of unauthorized purchases made by the
cardholder. MSD management advised that it had not updated the reviewer
agreements to reflect current supervisory relationships to cardholders.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Consequently, proper accountability had not been established over the review and
verification of CPC purchases. Our review of CPC procedures and controls also
found that MSD did not document the identity of the employee responsible for
receiving new cards from the issuing bank, to ensure an adequate segregation of
duties.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program Policy and
Procedures Manual requires that cardholder activity logs and monthly statements
be reviewed and approved by the cardholder’s authorized reviewer to ensure that
CPC charges are appropriate and for the benefit of the State. The Manual also
requires that the individual who is to receive the CPC must be independent of the
requester.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSD comply with the requirements of the Corporate
Purchasing Card Program Policy and Procedures Manual by ensuring
a. the appropriate supervisory review and approval of purchasing card
activity logs and the related monthly cardholder statements be
documented;
b. that CPC Program Authorized Reviewer Agreements be kept current;
and
c. that the employee who receives the new cards from the bank be
independent of the requestor, and that this receipt process be
documented.
We advised MSD on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Equipment
Finding 2
MSD did not accurately maintain detail records and properly account for all
of its equipment.
Analysis
MSD did not adequately control its equipment and properly maintain the related
records in accordance with the Department of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory
Control Manual. According to MSD records, its equipment inventory as of June
30, 2014 totaled approximately $6.7 million.
4

--- Page 7 ---
 Physical inventories of sensitive equipment were not completed annually as
required. As of April 2015, a physical inventory of sensitive equipment had
not been completed since 2012 and MSD detailed records valued sensitive
equipment at approximately $2.3 million.
 There was an inadequate separation of duties, as the same employee
maintained both the equipment control account and related detailed equipment
records, and was responsible for performing physical inventories of
equipment.
 Although MSD management advised us that periodic reconciliations of the
control account to the detailed records were conducted throughout the audit
period, the completion of the reconciliations was not documented.
 Equipment acquisitions were not always recorded in the detail records, as
required. Our initial test of 5 equipment acquisitions disclosed one item that
had not been recorded in the detail records. Upon inquiry, we were advised
that this item related to a cafeteria building completed in 2011. We selected
an additional 22 equipment acquisitions related to the cafeteria and found that
none had been recorded in the detail records, although the equipment had been
purchased approximately 4 years earlier. The 23 items were valued at
approximately $21,000.
DGS’ Inventory Control Manual requires that a physical inventory of sensitive
equipment be taken annually. The Manual also requires that the equipment
control account be maintained by someone who does not maintain the detail
records and that the aggregate balance of the detail records be periodically
reconciled to the control account balance, at least quarterly. Finally, the Manual
requires that equipment detail records be properly maintained on a current basis,
and that all capital equipment is included in the detail records.
Recommendation 2
We recommend MSD comply with the applicable requirements of DGS’
Inventory Control Manual. We advised MSD on accomplishing the necessary
separation of duties using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland School for the Deaf
(MSD) for the period beginning August 9, 2011 and ending March 30, 2015. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
5

--- Page 8 ---
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MSD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, cash receipts,
payroll, corporate purchasing cards, and equipment.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MSD’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MSD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MSD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MSD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MSD’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MSD regarding the results of our
review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Maryland School for the Deaf
Response to Legislative Audit Report
August 9, 2011 and ending March 30, 2015
Finding 1
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Corporate purchasing card transactions were not always reviewed and approved by appropriate
supervisory personnel and documentation was lacking for a certain aspect of the new card issuance
process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MSD comply with the requirements of the Corporate Purchasing Card Program
Policy and Procedures Manual by ensuring
a. the appropriate supervisory review and approval of purchasing card activity logs and the related
monthly cardholder statements be documented;
b. that CPC Program Authorized Reviewer Agreements be kept current; and
c. that the employee who receives the new cards from the bank be independent of the requestor,
and that this receipt process be documented.
MSD Response:
MSD concurs. All findings have been addressed and implemented.
a. MSD is verifying that all monthly statements and activity logs are signed on each page as
required.
b. MSD has updated the Supervisory Review forms to document the changes in supervisors for
card holders. The PCPA will insure that documentation stays current.
c. MSD is now documenting that the employee who has been receiving the new cards from the
bank is independent of the requester.
Finding 2
Equipment
MSD did not accurately maintain detail records and properly account for all of its equipment.
Recommendation 2
We recommend MSD comply with the applicable requirements of DGS’ Inventory Control Manual. We
advised MSD on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
MSD Response:
MSD concurs. MSD will make sure physical inventories are completed and reconciled per DGS’ Inventory
Control Manual. A full physical inventory will be completed during the School’s summer break. The

--- Page 12 ---
reconciliation to the control account will be completed quarterly. Though the separation of duties
blurred with the change in staff, separation of duties will be enforced moving forward.

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Senior Auditor
Amanda M. Jones
Staff Auditor