Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland University College
Date: 06/08/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d724560674734
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:56:52.789130
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland University College
June 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
New Business Model 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1 – Security and Access Controls Over Certain UMUC 6
Systems Were Not Sufficient
Finding 2 – UMUC Workstations and Servers Were Not Sufficiently 7
Protected Against Malware
Outsourced IT Functions
Finding 3 – Service Level Agreements and Related Independent Reports 9
Did Not Address Certain Security and Operational Risks
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland University College (UMUC) is a public institution of
the University System of Maryland (USM) and operates under the jurisdiction of
USM’s Board of Regents. UMUC offers degree and non-credit educational
programs to students who prefer not to enroll in more traditional programs.
UMUC strives to broaden educational opportunities through online education; the
majority of UMUC’s courses are taught online.
UMUC consists of three major divisions: the Statewide Division, the Asian
Division, and the European Division. These three divisions offer educational
programs at a number of locations primarily throughout the State of Maryland, as
well as in numerous foreign countries. The Statewide Division also administers
educational and training programs for adults, and maintains a residential
conference center that includes conference rooms, guest accommodations, dining
facilities, and an auditorium. UMUC’s main administrative office and residential
conference center are located in Adelphi, Maryland. The Asian Division is
headquartered in Tokyo, Japan and the European Division is headquartered in
Kaiserslautern, Germany.
For fiscal year 2014, UMUC’s enrollment totaled 84,801 students. UMUC’s
budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition and student fees, a State
general fund appropriation, and restricted revenues, such as federal grants.
According to the State’s accounting records, fiscal year 2014 revenues totaled
approximately $372.1 million, which included a State general fund appropriation
of approximately $33.7 million.
New Business Model
In February 2015, the USM Board of Regents approved the framework for a new
business model for UMUC aimed at addressing its long-term challenges in
maintaining its position in a changing global educational marketplace. Under this
new model, UMUC would remain within USM but, subject to approval by the
Board of Regents, would be granted certain autonomies and exemptions from
USM and State laws, rules, and procedures, particularly with regard to personnel,
procurement, and the strengthening of protections of proprietary and competitive
innovation. The Board supported the appointment of a managing board by
UMUC’s President and directed the President to develop proposed legislative
4

--- Page 7 ---
changes in the Annotated Code of Maryland – State Education Article for review
by the Board of Regents and subsequent submission to the Governor and the
General Assembly for their consideration. A more developed business model
framework is expected to be presented for Board consideration at a future
meeting.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated February 14, 2013. We determined
that UMUC satisfactorily addressed these findings.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
The University of Maryland University College (UMUC) maintains an internal
network and an international wide area network which includes locations in the
United States, Europe, and Asia. These locations serve the broader UMUC
student body and provide UMUC students with information technology (IT)
resources and classroom space.
Over the past few years, UMUC has outsourced many of its critical IT functions,
including its financial, student information services and human resources systems,
to third-party service providers. These systems are maintained and operated by a
combination of service providers and UMUC personnel. In concert with this
outsourcing, UMUC has used service providers to host numerous servers used by
UMUC to accomplish its core mission requirements. UMUC also maintains
numerous workstations and servers in its wide area network. Specifically, as of
September 2014 UMUC maintained 235 servers at its main administrative offices
in Adelphi and a backup datacenter located in Largo.
Information systems are integral to the UMUC online education function and
provide an interactive classroom experience to its students and faculty. Online
education services range from supplementing traditional classroom sessions to
complete course delivery. In this regard, the online services allow instructors to
deliver materials and allow students to submit related class work and interact with
classmates and instructors. Online educational courses serve students around the
world and account for a significant portion of UMUC’s revenues.
Finding 1
Security and access controls over the student information system and a
related database were not sufficient.
Analysis
Security and access controls over the student information system and a related
database were not sufficient.
 Unencrypted sensitive personal identifiable information (PII) of students,
faculty, and staff was stored in the database. We determined that this
sensitive PII (social security numbers with related names and birthdates)
6

--- Page 9 ---
contained 655,227 unique social security numbers and was stored in 22
different database tables. This sensitive PII, which is commonly sought by
criminals for use in identity theft, should be properly protected. The
University System of Maryland (USM) IT Security Standards require that
institutions protect confidential information from disclosure by the deletion of
unneeded confidential information, the encryption of confidential information,
or other equally secure safeguards.
 A vendor account was assigned the powerful administrator role over the
student information system application, although the account did not require
administrator capabilities. Accordingly, this vendor (and potentially many of
its employees) had full control over the student information system
application and its data. USM IT Security Standards state that institutions
must implement authentication and authorization processes that uniquely
identify all users and appropriately control access to systems.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMUC
a. encrypt sensitive PII, including social security numbers, stored in the
database; and
b. restrict assignment of the student information system application’s
administrator role to only those individuals who require its use.
Finding 2
UMUC workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
Analysis
UMUC workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
 Anti-malware software was not installed on numerous UMUC servers.
Specifically, we were advised that 220 servers, running specific operating
systems, did not have malware protection software installed. In addition, we
tested 10 workstations/servers that had anti-malware software installed and
noted in 5 cases the software had not been updated with the latest releases.
 Although UMUC had documented procedures requiring written authorization
for users to have administrator rights on their local workstations, we noted
that certain workstations were improperly configured with users having
administrator rights, without such written authorizations. Administrator rights
are the highest permission level that can be granted to users and allow users to
7

--- Page 10 ---
install software and change configuration settings. Our test of six
workstations disclosed that four employees’ user accounts were defined with
unauthorized administrator rights, rather than with user rights, and did not
need these administrative rights since they were not system/network
administrators. As a result, if these workstations were infected with malware,
the malware would run with administrative rights and expose these
workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user
accounts operated with only user rights.
 Workstations tested had not all been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security software-related
vulnerabilities which could be exploited by malware. Although the vendors
for these software products frequently provide software patches to address
these vulnerabilities, UMUC had not updated its workstations for these
patches. For example, we tested eight workstations for one of these software
products and noted that four workstations were running older versions of this
software.
The USM IT Security Standards state that, where feasible, software must be
installed to protect the system from malicious programs such as viruses, trojans,
and worms.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMUC
a. ensure that all servers and network workstations are configured with
anti-malware software that is operating properly and up-to-date;
b. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to
system/network administrators and individuals authorized, in writing, to
have such rights; and
c. keep its workstations up-to-date for all critical security related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Outsourced IT Functions
Background
As previously mentioned, UMUC has outsourced many of its critical IT functions.
In this regard, UMUC entered into service level agreements (which defined the
terms and requirements for the contractual services) with service providers for the
maintenance and operation of its financial, student information, and human
resources systems as well as its mission critical Learning Experience Online
(LEO) system which is used to manage and deliver an online learning
environment for UMUC students. To provide assurance that the terms of these
agreements were complied with, the service providers procured and obtained
independent reviews and reports which included descriptions of the service
providers’ controls and security procedures and the results of tests designed to
ensure that these controls and security procedures were effective for designated
periods. We reviewed the service level agreements executed with two service
providers and independent reports issued for three service providers responsible
for the maintenance and operation of LEO and the financial, student information,
and human resource systems.
Finding 3
The service level agreements and the related independent reports did not
address certain security and operational risks.
Analysis
The service level agreements and the related independent reports did not address
certain security and operational risks. Without contractual provisions to address
critical security and operational risks, along with comprehensive reviews and
reports to ensure the provisions were complied with, UMUC lacked assurance that
adequate controls existed to ensure the integrity and availability of its critical
systems such as its online learning environment. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 For the two service level agreements we reviewed, we noted certain security
and operational risks that were not addressed. For example, neither agreement
contained a provision to ensure that production data were not replicated in
non-production environments. Additionally, one of the two agreements did
not contain a provision that required the contractors to perform daily
documented reviews of audit logs, which is a best practice identified by the
State Department of Information Technology’s Information Security Policy.
9

--- Page 12 ---
 For the independent reviews and related reports, we noted that certain critical
security controls were not addressed. For example, two of the three
independent reports we reviewed did not indicate whether intrusion detection,
malware prevention, data loss prevention, and antivirus protection controls
had been implemented by the service providers. Furthermore, one of these
reports also did not indicate if audit logs were reviewed on a regular basis.
We provided UMUC with complete lists of provisions which should be included
in the agreements and significant security controls that were not addressed by the
independent reviews and reports.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMUC
a. attempt to amend the aforementioned existing service level agreements to
fully address security and operational risks, including the provisions that
we presented to UMUC, and ensure that future service level agreements
contain all appropriate provisions; and
b. determine if the independent reviews and related reports address all
critical security controls by performing documented reviews of the
reports, including ensuring corrective actions are taken regarding issues
raised in the reports.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of Maryland
(USM) – University of Maryland University College (UMUC) for the period beginning
March 21, 2011 and ending June 30, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We
believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMUC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related areas
of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas addressed by the
audit included purchases and disbursements, student accounts receivable, cash receipts,
information systems security and control, payroll, student financial aid, and corporate
purchasing cards. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
With respect to UMUC’s Asian and European Divisions, our audit did not include
an evaluation of financial transactions, records, and internal controls and an
assessment of compliance with State laws, rules, and regulations. These
divisions, which according to UMUC’s records, accounted for approximately 5.7
percent and 8.8 percent of UMUC’s fiscal year 2014 revenues, respectively, are
reviewed on a triennial basis by the USM internal auditors on whose work we
relied to reduce the scope of our audit work. In addition, our audit did not include
certain support services provided to UMUC by the USM Office (such as
endowment accounting) and by the University of Maryland, College Park (such as
certain payroll processing functions) which are included within the scope of those
audits. Furthermore, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls
over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of UMUC’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
the components of USM.
11

--- Page 14 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
UMUC’s operations and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from UMUC’s financial system for the purpose of testing certain
information, such as student accounts receivable and financial aid. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UMUC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMUC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
12

--- Page 15 ---
findings were communicated to UMUC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMUC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND UNIVERSITY COLLEGE
MARCH 21, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2014
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 1
Security and access controls over the student information system and a
related database were not sufficient.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMUC
a. encrypt sensitive PII, including social security numbers, stored in the
database; and
b. restrict assignment of the student information system application’s
administrator role to only those individuals who require its use.
University response
UMUC appreciates OLA’s focus on PII and thorough review of the student
information system portal database. Security of student information is paramount
at UMUC. Accordingly, UMUC adheres to the USM IT Security Standards for
protecting data and currently complies with Version 3.0, Section III.3, which
states: “Protection measures can include the deletion of unneeded confidential
information, the encryption of confidential information, or other equally secure
safeguards.” While during the audit period, UMUC did not encrypt this database,
UMUC did ensure “other secure safeguards” via 1.) routine risk-based
assessments, 2.) secure network configurations, 3.) vulnerability scanning, 4.)
logging & monitoring, 5.) regular patching & maintenance, and 6.) strong logical
and physical access controls, that ensure compliance with USM standards and
industry best practices.
OLA accurately identified a second vendor account with administrative privileges
for UMUC’s student information system during audit fieldwork. The following
rationale was shared with OLA during the audit.
In January 2013, UMUC experienced degraded performance with its student
information system. Expert analysis and troubleshooting determined that
isolation of this issue required a temporary account with system administrator
privileges. The single unique account, cited by OLA as evidence for this finding,
was:
 created and used with explicit approval from UMUC,
 granted the necessary level of access privileges to perform the work required,
 used by UMUCs’ third-party security staff for two (2) days in January 2013,
and
 used to successfully rectify the issue.

--- Page 18 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND UNIVERSITY COLLEGE
MARCH 21, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2014
UMUC appreciates OLA’s focus on PII and values Recommendation 1. As a
result, UMUC:
a. is implementing Recommendation 1a with a target completion date of
8/31/15,
b. will continue to adhere to the account management policy defined by USM
standards.
Finding 2
UMUC workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMUC
a. ensure that all servers and network workstations are configured with
anti-malware software that is operating properly and up-to-date;
b. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to
system/network administrators and individuals authorized, in writing, to
have such rights; and
c. keep its workstations up-to-date for all critical security related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software.
University response
The servers in one of UMUC’s environments are running a specific operating
system and are configured and operating effectively with current, vendor
supported anti-malware software. A different UMUC server environment,
running another operating system, does not have anti-malware software installed
due to a diligent risk analysis. Instead, UMUC uses an industry standard defense-
in-depth strategy with controls that mitigate the risk of virus infections and
software vulnerabilities, including:
o host-based Intrusion Prevention System (HIPS),
o weekly vulnerability scanning, and integrity monitoring.
UMUC appreciates and wholeheartedly agrees with OLA’s analysis and
recommendation regarding Local Administrator Rights. As evidence, UMUC
implemented a global procedure to restrict these rights on 8/20/14. The
procedure, Requesting Local Admin Rights, allows local administrator rights by
exception only, with documented approval by responsible parties.

--- Page 19 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND UNIVERSITY COLLEGE
MARCH 21, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2014
OLA accurately observed multiple versions of a software product in UMUC's
environment during audit fieldwork because UMUC was in the process of
replacing that product at the time. UMUC stopped purchasing client-based
licenses of this product in FY ’14 because the vendor no longer provided updates
for this software. As a result, UMUC replaced the unsupported client-based
product with the vendor’s cloud solution and was in the process of migration
during the audit fieldwork.
a. UMUC will continue to deploy and maintain servers configured with current,
functioning, anti-malware software in one server environment. UMUC will
continue to monitor industry standard practices and assess the value of anti-
malware strategies for servers running in the other server environment.
UMUC will continue to employ its multi-tier security strategy for this
environment.1
b. UMUC will continue to follow its Requesting Local Admin Rights procedure
and restrict workstations provisioned prior to this procedure through IT
Service Desk requests and the perpetual computer refresh cycle.
c. UMUC will continue to maintain vendor-supported software and current virus
definition files for all workstations, including, but not limited to, centralized
security and antivirus solutions.
Outsourced IT Functions
Finding 3
The service level agreements and the related independent reports did not
address certain security and operational risks.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMUC
a. attempt to amend the aforementioned existing service level agreements to
fully address security and operational risks, including the provisions that
we presented to UMUC, and ensure that future service level agreements
contain all appropriate provisions; and
1
Auditor's Comment: While we recognize that UMUC has implemented certain protections over
the aforementioned 220 servers, we believe that these protections do not obviate the need for anti-
malware software on these servers. Furthermore, although UMUC is not subject to its oversight,
the State of Maryland Department of Information Technology (DoIT), which sets cyber security
policy for most State agencies, requires that anti-malware software be installed on all computers.
We confirmed with DoIT that this requirement applies to all types of operating systems.

--- Page 20 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND UNIVERSITY COLLEGE
MARCH 21, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2014
b. determine if the independent reviews and related reports address all
critical security controls by performing documented reviews of the
reports, including ensuring corrective actions are taken regarding issues
raised in the reports.
University response
UMUC values OLA’s Analysis of contracted service level agreements and will
consider incorporating them in future negotiations. The service level agreements
reviewed by OLA are part of task order contracts agreed to in 2012 and
subordinate to MEEC and USM negotiated and sponsored master agreements.
These contracts:
 Predate the USM IT Security Standards v. 3.0 from June 2014, which
introduce Section XI. Cloud Computing Technologies. This section outlines
risk assessment activities during the preliminary, initiating/coincident, and
concluding phases of the lifecycle of the service. Nonetheless, UMUC
complied with these standards when the contracts were authored in 2012,
during the audit period, and continues to comply today.
 Contain the following language:
o “Contractor shall (i) establish and maintain industry standard technical
and organizational measures to help to protect against accidental
damage to, or destruction, loss, or alteration of the material (ii)
establish and maintain industry standard technical and organizational
measures to help to protect against unauthorized access to the Services
and materials; and (iii) establish and maintain network and internet
security procedures, protocols, security gateways and firewalls with
respect to the Services.”
o “Contractor will take industry standard measures to protect the
security and confidentiality of such information including controlled
and audited access to any location where such confidential and
proprietary data and materials reside while in the custody of
Contractor and employing security measures to prevent system attacks
(e.g., hacker and virus attacks).”
UMUC’s posture and OLA’s Analysis are aligned. As such, UMUC’s Vendor
Risk Management program complies with the current USM Cloud Computing
Technology Standard, which outlines activities that consider the security and
privacy controls of a cloud provider's environment and assesses the level of risk
involved with respect to the control objectives of the organization. UMUC’s
Vendor Risk Management Program includes, but is not limited to the following
activities:

--- Page 21 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND UNIVERSITY COLLEGE
MARCH 21, 2011 TO JUNE 30, 2014
 Thorough review of Statement of Works with UMUC’s Procurement and
Strategic Contracting Departments and drafting security requirements specific
for each vendor solicitation;
 Requiring prospective technology vendors to submit their third-party
assessments (SSAE16, SOC 1, 2 Type 1, 2, PCI compliance, and/or other
reports) initially and on an annual basis;
 Live vendor presentations/demonstrations where additional
security/compliance questions are asked as needed;
 Review of submitted proposals to determine if security requirements are met;
 Administering UMUC’s Third Party Security Assessment questionnaire which
was developed based on the controls outlined in ISO27002 and NIST 800-53,
Rev. 4. The questionnaires may be customized based on the type of
product/service offering and UMUC’s needs regarding Confidentiality,
Integrity, and Availability;
 Reviewing responses to UMUC’s questionnaire, as well as the vendor’s third-
party assessments, asking additional follow-up questions as needed
UMUC appreciates OLA’s review of this area and their thoughtful
recommendations. UMUC reviews all contracts on a periodic basis for several
factors, including security, and when appropriate, UMUC negotiates contract
amendments. UMUC also continuously reviews its vendor risk management
program and will consider OLA’s recommendations for subsequent iterations.
a. UMUC assessed and accepted the existing service level agreements during
negotiations and therefore does not intend “to amend the aforementioned
existing service level agreements to fully address security and operational
risks presented” by OLA at this time. UMUC may amend service level
agreements in the future at its discretion.
b. UMUC has reviewed and deemed acceptable the independent reviews and
related reports referenced by OLA. Therefore, UMUC does not intend to
perform additional documented reviews of these reports at this time. UMUC
will continue to receive and review these reports on an annual basis, follow up
on any issues with its vendors, and may perform additional reviews in the
future at its discretion.

--- Page 22 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
John C. Venturella, CISA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charnelle S. Brown
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Philip C. Funkhouser
Staff Auditors
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditor