Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Rosewood Center

NOTE: OLA no longer conducts audits of Rosewood Center because the Center was closed.
Date: 12/22/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744ef
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:21:37.203022
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Rosewood Center
December 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
December 22, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Rosewood Center, a unit of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene, for the period beginning May 12, 2008 and ending June 30,
2009, the date that Rosewood Center was closed. Rosewood provided treatment
services to developmentally disabled individuals.
Our audit disclosed deficiencies that precluded effective financial control over the
Center’s closeout process with respect to equipment, bank accounts, and certain
donated funds. For example, we noted that the Center did not perform an
inventory of equipment, prior to the liquidation process, to help account for the
proper disposition of the equipment during the liquidation. Our audit also
disclosed that the Center lacked documentation to support the propriety of certain
corporate purchasing card transactions.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response to this audit, on behalf
of the Center, is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge
the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by the Center.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Equipment
Finding 1 – Certain Recordkeeping and Inventory Deficiencies Hindered 5
Adequate Control Over the Liquidation Process
Donated Funds
Finding 2 – The Center Lacked Sufficient Documentation to Support the 6
Disposition of Donated Funds
Disbursements
Finding 3 – The Center Lacked Documentation to Support the Disposition 6
of Certain Bank Accounts and the Propriety of Certain Transactions
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 8
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Rosewood Center is located in Baltimore County and is part of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene’s Developmental Disabilities Administration. Until
its closure in June 2009, the Center provided treatment services to
developmentally disabled individuals. According to the State’s records, the
Center’s expenditures totaled approximately $29.8 million during fiscal year
2009.
During fiscal year 2008, a decision was made to consolidate the Administration’s
facilities, due to a reduction in the number of clients requiring services, and to
eliminate the costs to maintain these facilities. The Administration initiated
procedures to close the Center and, as of June 30, 2009, all clients had been
transferred from the Center to alternative living facilities (such as to other State
facilities) commensurate with their needs.
As of September 17, 2009, we were advised that the State was pursuing several
potential options for the Center’s land and facilities, but no decision had been
finalized.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Equipment
Finding 1
Certain recordkeeping and inventory deficiencies hindered adequate control
over the equipment liquidation process.
Analysis
Certain recordkeeping and inventory deficiencies hindered adequate control over
equipment during the liquidation. According to its detail records, approximately
2,994 items, with an inventory book value totaling $1.9 million, remained at the
Center as of June 30, 2009. For example, our review disclosed the following
conditions:
• Physical inventories of equipment were not conducted and, therefore, were not
used in the liquidation process. Specifically, the last inventory of equipment
was conducted in fiscal year 2007, a year before the liquidation process was
initiated. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all Center equipment
on hand prior to the liquidation was properly accounted for.
• Certain equipment could not be located. Specifically, our test of 10 items,
totaling $37,533, that were recorded on the detailed records as of June 30,
2009, disclosed that 4 items, totaling $18,301, could not be located. The
Center’s management advised us that this equipment may have been
transferred to other Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) units,
but it could not provide us with documentation to substantiate the transfers.
We were advised by Center management that all remaining equipment will be
disposed of over the next several months.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure, for the Center and for future agency closings, that there is
adequate accountability for all equipment to facilitate the liquidation
process;
b. ensure its facilities perform physical inventories, as required; and
c. investigate the aforementioned missing items and take appropriate
corrective action.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Donated Funds
Finding 2
The Center lacked sufficient documentation to support the disposition of
donated funds.
Analysis
The Center lacked sufficient documentation to support that donated funds were
used as intended. As of June 30, 2008, the value of the donated funds totaled
$580,102, the vast majority of which was a gift from one donor to be used to
benefit clients. By June 30, 2009, virtually all of these funds were spent.
For example, according to the State’s accounting records, approximately
$143,000 was spent on client medical equipment, which Center management
advised us was for wheelchairs. Center management also advised us that the
wheelchairs were to be used by the clients in their new places of residence but it
could not provide documentation to substantiate that the clients actually received
the wheelchairs. In addition, the Center disbursed $6,000 directly to a private
facility to purchase items, such as bedroom furniture, for clients. However, the
Center did not obtain documentation (such as copies of invoices) to ensure the
equipment was actually purchased by these facilities and was being used for the
clients.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHMH determine the disposition of all items purchased
with donated funds.
Disbursements
Finding 3
The Center could not document the disposition of certain bank accounts and
the propriety of certain corporate purchasing card transactions.
Analysis
The Center lacked documentation to support the disposition of certain bank
accounts and the propriety of certain corporate purchasing card transactions.
Specifically, our review disclosed the following conditions:
• The Center had not performed a formal accounting of all of its funds.
Specifically, the Center could not provide us with all bank statements in the
audit period for its three working fund accounts and for the client funds.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Furthermore, the Center did not perform monthly bank reconciliations and/or
fund compositions during the audit period to ensure that all funds were
properly accounted for. For example, the three working fund bank accounts
were not reconciled during our audit period. As a result, the Center lacked
assurance regarding the proper disposition of these funds. According to its
records, as of July 30, 2009, the Center still retained the client working fund
advance of $13,000, and client funds of approximately $56,000. We were
advised by Center management that, after these accounts have been
reconciled, the advance will be remitted to the Comptroller and the client
funds will be distributed to the respective clients.
• The Center lacked documentation to support the propriety of certain corporate
purchasing card transactions for the purchase of gift cards. Our audit
disclosed that, on two separate occasions, the Center spent a total of $6,350
for 254 gift cards. These purchases were artificially split into a larger number
of transactions (generally $500 each), circumventing the cardholder limit of
$2,500. In addition, although DHMH advised that it authorized the purchase
of gift cards as employee incentives, the Center was unable to provide us with
a complete listing of employees who received the gift cards, and
documentation that the cards were distributed as intended. As a result, there is
a lack of assurance that the gift cards were used for their intended purposes.
Effective November 2008, the Comptroller of Maryland prohibits the
purchase of gift cards with corporate purchasing cards.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure the proper disposition of the aforementioned bank accounts to
ensure that all funds were used properly and remaining funds were
properly accounted for, and
b. determine the propriety of the aforementioned gift card purchases.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Rosewood Center of the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene for the period beginning May 12, 2008 and ending June 30, 2009. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Center’s
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. The areas addressed by the
audit included the liquidation of Center assets, purchases and disbursements,
payroll, and bank accounts.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Center’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Center’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
8

--- Page 11 ---
This report includes findings that we consider significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Center’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit did not
disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to the Center that
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of the
Center, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Equipment
Finding 1
Certain recordkeeping and inventory deficiencies hindered adequate control
over the equipment liquidation process.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure, for the Center and for future agency closings, that there is
adequate accountability for all equipment to facilitate the liquidation
process;
b. ensure its facilities perform physical inventories, as required; and
c. investigate the aforementioned missing items and take appropriate
corrective action.
Administration Response:
The Administration concurs as follows:
Regarding recommendation (a), the DHMH Central Services Division will
conduct a baseline inventory prior to any future closings of a DHMH facility in
order to ensure accountability and facilitate the liquidation process.
It should be noted that the Center performed inventory as each building closed
and all required forms were completed at that time. Most of the surplus inventory
was transferred to the other DHMH facilities with the remaining being written-
off. A physical inventory is required every three years; the last one for Rosewood
was completed in FY2007 and the next one was due in FY2010. The detailed
records were reconciled to the control account as of 03/31/09 and the DHMH
Central Services Division is reviewing the control account and existing records to
reconcile any difference. This should be completed by 05/31/10.
With reference to recommendation (b), the DHMH Central Services Division will
require DHMH facilities to submit a Reconciliation of Inventory Records on an
annual basis as required in Department of General Services Inventory Control
Manual, Section II, Number .05 Controls for Materials and Supplies, Letter C.
Reconciliation of Inventory Records..
Regarding recommendation (c), the DHMH Central Services reviewed the control
account, located two of the missing items noted, and continues to pursue locating
the remaining two items. If the Department is unable to locate the missing items

--- Page 14 ---
after performing its investigation, a missing equipment report will be provided to
DGS for removal from the inventory records.
Donated Funds
Finding 2
The Center lacked sufficient documentation to support the disposition of
donated funds.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHMH determine the disposition of all items purchased
with donated funds.
Administration Response:
The Administration concurs with the recommendation and determined the
disposition of the items purchased with donated funds. Original receipts for
purchases made by the private facility have been obtained by the Department
documenting the purchase of items for use by former Rosewood consumers.
Documentation pertaining to the wheelchairs and related equipment purchased
with donated funds has been reviewed by the Department. The review found that
the wheelchairs are with the consumers. The remaining $28,740 of the bequest not
expended on Rosewood consumers was reverted to the State general fund during
the fiscal year 2009 closeout of Rosewood Center.
Disbursements
Finding 3
The Center could not document the disposition of certain bank accounts and
the propriety of certain corporate purchasing card transactions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHMH
a. ensure the proper disposition of the aforementioned bank accounts to
ensure that all funds were used properly and remaining funds were
properly accounted for, and
b. determine the propriety of the aforementioned gift card purchases.
Administration Response:
The Administration concurs with the recommendations.
Regarding recommendation (a), the Administration has obtained statements from
the banks and is reviewing Rosewood Center documentation to determine the

--- Page 15 ---
propriety of transactions and to account for the funds. This should be completed
by April 30, 2010.
Regarding recommendation (b), the Administration obtained significant
information clearly indicating that the gift cards were distributed as intended.

--- Page 16 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Ronnette L. Bailey, CFE
Senior Auditor
Erin D. Erdley
Julia M. King
Shalom N. Warburg
Staff Auditors