Title: Department of Natural Resources
Date: 07/12/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d15cc9d72456067450e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:25:56.306300
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Natural Resources
July 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Special Review of Resource Sharing Lease Agreements 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
COMPASS Licensing and Registration System
* Finding 1 – DNR did not establish sufficient controls over the processing 6
of voids and price changes.
* Finding 2 – DNR lacked assurance that COMPASS was properly 7
secured against operational and security risks.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 3 – DNR lacked adequate controls over collections at the 9
Annapolis headquarters complex and one Regional
Service Center.
Telecommunication Tower Maintenance Contracts
Finding 4 – DNR did not use available statewide contracts nor 11
comply with State procurement regulations for the purchase of
telecommunication tower maintenance and equipment
installation services.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) oversees the management and use
of the State’s living and natural resources for the current and future enjoyment of
Maryland’s citizens and visitors. These resources include the Chesapeake Bay
and its tributaries, state forests and parks, and fisheries and wildlife. DNR
maintains a headquarters location in Annapolis and seven Regional Service
Centers. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, DNR’s capital
and operating expenditures totaled $330.2 million.
Special Review of Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
On November 18, 2016, we issued a report on our special review of resource
sharing lease agreements payments deposited into escrow accounts maintained
outside of State control by a law firm. Under these agreements, DNR and two
other State agencies received compensation from telecommunication companies
for the use of the State’s communications infrastructure, such as the installation of
private communication systems on State-owned towers. From February 2001
through June 2016, the companies deposited lease payments totaling $4.4 million
into the escrow accounts and the payments were subsequently used by DNR and
another State agency to acquire equipment and services totaling $3.8 million.
Our review concluded that agreements were not effectively monitored, sufficient
accountability and control was not established for the lease payments, and
purchases of equipment and services with these funds were not properly
controlled and accounted for. The report contained findings and
recommendations to all three State agencies including the following select
findings related to DNR:
• DNR did not maintain comprehensive records of its resource sharing
agreements.
• DNR did not establish effective oversight of escrow accounts.
• Purchases were not subject to any independent supervisory review and
approval and were not made in accordance with State procurement
regulations.
• DNR did not record, tag, and inventory equipment purchased with escrow
account funds and could not provide a listing or identify the location of
equipment purchased.
4

--- Page 7 ---
We also noted that a DNR employee used escrow account funds to pay $73,350 to
an out-of-State vendor to install a telecommunications tower on DNR land
without conducting a proper procurement and executing a written contract. DNR
agreed to the findings and recommendations in our November 2016 report.
During our fiscal compliance audit, we noted additional concerns with DNR’s use
of this vendor for tower maintenance work (see Finding 4 of this report).
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives,
our audit included a review to determine the status of five of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 18, 2014. We determined
that DNR satisfactorily addressed two of the five findings. The remaining three
findings are repeated in this report. We did not follow up on the remaining
finding, which pertained to equipment inventory procedures.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
COMPASS Licensing and Registration System
Background
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) is responsible for issuing
commercial fishing and recreational sports licenses which can be obtained at one
of seven DNR Regional Service Centers (RSCs) and numerous third party sales
agents (such as sporting goods stores) throughout the State. In April 2012, DNR
implemented a web-based licensing and registration system, called COMPASS,
for the issuance of recreational licenses, which was expanded in August 2013 to
include commercial fishing licenses, and again in December 2015 to include boat
licensing, registration, and taxes. Customers can process these transactions
online, over the phone with call center staff, at RSCs, or for certain transactions,
in-person with third party sales agents.
To comply with State and federal laws, COMPASS collects customer data, such
as name, social security number, date of birth, driver’s license number, and
address. According to State law, certain of this data is deemed personally
identifiable information (PII). The development, maintenance, and hosting of
COMPASS is outsourced to a private contractor (service organization) which
subcontracted hosting, backup, disaster recovery, maintenance of servers,
firewalls, other network equipment, physical security, environmental controls,
electrical power, and internet connectivity to two vendors.
According to DNR’s records, fiscal year 2015 revenues processed through
COMPASS totaled approximately $20.3 million, including $9.3 million initially
collected by authorized third-party sales agents.
Finding 1
Numerous COMPASS users at the RSCs could process voids and price
changes without supervisory review and approval at the time the
transactions were processed and the post-transaction supervisory review at
the Annapolis RSC was not effective.
Analysis
Numerous system users at the RSCs could process voids and price changes
(including changing the price to zero) without supervisory review and approval at
the time the transactions were processed and based upon our review of the
procedures at the Annapolis RSC, the post-supervisory review of the transactions
was not effective.
6

--- Page 9 ---
We noted that RSC cashiers could initiate and void the same transaction within 30
minutes of initiation as well as process a price change (which are permitted by
regulations for certain customers, such as a disabled veteran) without supervisory
approval.
Our test of 10 voided transactions processed at the Annapolis RSC during fiscal
year 2015 disclosed there was no documented supervisory review and approval of
these transactions. In December 2015, DNR began generating output reports of
voided transactions to assist supervisors in the monitoring of these transactions
after the fact, but DNR management advised us that these reports were not
complete as they did not include all voided transactions.
Our test of 12 price changes processed at the Annapolis RSC during fiscal year
2015 disclosed there was no documented supervisory review and approval or
supervisory comparison to customer supplied documents supporting the nature of
the revised transaction amount. In May 2016, the Annapolis RSC began
generating output reports of price change transactions; however, we were advised
that the supervisor only reviewed the listed reason for the price change without
also tracing to supporting documentation. Similar conditions were commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
According to DNR’s records, during fiscal year 2015, there were 8,640 price
changes processed at the RSCs that cumulatively reduced fees by $112,000, and
7,172 voids processed in COMPASS. Due to the lack of reliable output reports
the value of these voids could not be quantified.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DNR establish complete and reliable reports of voids
and price changes and procedures for documented supervisory review and
approval of these transactions (repeat).
Finding 2
DNR lacked assurance that COMPASS was properly secured against
operational and security risks.
Analysis
DNR lacked assurance that COMPASS was properly secured. DNR personnel
advised us that as of May 2016, COMPASS’ primary service provider and a
critical subcontractor had not obtained independent security reviews of
COMPASS. The contract between DNR and the primary service provider
required that the primary service provider and all subcontractors performing
7

--- Page 10 ---
material services for COMPASS must obtain annual independent security reviews
(either a Service Organization Controls review or other equally comprehensive
review) for COMPASS. Accordingly, DNR lacked assurance that COMPASS,
and the customer PII contained therein was properly secured. We noted that the
dates of birth for 1.4 million customers and the drivers’ licenses for 1.1 million
customers were being stored in plain text. A similar condition regarding the lack
of security reviews was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service providers. Based on this guidance, service
providers (like the aforementioned contractors) may contract for an independent
review of controls and resultant independent auditor’s report referred to as a
Service Organization Controls (SOC) report. There are several types of SOC
reports, with varying scopes and levels of review and auditor testing. One type of
report, referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, contains the service organization’s
description of its system and the results of the auditor’s examination of the
suitability of the system design, operating effectiveness for the period under
review, and any evaluation of system security, availability, processing integrity,
confidentiality, and privacy. Due to the nature and sensitivity of the information
contained in COMPASS, if a SOC review is performed in lieu of an equivalent
comprehensive review, we believe a SOC 2 Type 2 report would be appropriate.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DNR
a. enforce the provisions of its COMPASS contract, by requiring that
independent security reviews (such as SOC reviews with Type 2 reports)
be performed for the primary service provider and all subcontractors
providing material services; and
b. obtain and review copies of these independent reports and ensure that the
independent security reviews and related reports on COMPASS address
all relevant and critical security controls and further ensure that the
service providers implement all critical recommendations made in these
reports (repeat).
Cash Receipts
Background
According to DNR’s records, collections (cash, checks, and credit cards) totaled
approximately $66.4 million during fiscal year 2015. These collections consisted
of $38.3 million collected at seven RSCs and third party sales agents, $10.8
million collected by various DNR units at the Annapolis headquarters complex,
8

--- Page 11 ---
$10.8 million collected at State parks, and $6.5 million collected online solely via
credit cards through the State Park Reservation System. For some of the
collections, deposits are made by the remote locations (for example, the State
parks and the seven RSCs). Collections received at DNR’s Annapolis
headquarters are deposited by the Financial and Administrative Services
Department (FAS).
Finding 3
DNR lacked adequate controls over collections at the Annapolis
headquarters complex and the Annapolis RSC.
Analysis
DNR lacked adequate controls over collections at the Annapolis headquarters
complex and the Annapolis RSC. According to DNR’s records, fiscal year 2015
collections at headquarters totaled $10.8 million and at the RSC totaled $8.3
million (including $7.2 million in cash and check collections and $1.1 million in
credit card collections).
Annapolis Headquarters
• An independent verification of validated deposits slips to recorded collections
was not properly performed. The individual who performed the deposit
verification did not compare the validated deposit slip to the initial recordation
(the mail log) of checks received for deposit. Rather, the validated deposit
slip was compared to a secondary summary record of collections, (the deposit
reconciliation form) which was prepared during the deposit process. In
addition, this employee was not independent of the cash receipt process since
the employee had access to collections.
• Checks received by two departments at the Annapolis headquarters were not
adequately safeguarded. For example, at one department, the checks were not
restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt, and at the other department,
checks were not initially recorded upon receipt and were stored in an unlocked
storage room until they were forwarded to FAS for bank deposit. According
to DNR’s records, fiscal year 2015 cash receipts deposited for these two
departments totaled $657,400.
• FAS did not deposit certain checks pending a determination as to why DNR
received the check (for example, no related accounts receivable record), but
did not maintain a comprehensive listing of these unidentified checks
requiring resolution in order to control, monitor, and document the ultimate
disposition of the checks. If subsequent research concluded that the check
was properly received by DNR, it would be processed for deposit; otherwise
9

--- Page 12 ---
FAS returned the check to the sender. The lack of a comprehensive record
could result in checks being misappropriated or lost without timely detection.
We determined that during fiscal year 2015, 70 checks totaling $788,446 were
withheld from deposit pending investigation, and that due to the lack of
accountability, DNR was unable to readily determine the ultimate disposition
of these checks. We tested 8 of those checks, totaling $203,500, and
determined that 5 were deposited and 3 were returned to the sender.
Annapolis Regional Service Center
• A supervisory employee, who was responsible for closing out cashiers’ daily
transactions and approving voids and price changes, was not independent of
the collection process. The employee routinely performed cashiering duties,
which gave the employee the capability to void receipt transactions without
independent approval as mentioned in Finding 1, and had access to the cash
receipts in the vault.
• Checks received in the mail were not always recorded and restrictively
endorsed immediately after the envelopes were opened. Rather, the opened
envelopes were stored in a common area until staff was available to process
the paperwork and associated payments. Based upon our observations on
three days, we sighted nine unendorsed checks totaling $1,078 that remained
undeposited for periods ranging from at least 4 to 33 days. Because the
paperwork was frequently not date stamped when received, the actual delay
may have been longer.
• Bank deposits were not verified to the initial recordation documents (such as,
the cashier closeout reports), but rather, to a summary document of receipts
that was prepared during the deposit process.
Similar conditions regarding a lack of supervisory employee independence and
improper deposit verifications were commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
receipts recorded on initial source documents be traced to deposit by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions. The Manual also requires the
restrictive endorsement and initial recordation of checks immediately upon receipt
as well as safeguarding cash receipts until deposit.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DNR
a. ensure deposit verifications are performed by an employee independent
of the cash receipts functions using initial recordation documents
(repeat),
b. initially record and restrictively endorse checks received in the mail
immediately upon opening the envelopes,
c. properly secure all collections until bank deposit,
d. establish accountability and control over unidentified checks and
document the final disposition of the checks, and
e. ensure that supervisory employees responsible for closing out cashiers’
daily transactions maintain independence from the cash collection
process.
We advised DNR on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Telecommunication Tower Maintenance Contracts
Finding 4
DNR did not use available statewide contracts nor comply with State
procurement regulations for the purchase of telecommunication tower
maintenance and equipment installation services.
Analysis
DNR did not use available Statewide contracts nor comply with State
procurement regulations when procuring certain telecommunication tower
maintenance and equipment installation services. Purchases for these services
were artificially divided to circumvent oversight and approval requirements, and
sufficient evidence of competitive bids was lacking. Furthermore, invoices for
those services were not adequately verified prior to payment. Consequently, DNR
did not ensure it received the best value for these services and that all contracted
services were provided. We determined that this arrangement with the vendor
began as early as 2011. According to State records, during the period from July
2011 to April 2016, DNR paid this vendor approximately $387,200 for these
services1.
1 Additional payments totaling $73,350 were made to this vendor from special bank accounts to
install a telecommunication tower. Concerns with the activity from the special bank accounts
were commented upon in our November 18, 2016 special review on Resource Sharing Lease
Agreements.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Available Statewide Contracts Were Not Used
DNR employees who oversaw tower maintenance did not use available
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) Statewide information technology
contracts to procure tower maintenance and equipment installation services from
pre-qualified vendors. Essentially the same services available under the DoIT
contract were obtained from an out-of-State vendor. DNR could not document
that the vendor had proper qualifications, licensing certifications, and insurance to
perform tower climbs or to install and align microwave antennas. In addition, the
vendor was not registered with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation
as required by State law.
Purchases Were Artificially Divided to Circumvent Oversight and State
Procurement Regulations
The same DNR employees artificially divided purchases circumventing oversight
and State procurement regulations, which generally require competitive bidding
for purchases over $5,000. The individual smaller dollar value procurements that
resulted from these artificially divided purchases allowed DNR to avoid certain
internal and external approvals and procurement requirements. Specifically,
vendor payments totaling approximately $387,200 were comprised of individual
purchases under $50,000, which DNR management advised is the threshold
requiring review and approval by DNR’s procurement department. In addition,
none of the purchases for telecommunication services were approved by DoIT as
required. Furthermore, $288,700 of those procurements were divided into
purchases under $15,000, which circumvented the requirement to publish the
solicitation on eMaryland Marketplace.
Procurements totaling $164,800 were of sufficiently small dollar amounts that
they could be made using corporate purchasing cards. Even though State
procurement regulations require the solicitation of oral or written bids for certain
small procurements, including those made with corporate purchasing cards, DNR
could not provide documentation that such solicitations were made by these
employees. Finally, this vendor was the only bidder for procurements totaling
$90,650, most of which were under $15,000. DNR management advised us that
other vendors were solicited and declined to bid on these purchases, but DNR
could not adequately support its assertions.
Subsequently, in February 2016, DNR’s procurement department noticed the
frequent payments to this vendor and recommended use of the Statewide DoIT
contract or the award by DNR of a master contract for tower maintenance services
due to the ongoing need for these services. As of November 2016, neither course
of action had been pursued by DNR.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Invoices Were Not Adequately Verified Prior to Payment
Although we were advised that the employee approving the invoices for payment
confirmed that the related equipment and services were received, this
confirmation was not documented. Furthermore, we were advised that the
confirmation was generally received from the DNR employees who unilaterally
procured the related services.
State agencies are encouraged to use available Statewide contracts with pre-
qualified vendors to procure goods and services. If not using Statewide contracts,
State procurement regulations generally require a formal written competitive
procurement and publication of the solicitation on eMaryland Marketplace for
procurements over $15,000. Purchases expected to cost between $5,000 and
$15,000 require at least two bids, which can be solicited in writing or orally
directly from vendors at the discretion of the agency’s purchasing agent. State
law and regulations also prohibit procurements from being artificially divided to
circumvent procurement requirements. Furthermore, DoIT approval is required
for all telecommunication procurements and Board of Public Works approval is
required for such purchases over $200,000.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DNR
a. use available Statewide contracts and comply with State law and
regulations by discontinuing the practice of artificially dividing
procurements;
b. when competitively procuring services, maintain complete bid
documentation and ensure procurements are approved by appropriate
internal personnel and control agencies;
c. review the activity associated with this vendor for propriety, and report
the results of the review, including related procurement activity, to the
appropriate control agency;
d. ensure that vendors are licensed in the State, and obtain and document
all necessary vendor qualifications and certifications; and
e. ensure invoices are adequately verified prior to payment by obtaining
documented confirmation that the related equipment and services were
received.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) for the period beginning February 5, 2013 and ending January
5, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DNR’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, cash receipts, payroll, special funds, and critical information
technology systems. We also determined the status of five of the six findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of DNR’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including DNR.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DNR’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
14

--- Page 17 ---
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from DNR’s COMPASS for the purpose of testing
licensing transactions and system access. We performed various tests of the
relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
DNR’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DNR’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DNR that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DNR’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DNR regarding the results of our
review of its response.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Response to OLA Audit Report – 2016
10 July 2017
Finding 1 -- Numerous COMPASS users at the RSC could process voids and price changes
without supervisory review and approval at the time the transactions were processed; and the
post-transaction supervisory review at the Annapolis RSC was not effective.
Recommendation 1 – establish complete and reliable reports of voids and price
changes and procedures for documented supervisory review and approval of these
transactions. (repeat)
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendation which
has already been implemented.
Additional Department Comments:
• Compass was modified subsequent to OLA’s 2016 on-site visits to address the
inconsistencies in the void and variance reports. Licensing staff have confirmed
that the reports are now complete and reliable.
• The voids and price variance reports have been modified to incorporate a
verification signature, representing supervisory review and confirmation that the
voids and price overrides were appropriate.
Finding 2 – DNR lacked assurance that COMPASS was properly secured against
operational and security risks.
Recommendation 2(a) – enforce the provisions of its COMPASS contract by
requiring that independent security reviews (such as SOC reviews with Type 2
reports) be performed for the primary service provider and all subcontractors
providing material services
Recommendation 2(b) – obtain and review copies of these independent reports and
ensure that the independent security reviews and related reports on COMPASS
address all relevant and critical security controls and further ensure that the service
providers implement all critical recommendations made in these reports (repeat)
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendations and
is working towards full compliance by December 1, 2017.
Additional Department Comments:
• The department is in possession of a SOC 2 Type II audit report dated 5/26/2016
for the subcontractor providing material services. The department is moving its
COMPASS system to cloud-based equipment and hosting model in July 2017. It
is our understanding that this environment was audited and found to be SOC 1, 2
and 3 compliant as of 10/28/2016. Following this transition, a SOC 2 Type II
audit of the developer and manager of COMPASS will be scheduled.
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 20 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Response to OLA Audit Report – 2016
10 July 2017
Finding 3 – DNR lacked adequate controls over collections at the Annapolis
headquarters complex and the Annapolis RSC.
Department Response: The department acknowledges that we could have a
higher level of internal controls as required by OLA’s internal control
procedures. Because of the limitation of necessary resources, the department
has been actively pursuing a partnership with the Maryland Motor Vehicle
Administration (MVA) as a resolution to this matter.
Additional Department Comments:
• The department has reviewed each transaction where a check was identified as
not being deposited for a period ranging from 4 to 33 days (second bullet under
Annapolis Regional Service Center). In every circumstance but one, the
submission, including the check, was returned to the applicant for additional
information or correction. The applicant resubmitted the check originally written
along with the additional/corrected information. Analyzing deposit delay using
the check date overstated the time between receipt and our ability to process that
transaction. The delay between check date and processing resulted from actions
by the applicant, not the department. No receipt date was stamped on the
documents for the remaining transaction, making it impossible to determine the
true processing delay.
Recommendation 3(a) – ensure deposit verifications are performed by an employee
independent of the cash receipts functions using initial recordation documents. (repeat)
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendation which has
already been implemented.
Additional Department Comments:
• The department’s Finance and Administrative Services (FAS) Unit validates deposits
using Bank of America’s Cash Pro Online program. This report is used to verify that
all collections are reconciled to the Bank of America bank statement report. The
employee who performs the deposit validation does not have access to the accounts
receivable database or the safe in which deposits are kept awaiting pickup, nor does
this employee perform any other cash receipts function. The Manager of General
Accounting is the approver of the deposit reconciliation.
Recommendation 3(b) – initially record and restrictively endorse checks received in the
mail immediately upon opening the envelopes.
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendation which has
already been implemented.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 21 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Response to OLA Audit Report – 2016
10 July 2017
Additional Department Comments:
• Managers of the department’s seven Service Centers were notified shortly after our
5/10/17 meeting with OLA that mail should not be opened until just prior to
processing.
Recommendation 3(c) – properly secure all collections until bank deposit
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendation which has
already been implemented.
Additional Department Comments:
• Maryland Park Service has addressed staffing issues that contributed to this finding
and made procedural changes to ensure the restrictive endorsement and recordation of
checks upon receipt.
• Fishing & Boating Services has procured stamps to restrictively endorse checks upon
receipt and has implemented deposit reconciliation by staff independent of the cash
receipts process.
Recommendation 3(d) – establish accountability and control over unidentified checks
and document the final disposition of the checks
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendation which has
already been implemented.
Additional Department Comments:
• FAS developed a spreadsheet to track unidentified checks removed from the deposit
reconciliation that is maintained by an employee independent of the cash receipts
process. It contains the check number, name, amount, and date removed from the
deposit, as well as the final disposition of the check.
Recommendation 3(e) – ensure that supervisory employees responsible for closing
out cashiers’ daily transactions maintain independence from the cash collection
process
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendation and
acknowledges the importance of separation of duties relative to the processing of
cash receipts.
Additional Department Comments:
• Compliance is difficult due to the limited number of staff at our Service Centers.
The Service Center manager generally prepares the deposit; and while the
manager does not wait on customers on a daily basis, they often cover the counter
during lunch breaks, when staff is out for illness or vacation, and at times of
extremely heavy customer load.
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 22 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Response to OLA Audit Report – 2016
10 July 2017
• The current effort to locate DNR Service Centers at Maryland MVA locations
will offer greater opportunity for independent review. The Dundalk Service
Center has been moved to the Essex MVA. The Salisbury Service Center will be
moving to MVA in the fall of 2017. Planning has already begun for the Bel Air
Service Center’s move. All other Service Centers will be scheduled for future
consolidation with nearby MVA facilities.
Finding 4 – DNR did not use available statewide contracts nor comply with State
procurement regulations for the purchase of telecommunications tower maintenance and
equipment installation services.
Recommendation 4(a) – use available statewide contracts and comply with State law
and regulations by discontinuing the practice of artificially splitting procurements
Recommendation 4(b) – when competitively procuring services, maintain complete
bid documentation and ensure procurements are approved by appropriate internal
personnel and control agencies
Recommendation 4(d) – ensure that vendors are licensed in the State, and obtain and
document all necessary vendor qualifications and certifications
Recommendation 4(e) – ensure invoices are adequately verified prior to payment by
obtaining documented confirmation that the related equipment and services were
received
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendations
which have already been implemented.
Recommendation 4(c) – review the activity associated with this vendor for propriety,
and report the results of the review, including related procurement activity, to the
appropriate control agency
Department Response: The department agrees with the recommendation which
has already been implemented.
Additional Department Comments:
• All items purchased with escrow funds have been accounted for. While we
lack the technical expertise to confirm that work was performed properly, we
did confirm that DNR staff provided tower access on each of the dates that
work was invoiced, and that there were no reports of system outages during
the period of time the vendor provided those services.
• The department continues to work with DoIT and the Maryland State Police
to address lease modifications and effect transfer of the escrow funds to the
Major Information Technology Development Project Fund.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 23 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Zain Khalid
Joshua A. Naylor
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Timothy S. Rice
Larry M. Richardson
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
David O. Mauriello, CPA