Title: Maryland Department of Health - Office of the Secretary and Other Units
Date: 08/30/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d10cc9d72456067443c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:51:16.557394
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Department of Health
Office of the Secretary and Other Units
August 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or
disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 7
Interagency Agreements
Finding 1 – MDH did not provide adequate guidance and oversight 7
regarding 304 interagency agreements valued at $329.5 million that
MDH administrations entered into with units of State universities.
As a result, assurance was lacking that the services provided under
these agreements were appropriate and represented the best value. In
addition, certain administrative fees included in the agreements
appeared excessive.
Finding 2 – MDH did not establish procedures to help ensure the agencies 10
responsible for administering interagency agreements verified that
the appropriate services were provided by the universities at the
agreed-upon costs.
Procurements
Finding 3 – MDH did not always comply with State procurement 12
requirements regarding the award of sole source and emergency
contracts.
Finding 4 – MDH did not have a formal monitoring procedure to ensure 14
that it consistently complied with publication requirements for service
and information technology contract awards.
Finding 5 – MDH did not always comply with State procurement 15
regulations with respect to bidding requirements and retention of
critical procurement documentation. Additionally, MDH also
awarded a contract for an amount substantially higher than could be
supported by the related bid.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Federal Funds
* Finding 6 – Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursement requests 17
was not always effective.
Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
* Finding 7 – OIG had not audited certain private providers for more than 19
five years and did not always conduct private provider audits in a
comprehensive manner.
Finding 8 – OIG did not have a formal process for oversight and 20
monitoring to ensure corrective actions were taken by both local
health departments and private providers.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 9 – Sensitive personally identifiable information within 21
a database and data file was stored without adequate safeguards.
* Finding 10 – Network access to critical MDH internal network devices 22
was not properly restricted, intrusion detection prevention system
coverage was not complete or adequate, and certain wireless
connections were not configured securely.
* Finding 11 – Malware protection for MDH computers was not sufficient 24
to provide the Office of Information Technology with adequate
assurance that these computers were properly protected.
Finding 12 – Information technology contractors had unnecessary 26
network-level access to the MDH network.
Cash Receipts
Finding 13 – Controls were not established to ensure collections were 27
properly accounted for, deposited, and secured.
Accounts Receivable
* Finding 14 – MDH did not adequately pursue collection of certain 29
Division of Cost Accounting and Reimbursements delinquent
accounts receivable.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Payroll
Finding 15 – Overtime earned by certain Secure Evaluation and 30
Therapeutic Treatment Program employees for an extended period
appeared questionable and was not investigated.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 16 – MDH did not comply with certain corporate purchasing card 31
requirements relating to the sharing of cards and certain purchasing
activities.
Equipment
* Finding 17 – MDH physical inventory procedures did not comply with 32
certain Department of General Services requirements.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 34
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Name Change and Agency Responsibilities
Chapter 214, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective July 1, 2017 renamed the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to be the Maryland Department of
Health (MDH).
MDH is responsible for promoting the health of the public and for strengthening
partnerships between State and local governments, the business community, and
all health care providers in Maryland regarding health care. This audit report
includes the operations of the following six units:
Office of the Secretary
Deputy Secretary for Operations
Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services (excluding Vital Statistics
Administration)
Deputy Secretary for Developmental Disabilities
Deputy Secretary for Behavioral Health
Deputy Secretary for Health Care Financing
These units provide an administrative infrastructure and oversight to MDH and
other health providers throughout the State. Additionally, the units are
responsible for policy formulation and program implementation and for providing
executive oversight to certain MDH administrations, including for the Medical
Care Programs Administration (which operates the Medicaid program). As part
of the administrative support provided by the units, certain support services (for
example, payroll processing, maintenance of accounting records, and purchasing)
are provided by MDH’s Office of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary for
Operations to the other units of MDH. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2016, expenditures for these six units totaled approximately $55.4
million.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 15 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated February 19, 2015. We determined that MDH
satisfactorily addressed 9 of these 15 findings. The remaining 6 findings are
repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Interagency Agreements
Background
Interagency agreements are used by State agencies, including the Maryland
Department of Health (MDH), to obtain services from State institutions of higher
education (State universities), such as information technology assistance and
training. Interagency agreements are exempt from State procurement laws,
including the requirements for competitive procurement, publication of
solicitations and awards, and Board of Public Works’ approval.
State budget law requires agencies to report all interagency agreements with
institutions of higher education that are valued at more than $100,000 to the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM). In turn, DBM is responsible for
compiling an annual listing and reporting the agreements to the General
Assembly’s budget committees.
For fiscal years 2016 and 2017, State budget law established an additional
requirement for DBM to review each agreement in excess of $500,000 to
determine why the services could not be provided directly by the State agency,
and to provide pre-approval for all new agreements.
According to the report of interagency agreements issued annually by DBM,
MDH had 304 interagency agreements with State universities that were in effect
between February 27, 2013 and January 10, 2016, valued at approximately $329.5
million. Of these agreements, 254 valued at $296.0 million were executed prior
to fiscal year 2016 and, therefore, did not require DBM pre-approval.
Finding 1
MDH did not provide adequate guidance and oversight regarding 304
interagency agreements valued at $329.5 million that MDH administrations
entered into with units of State universities. As a result, assurance was
lacking that the services provided under these agreements were appropriate
and represented the best value. In addition, certain administrative fees
included in the agreements appeared excessive.
Analysis
MDH did not provide adequate guidance and oversight to its administrations
which entered into the aforementioned interagency agreements with units of State
universities. As a result, assurance was lacking that the services were appropriate
and were obtained at the best value to the State. Specifically, MDH did not
7

--- Page 10 ---
provide the administrations with guidance or a methodology for determining
whether obtaining these services through these agreements was appropriate and
cost beneficial. Such a methodology should require the administrations to
consider obtaining the services through additional State positions or through a
competitive procurement process. In addition, we found that a significant number
of these interagency agreements were for general staffing services to carry out
operational functions, allowing the applicable MDH administrations to augment
their staff beyond its budgeted positions. These services provided by the State
universities were not always consistent with their respective missions. Finally,
certain administrative fees paid to the State universities appeared excessive
considering the universities’ limited involvement with the services provided.
Interagency Agreements May Not Have Been the Most Cost Effective
MDH had not determined that obtaining services through interagency agreements
was more cost-effective than seeking additional budgeted positions or procuring
the services through a competitive procurement process. Our review disclosed
that MDH lacked a formal or documented methodology for determining that these
agreements provided the most advantageous method to obtain these services. We
were advised by MDH management that these agreements were primarily used
out of convenience as they required less administrative effort by MDH.
Interagency Agreements Were Used to Augment Budgeted Staff
MDH’s use of interagency agreements with State universities to provide general
staffing services allowed the applicable MDH administrations to augment their
staff outside of the budgetary process. According to the descriptions reported to
DBM of the aforementioned 304 interagency agreements, 102 agreements totaling
$122.7 million were for general staffing purposes and increased MDH’s staffing
beyond its budgeted positions.
For example, according to its records, between February 27, 2013 and January 10,
2016 certain MDH units had 17 active agreements with the Maryland Institute for
Policy Analysis and Research (MIPAR), a unit of the University of Maryland
Baltimore County; these agreements were valued at approximately $37.3 million.
We performed a detailed review of one interagency agreement between MIPAR
and the Prevention and Health Promotion Administration’s (PHPA) Infectious
Disease Bureau (IDB) that was used to employ and provide staff to support PHPA
– IDB’s mission. This agreement was valued at approximately $11 million for the
period from July 2014 through June 2017. This one interagency agreement with
MIPAR provided PHPA – IDB with an additional 56 positions beyond the 239
positions authorized in its budget. As of August 2016, 37 of the individuals
providing services through this agreement were hired contractually by the State
University, specifically for MDH, and only 7 positions were filled by either
8

--- Page 11 ---
existing university employees or graduate students. The remaining positions were
not filled as of August 2016. According to MDH records, fiscal year 2016
expenditures under this agreement totaled $1.9 million.
Interagency Agreements Were Not Within the Mission of the University
The services provided through these interagency agreements were frequently used
to carry out operational functions and did not always appear to be within the
mission of the university unit under which they were hired. For example,
according to its website, MIPAR “is the principle center for social science and
public policy research at UMBC. MIPAR links the analytical resources of the
University with policymakers in the State and region, conducting opinion
research, policy analyses, and program evaluations.” However, the individuals
provided under the aforementioned agreement between MIPAR and PHPA – IDB
were essentially serving in PHPA – IDB positions, such as accounting and data
entry, and the services provided did not relate to MIPAR’s mission. As
mentioned above, many individuals were hired by the University specifically to
work for PHPA – IDB.
Administrative Rates Appear Questionable
MDH did not establish a process to determine the appropriateness of the
administrative fees charged by the State universities under these agreements.
Rather, we were advised that, in general, the fees proposed by the universities
were accepted without question. Administrative fees associated with the 304
interagency agreements totaled $25.6 million and ranged between 0 and 31
percent of the agreement value.
Certain administrative fees included in the interagency agreements appeared
excessive since the involvement of the State universities was so limited. Under
the aforementioned agreement between MIPAR and PHPA – IDB, MDH paid
MIPAR administrative fees of 14 percent of the direct costs associated with the
salaries and fringe benefits, which totaled $525,000 as of August 1, 2016. This
rate appeared excessive because MIPAR’s involvement was generally limited to
adding the positions to its payroll, paying the salaries, and invoicing IDB for
those costs and its administrative fees. In contrast, PHPA – IDB was responsible
for recruiting employees, reviewing employment applications, selecting
candidates to interview, conducting interviews, and selecting individuals to be
hired under the agreement. In addition, PHPA – IDB was solely responsible for
the daily supervision and monitoring of the individuals who performed services
under the agreement, including ensuring responsibilities were performed. We
were advised that similar arrangements regarding the fees charged and work
performed by each party existed for all 17 MIPAR agreements.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Accordingly, assurance was lacking that services provided through interagency
agreements were obtained at the most advantageous cost to the State. In this
regard, in fiscal year 2017, MDH converted 58 positions provided through nine
interagency agreements with MIPAR, including 27 individuals from the
agreement discussed above, into permanent PHPA – IDB positions. MDH
estimated that this conversion would result in general fund savings of $784,000
from federal indirect cost recoveries in fiscal year 2017 that are not available
recoveries to MDH if services are rendered through an interagency agreement.
As previously mentioned, DBM is required to review and approve each new
agreement beginning for fiscal year 2016. MDH is responsible for satisfying
DBM approval requirements, which may include demonstrating need and value
for each of those agreements.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDH
a. provide oversight of and guidance to its administrations regarding
agreements with State institutions of higher education,
b. evaluate existing interagency agreements with State institutions of higher
education to determine whether each arrangement is appropriate and the
most cost beneficial option for MDH,
c. refrain from executing agreements to augment its staff,
d. establish procedures to perform a documented analysis to determine the
most cost beneficial option for MDH to obtain services prior to entering
into future interagency agreements, and
e. ensure that the administrative fees are reasonable when it is determined
appropriate to use an interagency agreement.
Finding 2
MDH did not establish procedures to help ensure the agencies responsible for
administering interagency agreements verified that the appropriate services
were provided by the universities at the agreed-upon costs.
Analysis
MDH did not establish procedures to help ensure the agencies responsible for
administering interagency agreements verified that the appropriate services were
provided by the universities at the agreed-upon costs. Consequently, we noted
that PHPA – IDB did not adequately monitor individuals providing staffing
services under an interagency agreement with MIPAR (which was commented
upon in finding 1) and did not verify the billing rates and the hours worked. As of
August 1, 2016, MDH paid salaries for this agreement totaling $3.7 million.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Our review disclosed that PHPA – IDB employees did not sufficiently monitor
the individuals providing services through the agreement, as required, to ensure
work assignments detailing each person’s tasks and responsibilities were clearly
defined and the performance of each was appropriately evaluated. The agreement
provided only a general description of the duties of each of the 25 different
positions such as epidemiologists, data entry operators, and program specialists.
We were advised by PHPA – IDB management that it had not started formulating
work assignments for this July 2014 agreement until November 2015 and, as of
April 2017, the work assignments remained incomplete and PHPA – IDB
management could not provide us with a clear status. Individual evaluations were
also not performed in a timely manner and lacked sufficient detail. Our review of
10 individual evaluations disclosed that each was given between 14 and 24
months after the individual began work under this agreement. Three of these
evaluations lacked sufficient details, such as the evaluation period and comments
to support the ratings. While the interagency agreement did not specify the
frequency of evaluations, the Department of Budget and Management
Performance Planning and Evaluation Program Guidelines provide that
employees be evaluated twice annually. As mentioned in finding 1, these
individuals were essentially functioning as PHPA – IDB employees.
In addition, PHPA – IDB did not verify that the rates billed agreed with the
individual contracted rates established for each position type. Instead, it relied on
MIPAR to enter the rates for each individual into the University’s payroll system,
which were then billed to PHPA – IDB, without PHPA – IDB confirming that the
rates billed were consistent with the agreement. Consequently, PHPA – IDB
lacked assurance that all rates being billed were appropriate. Our testing of
billings for 10 individuals for pay periods between March and June 2016 did not
disclose any improper rates.
Finally, PHPA – IDB’s review of invoices did not ensure that hours billed were
supported by an approved timesheet reflecting the appropriate number of hours, as
required in the agreement. Our review of charges for hours worked between
March 20, 2016 and April 2, 2016, totaling $67,084, disclosed that the invoice
approver did not have approved timesheets on file for 6 of the 39 individuals. The
related charges for these 6 individuals totaled $12,067.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to help ensure the agencies responsible for
administering interagency agreements verify that the appropriate
services were provided by the universities at the agreed-upon costs;
11

--- Page 14 ---
b. ensure that PHPA – IDB immediately develops work assignments for
each individual provided under the aforementioned agreement;
c. ensure that PHPA – IDB performs evaluations of individuals twice
annually, and ensure that these evaluations are sufficiently detailed; and
d. as part of the invoice approval process, ensure that PHPA – IDB verifies
rates billed to the individual contracts, and obtains and reviews approved
timesheets for each individual invoiced.
Procurements
Background
MDH’s Office of Procurement and Support Services (OPASS) is responsible for
establishing Department-wide procurement and contract administration policies;
performing or delegating procurement functions; and ensuring compliance with
State procurement laws, regulations, and policies. According to MDH
procurement records, OPASS processed approximately $220 million in contract
awards during fiscal year 2016.
Finding 3
MDH did not always comply with State procurement requirements
regarding the award of sole source and emergency contracts.
Analysis
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations regarding the
award of sole source and emergency contracts. According to MDH records, sole
source and emergency contracts awarded totaled approximately $30.7 million and
$14.7 million, respectively, during the audit period. Our tests of six sole source
procurement awards totaling approximately $17.1 million and three emergency
procurements totaling approximately $3.6 million disclosed instances in which the
appropriateness of the procurement methods used and the labor rates paid could
not be adequately substantiated. MDH did not conduct price negotiations for any
of these six sole source awards as provided for by State procurement regulations.
 For three procurements totaling $8.7 million, MDH did not adequately justify
the procurements as sole source awards. For example, for a psychiatric
services contract awarded in May 2013 ($4.4 million) and for a physician
services contract ($1.7 million) awarded in November 2013, the sole source
justifications stated that the services were not competitively procured so as not
to interrupt the patients’ continuity of care. However, neither justification was
supported by an assessment from a licensed or certified practitioner that a
12

--- Page 15 ---
change in the provider would have a detrimental impact to the patients, as
required by procurement regulations.
Furthermore, we noted that other vendors could have provided the same
services. Specifically, we identified six other MDH procurements for similar
services (three each for psychiatric services and physician services) made
during the period between June 2013 and December 2015 that were
competitively awarded to eight different vendors. One of these procurements
for physician services indicated that 91 prospective vendors were solicited.
 MDH did not have a procedure to conduct negotiations for sole source
procurement pricing, as allowed by State regulations, and no pricing
negotiations occurred for any of the six awards tested. Rather, we were
advised that the sole source vendor prices were accepted without any attempts
to seek more favorable pricing. Our review disclosed that the MDH
contracted labor rates for psychiatric services under one sole source award
were between 18 and 47 percent more per hour than those of three competitive
procurements for other MDH facilities. Specifically, MDH paid $220 per
hour for psychiatric services under the sole source procurement; rates for the
competitively procured vendors ranged from $150 to $186 per hour.
 One emergency procurement for management and staffing services at a State
facility totaling approximately $2.1 million was awarded outside the normal
procurement process and included higher labor rates than comparable State
positions. An adequate justification for soliciting interest from only one
vendor was not prepared and inaccurate information about the award was
provided to the Board of Public Works (BPW).
We were advised by current MDH management that one executive-level
person unilaterally selected the vendor to provide these services and no other
vendors were sought. Typically, such decisions include the involvement of
other parties, such as the procurement office. MDH management also
concurred that the decision to limit the solicitation to one vendor was not
adequately justified as required by procurement regulations. The sole source
justification stated that “[the vendor] will bring established administrative and
clinical expertise...” Furthermore, MDH management’s representation that no
other vendors were solicited for this award differs with the information
provided to the BPW which indicated that a quote was sought from another
vendor, but that the vendor did not offer an adequate solution.
The hourly rates for three management positions in the contract were
substantially higher than the rates paid to State employees in the same
13

--- Page 16 ---
positions at other MDH facilities. For example, the hourly rate for the chief
executive contract position of $210 was substantially higher than the average
hourly rate of $71 (salary and fringe benefits) for eight State chief executive
officers at other MDH facilities. Similar contractor hourly rates were included
in the subsequent June 2015 contract, which was awarded via a three-year,
$2.6 million sole source procurement to the incumbent.
State procurement regulations provide that a sole source procurement is not
permissible unless the goods or services are available from only a single vendor,
and require that written justifications be prepared and approved prior to contract
awards and that the procurement officer conduct price negotiations, as
appropriate. For emergency procurements, State procurement regulations require
that procurement records include a justification if the solicitation was limited to
one vendor, and the basis for the selection of a particular vendor.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure sufficient justifications exist for sole source and emergency
procurements, and that those justifications are documented;
b. ensure sole source and emergency contract awards provide the most
favorable prices, and conduct documented price negotiations as
appropriate;
c. ensure that the vendor selection process is handled appropriately; and
d. provide accurate information to the BPW and notify the BPW of the
aforementioned erroneous statement.
Finding 4
MDH did not have a formal monitoring procedure to ensure that it
consistently complied with publication requirements for service and
information technology contract awards.
Analysis
MDH did not have a formal monitoring procedure to ensure contract awards were
consistently published, as required. Our test of 17 service and information
technology contracts awarded during fiscal years 2013 through 2016, totaling
$164.3 million, disclosed that 8 contract awards totaling $90 million were not
published on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) within 30 days of the contract
awards, as required by State law and regulations. Seven of these contracts
awarded between May 2013 and January 2016, totaling $43 million, had not been
published on eMM as of April 2017; the eighth contract award for $47 million
was published more than four months after the contract award date. These
14

--- Page 17 ---
contracts were procured primarily for psychiatric and physician staffing services
at MDH facilities, information technology services (hardware and software
support, project management), and other administrative function support.
State procurement law and regulations require awards for contracts greater than
$25,000 to be published on eMM not more than 30 days after the execution and
approval of the contract.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDH establish a formal monitoring procedure to
ensure that all applicable contract awards are published on eMM not more
than 30 days after the execution and approval of the contract as required.
Finding 5
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations with
respect to bidding requirements and retention of critical procurement
documentation. Additionally, MDH also awarded a contract for an amount
substantially higher than could be supported by the related bid.
Analysis
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations for securing and
recording receipt of vendors’ financial and technical bids, and certain bid opening
controls were lacking. Furthermore, MDH did not always retain certain critical
procurement documentation and awarded a contract for an amount substantially
higher than could be supported by the related bid without justification.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance regarding the integrity of the bidding
process and the propriety of certain awards and contract values.
We judgmentally selected eight contracts for testing totaling approximately
$143.5 million procured under the competitive sealed bid or proposal methods
during the period between September 2013 and January 2016. Our review
disclosed the following conditions:
 MDH lacked a procedure to record when bids were received and to secure
bids upon receipt. Specifically, MDH did not record, for each bid, the
submitting vendor name and date/time received to establish a record of receipt
by the submission deadline. In addition, bids were stored unlocked and were
accessible to many employees while in the MDH mailroom as well as in
OPASS custody. Furthermore, although OPASS established a procedure and
template for recording bid openings in the presence of two employees, our test
15

--- Page 18 ---
disclosed that recordation of the bid opening did not exist for six
procurements totaling $129.2 million.
 MDH could not provide any procurement documentation for a $10.1 million
contract awarded for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) program services.
Specifically, MDH could not locate the procurement file nor provide any
associated documentation including the executed contract, the vendor’s
financial and technical submissions, the justification for awarding based on a
single bid, and MDH’s evaluation of the vendor’s submission. We were able
to independently verify that the solicitation and award was published on eMM
and that BPW approval was obtained.
 For two contracts totaling $34.4 million, MDH could not provide all the
financial or technical proposals received. Specifically, none of the technical
proposals could be located from the five vendors who submitted proposals for
a procurement for behavioral support services totaling $31 million. Similarly,
none of the bids were retained for an award for nutritional services totaling
$3.4 million, for which submissions were received from three vendors; rather,
only the bid tabulation was retained for the procurement file.
 One contract award for pharmaceutical services at a facility was made for
approximately $5.1 million, an amount that was substantially higher than the
single vendor bid received of $1.9 million from the incumbent vendor. We
were advised by MDH management personnel that the award increase was
based on its increase in the estimated pharmaceutical quantities since the
initial solicitation for the procurement. However, documentation was lacking
to support this assertion. Additionally, MDH did not amend the publicized
solicitation as allowed by State regulations for significant changes to the
initial solicitation. Information about the expected quantities could impact
vendors’ bidding decisions and ultimately the outcome of the award, impeding
MDH’s ability to ensure it received the most favorable costs for these
pharmaceuticals.
State procurement regulations require that a record be maintained of the date
contract bids were received, that bids be secured, and that bids be opened in the
presence of at least two employees. State procurement regulations also require
that a procurement file exist and that this file include all bids or offers received,
all internal and external correspondence regarding the procurement, justifications
for single-bid awards, and the final contract. Finally, State procurement
regulations allow for the cancellation and subsequent amendment of a solicitation
when warranted by a significant change in the magnitude and substance of the
solicitation.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to record vendor bids upon receipt and to secure
vendor bids prior to opening;
b. ensure that at least two employees witness the bid openings, and maintain
documentation of the employees present;
c. maintain complete procurement documentation, including all bidder
financial and technical proposals;
d. ensure contract award amounts are consistent with bid documents or that
adequate justification is maintained to support contract award amounts
that differ from the supporting bids; and
e. in the future, when significant changes are made to the scope of services
or goods being procured, either amend the published solicitation or
provide a written justification for why an amendment is not needed.
Federal Funds
Finding 6
Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursement requests was not
always effective.
Analysis
Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursement requests was not always
effective. Although supervisory reviews of reimbursement requests were
performed and documented, the reimbursement requests were not thoroughly
verified to the supporting documentation, and our tests disclosed certain errors
that were not detected.
We tested 20 reimbursement requests submitted during calendar year 2015,
totaling approximately $3 billion, and noted that 5 reimbursement requests
submitted between April and November contained errors totaling $27.2 million.
Four requests included errors that omitted or miscalculated reimbursable
expenses, resulting in federal funds being underdrawn by approximately $3.7
million. The fifth request contained a miscalculation that resulted in federal funds
being overdrawn by $23.5 million. MDH provided documentation that one of the
five requests with inaccuracies that resulted in federal funds being underdrawn by
$1.3 million was subsequently identified and corrected.
We were advised by MDH management that these types of errors are routinely
corrected during a quarterly reconciliation that is performed between the federal
funds drawn down and the federal expenditures reported. However, we question
17

--- Page 20 ---
this assertion because MDH lacked any evidence that the specific errors were
corrected for the remaining four requests we tested and found to have errors.
Additionally, MDH has previously had problems with this reconciliation process.
In this regard, the federal Department of Health and Human Services issued an
audit report in December 2013 which found that reimbursement requests
processed during fiscal years 2009 through 2011 included errors and omissions
that resulted in federal funds totaling $115.3 million being received in excess of
expenditures. The audit report primarily attributed this situation to human errors
made during the preparation of these quarterly reconciliations. These funds were
repaid to the federal government during calendar year 2013 as an offset to draws
made at that time.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report. During fiscal year
2016, MDH processed federal fund reimbursement requests totaling
approximately $6.4 billion.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure that federal fund reimbursement requests are thoroughly
reviewed, along with supporting documentation (repeat); and
b. research the aforementioned four reimbursement requests tested and
take appropriate corrective actions, as needed.
Office of the Inspector General
Background
The MDH Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) Division of Audits (DOA)
performs audits of state grant funds paid to Local Health Departments (LHDs)
and private non-profit providers (private providers) who are reimbursed for the
cost of care for eligible individuals. State law requires MDH to examine the grant
accounts of LHDs and these providers, determine the amount of allowable costs,
and collect any excess reimbursements or pay any unreimbursed costs. MDH has
established regulations and policy manuals to govern the use and oversight of
these grant funds. Furthermore, in practice, the audits performed by DOA include
an evaluation of the entities’ internal control structures.
We were advised by MDH management that there were 24 LHDs and 80 private
providers that received grant awards subject to audit totaling approximately
$315.7 million and $196.9 million, respectively, during fiscal year 2016. The
grant audits performed by the DOA are the primary mechanism for ensuring the
propriety of the use of these funds and recovering unallowable expenditures.
18

--- Page 21 ---
According to OIG records, as of June 1, 2016, OIG has identified amounts due to
MDH totaling $8.7 million from the 82 audits performed since June 2014.
Finding 7
OIG had not audited certain private providers for more than five years and
did not always conduct private provider audits in a comprehensive manner.
Analysis
OIG did not conduct private provider audits in a timely manner and only
performed limited scope reviews for most of the audits conducted. As of June 1,
2016, 22 private providers had not been audited for more than five years. For 50
of the remaining 58 providers audited between March 2015 and May 2016, the
audits consisted only of desk reviews. The untimely audits of these grants results
in the risk that the audits may have reduced effectiveness, especially since State
regulations do not require grantees to retain grant records beyond five years
following the close of the fiscal year. In this regard, as of June 2016, grants
received through fiscal year 2010 should have been audited. OIG policy requires
these audits to be performed on a four-year cycle.
In our preceding audit report, we commented that 9 LHDs and 36 private non-
profit providers had not been audited for at least five years. To address this
deficiency, OIG significantly increased the pace of conducting audits beginning
February 2015. Although OIG was up-to-date with its audits of LHDs, as of June
2016, 22 private providers had not been audited for more than five years. The
unaudited grant expenditures associated with these 22 providers totaled $199
million during the period from 2007 through 2010.
However, to achieve this improvement after the issuance of our preceding audit
report, OIG significantly reduced the scope of its work for 50 private providers
with reported grant expenditures totaling $329.4 million. Specifically, for these
50 providers, OIG merely performed “desk audits,” significantly reducing their
effectiveness. Desk audits are reviews generally limited to obtaining basic
information, such as a management representation letter and a listing of board of
directors, reviewing independent financial statements, and reconciling the
provider’s expenditures reported to MDH with the provider’s records. While
these desk audits resulted in identifying instances in which the reported
expenditures did not agree with the providers’ records, these audits would not be
effective in determining whether costs are allowable as provided in State law and
in identifying control weaknesses.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDH ensure that
a. OIG completes its grant audits on a timely basis (repeat), and
b. future audits are performed in a comprehensive manner.
Finding 8
OIG did not have a formal process for oversight and monitoring to ensure
corrective actions were taken by both LHDs and private providers.
Analysis
OIG had not established a formal written policy to provide oversight and
monitoring of corrective actions to be taken by the LHDs and private providers,
but relied only on following up on the findings in the subsequent audit. Although
OIG developed a schedule to conduct and track follow-up reviews on audit
reports findings, effective July 2016, a formal written policy did not exist
detailing key processes such as timing, thresholds, and specific additional follow-
up efforts when OIG findings are not corrected. OIG scheduled 18 follow-up
reviews to be performed in fiscal year 2017; two of these reviews had been
completed as of September 2016.
Having a formal process for the oversight and monitoring of the LHD’s corrective
actions is important because the OIG audits identify a significant number of
findings and subsequent audits have noted that findings are not always corrected.
In this regard, our review of 10 LHD audit reports that were issued between June
2014 and May 2016, with grant awards totaling $1.2 billion, disclosed that the
OIG reported 69 findings. These findings primarily related to control weaknesses
and improper transactions within cash receipts, equipment, disbursements and
procurement, personnel and payroll, and grant reconciliations. Additionally, as
part of these audits, OIG’s follow-up on prior audit findings in 8 reports found
that 17 of the 41 prior findings (41 percent) were repeated. The scope of the
remaining 2 audits (which contained 28 findings) did not include the status of the
prior findings and the OIG could not explain why.
Oversight and monitoring could help ensure that audit findings are addressed and
repeat audit findings are minimized. OIG internal audit policy states that audits
will be performed in accordance with the auditing standards issued by the Institute
of Internal Auditors. These standards require an audit follow-up process to
monitor and ensure that management actions have been effectively implemented.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MDH ensure that the OIG establishes a formal process
to actively monitor corrective actions taken to address its audit findings.
Information Systems Security and Control
Background
MDH’s Office of Information Technology (OIT) is responsible for the overall
management and direction of certain MDH information systems. These systems
include, but are not limited to, the Hospital Management Information System
(HMIS – which is used to record information for patients of State hospitals such
as admissions, billings, and collections), the National Electronic Disease
Surveillance System (NEDSS – which is used to track and transmit sensitive
information related to certain infectious diseases), and the mainframe-based
Medicaid Management Information System II (MMIS II). These systems, and
many more, are supported by MDH’s network infrastructure. MDH operates a
wide area network with approximately 9,000 user connections across the State.
This wide area network has connections to local health departments, State
hospitals, health clinics, the MDH headquarters facility, the Statewide
Government Intranet, and the Internet. Critical applications and programs
accessible via the wide area network include the State’s Financial Management
Information System, MMIS II, NEDSS, Vital Records and the Provider Care
Information System (PCIS2).
MDH operates two redundant perimeter firewalls at both its headquarters’ data
center location, and its Springfield Hospital Center location, where a Disaster
Recovery network segment is located.
Finding 9
Sensitive personally identifiable information within the NEDSS database and
a HMIS data file was stored without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) within the NEDSS database
and a HMIS data file was stored in clear text. Specifically, we noted that the
NEDSS and HMIS applications contained social security numbers stored in clear
text along with names, addresses and dates of birth as of the dates of our test work
(early fiscal year 2017). During our review, we determined that one NEDSS
database table contained 91,252 unique social security numbers and one HMIS
data file contained 123,832 unique social security numbers. In addition, we were
21

--- Page 24 ---
advised that this sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating
controls.
This sensitive PII is commonly associated with identity theft. Accordingly,
appropriate information system security controls need to exist to ensure that this
information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that agencies protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MDH properly protect sensitive PII information by
encryption or other substantial mitigating controls.
Finding 10
Network access to critical MDH internal network devices was not properly
restricted, intrusion detection prevention system coverage was not complete
or adequate, and certain wireless connections were not configured securely.
Analysis
Network access to critical MDH internal network devices was not properly
restricted, intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) coverage was not
complete or adequate, and certain wireless connections were not configured
securely. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Numerous rules on the two aforementioned MDH headquarters perimeter
firewalls allowed unnecessary network level access to critical devices on the
internal network. For example, the entire Internet had unnecessary network
level access to 11 internal servers over various ports. A similar condition was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
 We identified 217 firewall rules that allowed network-level access to MDH
network devices (from various sources) which were not used by network
traffic for an extended period of time (466 days at the time of our test work).
Unused and unnecessary firewall rules allowing access to the MDH internal
network represent a security risk to the MDH network which could be
exploited to attack critical devices and systems.
 The MDH IDPS was configured to detect, log, and report potentially
malicious intrusion attempts instead of blocking these attempts. Furthermore,
22

--- Page 25 ---
the IDPS device was set to only log and report on network traffic generated
from 9 AM to 5 PM each business day. Accordingly, effective IDPS
protection did not exist for the MDH network.
 IDPS coverage for encrypted traffic entering the MDH network did not exist.
Specifically, host-based intrusion prevention system (HIPS) coverage was not
in use on MDH servers that processed encrypted traffic, nor was encrypted
traffic subject to inspection by the MDH network-based IDPS. The absence
of IDPS coverage for such encrypted traffic creates network security risk as
such traffic could contain malicious data which are not detected or dropped.
 Four wireless connections allowed certain MDH employees to access the
MDH internal wired network using an insecure encryption protocol. In this
regard, sensitive information transferred over these wireless connections and
encrypted using the insecure protocol was susceptible to compromise.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that agency systems
shall be configured to monitor and control communications at external
boundaries.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MDH
a. configure its firewalls to properly protect all critical network devices,
(repeat)
b. perform and document periodic reviews of its firewalls’ rule bases to
ensure that only necessary rules remain active and unnecessary rules are
deleted/disabled based on these reviews,
c. configure its network-based IDPS devices to prevent high-risk malicious
traffic from entering the network and to continuously log lower-risk
malicious traffic for review and possible investigation, and
d. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS and/or HIPS coverage should be best applied
to its network and implement this coverage for traffic (including
encrypted traffic) from all untrusted parties, and
e. use the strongest possible encryption method available to protect data in
transit over MDH wireless connections.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 11
Malware protection for MDH computers was not sufficient to provide OIT
with adequate assurance that these computers were properly protected.
Analysis
Malware protection for MDH computers was not sufficient to provide OIT with
adequate assurance that these computers were properly protected. OIT has overall
responsibility for MDH’s information security and provides direct control over
certain computers but not others.
MDH computers with OIT malware protection support
 OIT did not verify that malware protection software was operational on the
2,300 computers it supported. Although OIT used an automated malware
protection console to manage the malware protection software installed on
these computers, we determined that as of November 15, 2016 the console
only reported 1,831 active computers.
 As of January 2017, we noted that 1,828 of the aforementioned 1,831
computers supported by OIT for malware protection were running an outdated
version of the installed malware protection software. Release dates for this
outdated software ranged from November 2012 to March 2016. The malware
protection software vendor updated its software on a regular basis to fix
operating problems identified with the software and to introduce new features.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 OIT personnel advised us that regular reviews of the malware protection
console’s reports were performed to ensure that the supported computers had
the latest malware protection signatures installed; however, these reviews
were not documented. Accordingly, assurance was lacking that these reviews
were performed.
MDH computers not supported by OIT
 OIT lacked assurance that the MDH servers and workstations, without OIT
malware protection support (approximately 8,200 computers), had up-to-date,
operational malware protection software. In addition, OIT also lacked
assurance that whatever malware protection software was installed on these
computers had up-to-date signatures to protect against recently issued
malware. Specifically, OIT had not requested or received, from MDH units
(without OIT malware protection support), any malware console reports (for
example, showing software versions and operational status) or reconciliations
24

--- Page 27 ---
of counts of active computers from vendor malware consoles to listings of all
computers supported by each unit.
The MDH Information Technology Technical Security Policy Standards and
Requirements, Version 4.0, dated June 28, 2014, states that information
security is an agency responsibility under the direction and leadership of OIT
and shared by MDH business units. The Policy further states that the OIT, in
conjunction with the MDH Office of the Inspector General, is responsible for
assuring the confidentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability of all
agency information while it is being processed, stored and/or transmitted
electronically. Therefore, OIT was not in compliance with this Policy and
was not providing the oversight necessary to help ensure that all MDH servers
and workstations are properly secured.
 OIT lacked assurance that the MDH servers and workstations were frequently
updated for commonly vulnerable applications and were properly configured
with respect to administrative rights.
In this regard, we identified 80 workstations whose users had administrative
rights over these workstations. None of these users were network or system
administrators and OIT did not have any documentation authorizing these
users to have such rights. If these workstations were infected with malware,
the malware would run with administrative rights and expose these
workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user
accounts operated with only user rights. A similar condition was commented
upon in our preceding audit report. In addition, we identified 24 additional
workstations with the local administrators group defined to include a large
number of individuals who did not require this privilege. Specifically, OIT
had not requested nor received any reports (from the MDH business units
responsible for supporting their own computers) regarding updates for
commonly vulnerable applications or administrative rights policies and
assignments.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that OIT ensure
a. that all MDH computers are running current versions of the malware
protection software and that malware signatures provided by the
malware protection software vendor are installed on these computers
immediately upon issuance, document these efforts, and retain the
documentation for future reference; and
b. that commonly vulnerable applications on MDH workstations and
servers were frequently updated; and
25

--- Page 28 ---
c. that administrative rights on all MDH workstations and servers are
restricted to only system/network administrators or non–IT personnel
authorized in writing to have such rights, with documentation supporting
these authorizations retained for future reference (repeat).
Finding 12
Information technology contractors had unnecessary network-level access to
the MDH network.
Analysis
Information technology (IT) contractors had unnecessary network-level access to
the MDH network. MDH routinely uses IT contractors for both system
development and support purposes. These contractors worked both on-site at
MDH locations and remotely with access provided by a virtual private network
connection. These contractors only required access to the specific development
servers involved with their projects and certain support servers, such as email
servers. However, we noted the following conditions
 Although virtually all IT contractors connecting remotely had properly
defined network level access; IT contractors working on site at MDH
locations had unnecessary network-level access to numerous critical MDH
network devices because their network traffic was not filtered at all.
 We were advised by OIT personnel that a centralized schedule of all IT
contractors working onsite within MDH did not exist. Therefore, OIT was not
aware of the extent of unnecessary network-level access by these contractors
to critical MDH network devices.
MDH network-level access by IT contractors should be limited to only the
network devices and ports required for them to perform their contractual duties.
The DoIT Information Security Policy requires an authorization process which
specifically grants access to information ensuring that access is strictly controlled,
audited, and that it supports the concepts of least possible privileges and need to
know.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MDH
a. limit IT contractors’ network-level access to only those network devices
and ports required for them to perform their duties; and
b. create and maintain, on a current basis, a centralized schedule of all IT
contractor personnel working onsite within MDH and use this schedule to
26

--- Page 29 ---
ensure that network-level access for these contractors is appropriately
limited as noted in the aforementioned recommendation.
Cash Receipts
Finding 13
Controls were not established to ensure collections were properly accounted
for, deposited, and secured.
Analysis
Proper controls were not established over cash receipts to ensure collections were
properly accounted for, deposited, and secured. MDH’s Division of General
Accounting (DGA) provides certain cash receipt support services to other MDH
units, including depositing cash receipts these units initially received and recorded
before forwarding to DGA for processing. According to MDH records in fiscal
year 2015, collections processed by DGA via mail or walk-in from other MDH
units receiving support services totaled approximately $171.3 million.
 The procedure used to verify that all collections received were deposited was
not adequate. Specifically, this verification was not independent since the
employee who performed the verification also had cash handling and
recordation duties in a back-up capacity. In addition, this employee did not
use the initial record of collections received directly from the preparer for
verification purposes but, instead, used other system-generated summary
documentation received from the employee who was responsible for preparing
the deposit.
 MDH did not adequately separate the cash receipts and accounts receivable
functions. Specifically, two employees responsible for handling and scanning
checks into the remote deposit system were also responsible for applying
payments to the related accounts receivable records. According to MDH
records, approximately $90.3 million in collections processed by DGA were
posted to accounts receivable records in fiscal year 2015. The accounts
receivable related to numerous MDH units.
 Access to mail, which contained checks and other sensitive information, was
not adequately restricted within MDH’s mailroom. Rather, after the mail was
separated by unit, it was placed on the mailroom counter for unit employee
pick-up without sufficient safeguards, such as restricted access or security
cameras. Additionally, procedures did not exist to ensure that only authorized
27

--- Page 30 ---
employees picked up the mail. The mailroom counter is accessible to all
MDH employees and authorized guests.
 MDH did not comply with certain requirements pertaining to the destruction
and safeguarding of remotely deposited checks. For example, checks scanned
into the remote deposit system by MDH were not always destroyed in a timely
manner after deposit. Specifically, as of May 9, 2016, DGA had not
destroyed approximately 1,300 checks totaling approximately $33.1 million
that had been deposited through the remote deposit system during the period
from February 16, 2016 to April 8, 2016. Consequently, sensitive banking
information recorded on these checks was unnecessarily retained, increasing
the risk of unauthorized disclosure. In addition, checks destroyed were not
independently reconciled with the initial check logs to ensure that all checks
received and deposited were, in fact, destroyed.
As a result of these conditions, cash receipts could be misappropriated without
detection. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires the establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections,
including an independent verification of collections to deposit using proper
documentation and an adequate separation of cash receipt processing duties. In
addition, the Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit
Services by Maryland State Agencies requires that scanned and transmitted checks
be stored no longer than 30 days before they are destroyed, and that checks
destroyed be independently reconciled with the incoming check receipt log.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that MDH comply with the Accounting Procedures Manual
and the Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services. Specifically, we
recommend that MDH ensure that
a. the deposit verification is performed by an employee who does not handle
or record collections,
b. collections are verified to deposit using the related initial record,
c. proper segregation of duties are established over cash receipts and
accounts receivable functions,
d. access to mail is adequately restricted to authorized personnel only, and
e. remotely deposited checks are destroyed in a timely manner and
independently reconciled to the initial check logs.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Accounts Receivable
Finding 14
MDH did not adequately pursue collection of certain Division of Cost
Accounting and Reimbursements delinquent accounts receivable.
Analysis
Delinquent accounts receivable were not always adequately pursued for collection
by the Division of Cost Accounting and Reimbursements (DCARs) and/or
transferred to the Department of Budget and Management’s Central Collection
Unit (CCU), as required. DCAR conducts financial investigations of all patients
admitted to the State’s mental health, intellectual disability, and chronic disease
facilities to determine their ability to pay for the cost of care and/or to identify
other liable parties (such as Medicaid or Medicare). DCAR establishes the related
accounts receivable, and bills and collects the amounts due. According to
DCAR’s records, as of June 30, 2016, there were 1,149 outstanding accounts
totaling approximately $17.9 million, of which 394 accounts totaling $5.9 million
had been outstanding for more than 120 days. According to MDH’s records, cost
recoveries for fiscal year 2016 totaled approximately $58.2 million.
Our test of 12 accounts totaling approximately $1.6 million that had been
outstanding for more than 120 days disclosed that the collection efforts for 4
accounts totaling approximately $580,000 were not sufficient. Three of these
accounts, with outstanding claims totaling $503,000, were delinquent from 7 to 81
months and, as of June 2016, had not been referred to CCU, as required. For two
of these three accounts, evidence was lacking to support any collection efforts,
such as referral warning letters. The fourth accounts receivable included in our
test was referred to CCU three months late. CCU regulations, as amended for
MDH, provide that delinquent balances be referred 120 days after the first billing.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that MDH ensure delinquent accounts receivable are
adequately pursued for collection and transferred to CCU as required
(repeat).
29

--- Page 32 ---
Payroll
Finding 15
Overtime earned by certain Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment
Program employees for an extended period appeared questionable and was
not investigated.
Analysis
Our review of overtime earned by MDH employees disclosed 12 employees
within the Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment (SETT) Program that
had excessive overtime for an extended period that had not been investigated. For
example, we noted that three security guards earned, on average, between 73 and
80 hours of overtime each two-week pay period during a period of approximately
two years. One of these employees earned more than 100 hours of overtime
during 16 different pay periods, including one in which the employee earned 158
hours of overtime. Although the timesheets for these employees were approved
by a supervisor, the extent and duration of overtime earnings appears
questionable.
In addition, our comparison of SETT’s budgeted overtime costs to actual overtime
paid between fiscal years 2013 and 2016 disclosed that, while these costs were
generally absorbed within the program’s budgets, overtime payments of
approximately $2.7 million exceeded the amounts budget by approximately $2.2
million, or by 506 percent.
SETT is a program responsible for providing evaluation and treatment services to
individuals committed to MDH by the courts. We were advised by SETT
management that it was generally aware of the amount of overtime earned by the
unit but it had not performed any investigation relating to the specific individuals’
questionable overtime amounts. We were further advised that SETT’s overtime
was the result of staffing shortages, including shortages at certain MDH facilities.
In this regard, in some instances, SETT employees were providing services at
other MDH facilities but the SETT budget was absorbing the overtime charges.
Although we were advised that there have been some actions taken to reduce the
overtime, such as requests for additional positions and reassessments of SETT’s
operational structure, no documentation could be provided to support any formal
actions taken.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that MDH
a. investigate the legitimacy of the overtime for the employees cited as
having questionable overtime; and
30

--- Page 33 ---
b. take necessary actions to reduce overtime, consistent with budgetary
levels, and ensure that overtime charges are charged against proper
agency budgets.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 16
MDH did not comply with certain corporate purchasing card requirements
relating to the sharing of cards and certain purchasing activities.
Analysis
MDH did not comply with certain requirements of the Comptroller of Maryland’s
Corporate Purchasing Card Policy and Procedures Manual. According to the
credit card processor’s records, as of November 30, 2015, MDH had issued 311
corporate purchasing cards to employees, and the related expenditures totaled
approximately $25.3 million during fiscal year 2015. Our test of 61 transactions
totaling approximately $71,600, based on certain high-risk characteristics,
disclosed the following conditions:
 MDH did not always establish individual accountability over card purchases
made. Specifically, our procedural review and testing of transactions
disclosed five instances related to 13 transactions totaling $14,200 where
corporate purchasing cards were being shared with other employees within the
same operating unit. These shared cards had expenditures totaling
approximately $501,000 in fiscal year 2015. The Manual prohibits the
sharing of purchasing cards or account numbers.
 We identified six sets of purchases totaling approximately $44,250 that were
intentionally split into 13 smaller transactions to avoid individual transaction
spending limits, which also resulted in competitive procurements not being
performed for certain of these purchases. These purchases were identified as
potential split purchases (purchases made to the same vendor, on the same
day, by the same cardholder) through an analysis we performed on the
corporate purchase card data. State procurement regulations generally provide
that procurements may not be divided to avoid the use of the competitive
procurement processes. Each set of purchases exceeded the $5,000 threshold
in which bids should have been obtained. Furthermore, the Manual prohibits
artificially splitting purchases to circumvent corporate card spending limits.
 One cardholder purchased 650 gift cards totaling $6,500 through 12
transactions in January 2015. The gift cards were to be used as incentives for
31

--- Page 34 ---
encouraging a specific population of individuals to take health surveys. The
Manual prohibits the purchasing of gift cards, and that prohibition is also
stated on the MDH monthly activity log. Nevertheless, the cardholder’s
supervisor approved these purchases because of their purpose. In February
2015, the Comptroller of Maryland identified $3,000 of the $6,500 purchases
as questionable, which lead to the cardholder’s account being suspended for
45 days for violation of the Manual.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that MDH comply with the Corporate Purchasing Card
Policy and Procedures Manual. Specifically, we recommend that MDH
ensure that
a. purchasing cards are not shared by more than one employee so that
individual accountability exists for each purchase,
b. purchasing card purchases are not artificially split into smaller purchases
to circumvent the procurement regulations and individual transaction
limits, and
c. purchasing cards are not used to purchase gift cards.
Equipment
Finding 17
MDH physical inventory procedures did not comply with certain DGS
requirements.
Analysis
MDH physical inventory procedures were not in compliance with certain
provisions of the Department of General Services (DGS) Inventory Control
Manual. MDH’s Office of the Secretary maintains equipment records for certain
MDH units. According to MDH’s records, as of June 22, 2016, the value of
equipment for these units totaled approximately $58 million, of which $39.2
pertained to sensitive equipment, such as desktop and laptop computers.
 For one unit with equipment totaling $3.1 million, the differences between the
results of the physical inventory conducted and the related detail records had
not been adequately investigated and resolved, and the missing equipment was
not reported to DGS, as required. In our preceding audit report, we noted that,
as of July 15, 2013, this unit had not performed the required annual physical
inventory of sensitive equipment in three years. In response, MDH completed
a physical inventory of this unit’s equipment on March 30, 2016. While the
results of this inventory disclosed 442 missing items with a total cost of
32

--- Page 35 ---
$910,000, as of December 2016, MDH had not investigated and resolved their
disposition and had not reported the missing items to DGS, as required. These
missing items represent approximately 30 percent of the inventory recorded in
this unit’s detail records and included many sensitive items, such as 166 two-
way radios with a cost of $615,000.
 Physical inventories of sensitive equipment were not completed annually, as
required. Our test of physical inventories for sensitive equipment in 10 units
disclosed that, as of June 22, 2016, a physical inventory of sensitive
equipment for 6 units was last completed between March 2012 and December
2014. According to MDH detailed records, the sensitive equipment for these
6 units had a collective cost of $17.3 million.
DGS’ Inventory Control Manual requires that, when physical inventories of
equipment are taken, missing items should be investigated, reported, and removed
in accordance with the Manual. Furthermore, missing or stolen items are to be
reported to DGS within 10 working days of the discovery of the loss. Finally, the
Manual requires that that a physical inventory be conducted for sensitive
equipment items on an annual basis.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that MDH comply with the requirements of the Department
of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend
that MDH
a. investigate and resolve missing items identified through physical
inventories,
b. report missing or stolen items to DGS within 10 days of discovery, and
c. conduct annual physical inventories of sensitive equipment (repeat).
33

--- Page 36 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Secretary and
other units of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) for the period
beginning February 27, 2013 and ending January 10, 2016. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MDH’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included federal funds, audits of local health departments
and private providers, grants, procurement and disbursements, corporate
purchasing cards, cash receipts, payroll, financial investigations and related
accounts receivable records for patients in State facilities, information security,
and equipment. Our audit also included a review of certain support services (such
as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) provided by MDH’s Office of the Secretary and related units to the
other units of MDH. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MDH’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MDH.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MDH’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
34

--- Page 37 ---
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. We also extracted data from various key MDH internal
systems, such as the Hospital Management Information System for the purpose of
testing accounts receivable for patients in State facilities. We performed various
tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for
the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
MDH’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MDH’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also include findings regarding significant instances of
35

--- Page 38 ---
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MDH that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MDH’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of
our review of its response.
36

--- Page 40 ---
Agency Responses
to the
Findings and Recommendations
Interagency Agreements
Finding 1
MDH did not provide adequate guidance and oversight regarding 304
interagency agreements valued at $329.5 million that MDH administrations
entered into with units of State universities. As a result, assurance was
lacking that the services provided under these agreements were appropriate
and represented the best value. In addition, certain administrative fees
included in the agreements appeared excessive.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MDH
a. provide oversight of and guidance to its administrations regarding
agreements with State institutions of higher education,
b. evaluate existing interagency agreements with State institutions of higher
education to determine whether each arrangement is appropriate and the
most cost beneficial option for MDH,
c. refrain from executing agreements to augment its staff,
d. establish procedures to perform a documented analysis to determine the
most cost beneficial option for MDH to obtain services prior to entering
into future interagency agreements, and
e. ensure that the administrative fees are reasonable when it is determined
appropriate to use an interagency agreement.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. MDH has provided
oversight and guidance to its administrations regarding interagency
agreements (IA) with public universities. This has included department-wide
training in April 2017 by the Office of Purchasing and Support Services
(OPASS) on a new IA template that OPASS developed in March 2017.
Among other disciplines, the new IA template requires the definition of
deliverables and sets limits on administrative overhead (even for IAs that are
not with institutions of higher education), as described below. Further, the
Secretary and the Chief of Staff have provided information and directives in
both MDH leadership staff meetings and the MDH bi-weekly cadence

--- Page 41 ---
meeting for review and approval of departmental purchases, which meeting
now includes all IAs in addition to high-dollar procurements.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. As of July 2017, MDH
has removed authority of offices and units to use IAs unless by explicit
approval of the Secretary. For any IA presented to the Secretary, the
requesting office must submit a justification that demonstrates compelling
value for the State. For all existing IAs (with institutions of higher learning or
otherwise), MDH launched, in August 2017, a survey and analysis of the IA
scope, costs, duration, and rationale as basis for comprehensive assessment of
impact and value. This survey and analysis is by OPASS, the Office of
Human Resources (OHR), the Office of Finance and Budget, and the Chief of
Staff for delivery to the Secretary in fall 2017.
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation. MDH has implemented
new policies prohibiting the hiring of new staff by new IAs without the
approval of the MDH Secretary. MDH leadership (Deputy Secretaries, Chiefs
of Staff, Directors) has been instructed that IAs for staffing augmentation are
especially discouraged and are especially required to show compelling value
for the State.
d. The Department concurs with the recommendation. As of July 2017, MDH
(OPASS, the OHR, and the relevant Deputy Secretary) analyzes whether any
given IA is preferable to other methods for securing talent and services.
Alternatives include hiring staff on special payroll, obtaining and assigning
PINs, conducting a competitive procurement, and even abandoning the
position altogether.
e. The Department concurs with the recommendation. In April 2017, MDH
implemented both a standard (i.e., target) rate for administrative fees and a
process for assessing fees above that rate to determine whether the rates are
fair and reasonable. Fees that are above the standard rate require approval by
the Secretary. In addition to making these policy changes, MDH began
negotiating fees downward for IAs under negotiation in July and August 2017,
achieving cost savings for the State. These standards and procedures
encompass both indirect costs (IDC) and costs associated with facilities and
administrative overhead (F&A).

--- Page 42 ---
Finding 2
MDH did not establish procedures to help ensure the agencies responsible for
administering interagency agreements verified that the appropriate services
were provided by the universities at the agreed-upon costs.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to help ensure the agencies responsible for
administering interagency agreements verify that the appropriate
services were provided by the universities at the agreed-upon costs;
b. ensure that PHPA – IDB immediately develops work assignments for
each individual provided under the aforementioned agreement;
c. ensure that PHPA – IDB performs evaluations of individuals twice
annually, and ensure that these evaluations are sufficiently detailed; and
d. as part of the invoice approval process, ensure that PHPA – IDB verifies
rates billed to the individual contracts, and obtains and reviews approved
timesheets for each individual invoiced.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. In March 2017, OPASS
developed a template for staffing IAs so that entities receiving funds must
specify deliverables and report amounts of actual work performed as reflected
in timesheets. This documentation is tracked by contract monitors to assure
that any work that is paid for is actually being performed and documented by
deliverables and effort.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. As of August 2017, the
Infectious Disease Prevention and Health Services Bureau has detailed job
descriptions for MIPAR positions similar to those for State positions.
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation. As of July 2017, all
MIPAR employees are now reviewed twice annually using the same process
and tools as reviews for State positions.
d. The Department concurs with the recommendation. The Bureau implemented
a reconciliation process that examines invoices every two weeks to determine
if invoices match the approved timesheets and agreed upon pay rates. Also,
the process includes an approval for payment signature by the Bureau
Director.

--- Page 43 ---
Procurements
Finding 3
MDH did not always comply with State procurement requirements
regarding the award of sole source and emergency contracts.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure sufficient justifications exist for sole source and emergency
procurements, and that those justifications are documented;
b. ensure sole source and emergency contract awards provide the most
favorable prices, and conduct documented price negotiations as
appropriate;
c. ensure that the vendor selection process is handled appropriately; and
d. provide accurate information to the BPW and notify the BPW of the
aforementioned erroneous statement.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. OPASS provides a
template to set forth the narrative justifying sole source or emergency
procurement. The form is included in and maintained with the procurement
file. The Secretary reviews the justification before approving the sole source
or emergency procurement.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. MDH promotes and
requires competitive procurements. In the relatively infrequent case that a
sole source procurement will provide the State best value, MDH and OPASS
will require and oversee the development and documentation of the
justification, including analysis of cost reasonableness as required by recent
BPW Advisory. For emergency procurements, MDH (through OPASS) will
promote multiple solicitations, as practicable in context of the emergency
situation. Regardless of the practicality or appropriateness of pursuing
multiple solicitations for the emergency, MDH will develop and document the
justification. Emergency procurements will be in least-quantity amounts and
time.
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation. Evaluation committees
are counseled on how to conduct a trade-off analysis on low-cost versus high-
capability, so as to select the proposal that is highest-value to the State per the

--- Page 44 ---
considerations and priorities as defined in the RFP. Deliberations and
assessments are overseen and documented by the Procurement Officer.
d. The Department concurs with the recommendation. MDH commits to provide
accurate information to BPW. In the event that MDH finds gaps or errors in
previously provided information, MDH commits to timely mitigation of gaps
or correction of errors.
Finding 4
MDH did not have a formal monitoring procedure to ensure that it
consistently complied with publication requirements for service and
information technology contract awards.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MDH establish a formal monitoring procedure to
ensure that all applicable contract awards are published on eMM not more
than 30 days after the execution and approval of the contract as required.
Department’s Response
The Department concurs with the recommendation. All MDH procurement
personnel have been newly trained about the necessity of publishing contract
awards on eMM within 30 days as required by COMAR 21.05.02.16. As a
management control point, procurement supervisors making sure that contract
officers confirm the 30-day publication as part of the formal close-out procedure
for any given procurement. Confirmation is currently via a prompt or check in
the form that governs and documents the close-out process. By September 30,
2017, OPASS and the MDH Office of IT will determine whether further
automation to enforce the 30-day requirement is practicable for implementation in
the MDH Contract Tracking System.

--- Page 45 ---
Finding 5
MDH did not always comply with State procurement regulations with
respect to bidding requirements and retention of critical procurement
documentation. Additionally, MDH also awarded a contract for an amount
substantially higher than could be supported by the related bid.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MDH
a. establish procedures to record vendor bids upon receipt and to secure
vendor bids prior to opening;
b. ensure that at least two employees witness the bid openings, and maintain
documentation of the employees present;
c. maintain complete procurement documentation, including all bidder
financial and technical proposals;
d. ensure contract award amounts are consistent with bid documents or that
adequate justification is maintained to support contract award amounts
that differ from the supporting bids; and
e. in the future, when significant changes are made to the scope of services
or goods being procured, either amend the published solicitation or
provide a written justification for why an amendment is not needed.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. MDH has implemented
procedures to record the receipt of bids and proposals, by date and time
stamping them before securing them in a locked location.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. MDH has implemented a
requirement that each contract officer make a note in the bidder’s procurement
file as to the names of witnesses to bid openings.
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation All technical and financial
proposals are required to be preserved.
d. The Department concurs with the recommendation. Contract awards are
required to be made in the amounts reflected in the successful bid.
e. The Department concurs with the recommendation. A significant material
change in the Scope of Work is not permitted in the absence of a competitive
procurement.

--- Page 46 ---
Federal Funds
Finding 6
Supervisory oversight of federal fund reimbursement requests was not
always effective.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MDH
a. ensure that federal fund reimbursement requests are thoroughly
reviewed, along with supporting documentation (repeat); and
b. research the aforementioned four reimbursement requests tested and
take appropriate corrective actions, as needed.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. MDH staff created a
weekly draw checklist detailing review steps to ensure weekly draw accuracy.
In addition, each quarter, once the Federal auditors have certified that
expenditures reported are correct and finalized, MDH compares expenditure
data to the federal Payment Management System to ensure that drawn
amounts match reported expenditure amounts. This new process was put into
place in April 2016.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. The four reimbursement
requests were previously corrected and confirmed as corrected on March 1,
2017.
Office of the Inspector General
Finding 7
OIG had not audited certain private providers for more than five years and
did not always conduct private provider audits in a comprehensive manner.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MDH ensure that
a. OIG completes its grant audits on a timely basis (repeat), and
b. future audits are performed in a comprehensive manner.

--- Page 47 ---
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. As noted in the finding,
during the previous OLA audit period the OIG was behind on auditing grant
providers. In February 2015, the month the previous audit report was issued,
the OIG hired a new Chief of the Audit Division who was tasked with
bringing the audits current. As of July 2017, grant audits are up-to-date. To
ensure future audits are conducted in a timely manner, the OIG has developed
several internal monitoring and tracking schedules.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. Because grant audits had
fallen behind, desk audits were performed as a one-time “fix” to eliminate the
backlog. Now that the OIG is current on performing grant audits, desk audits
will only be used for vendors receiving less than $250,000 in grants. All other
audits conducted in FY 2017 and FY 2018 are more comprehensive in scope.
Finding 8
OIG did not have a formal process for oversight and monitoring to ensure
corrective actions were taken by both LHDs and private providers.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MDH ensure that the OIG establishes a formal process
to actively monitor corrective actions taken to address its audit findings.
Department’s Response
The Department concurs with the recommendation. This, too, is a by-product of
the backlogged audits, as well as the change in management of the OIG and
limited audit resources. While there were procedures in place for follow-up audits
on providers’ corrective action plans, the procedures were not in writing. The
OIG has, as of July 2017, formalized the follow-up process in writing. The
procedures will be included in the OIG Audit Manual, which is under
development and scheduled for completion by December 2017.

--- Page 48 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 9
Sensitive personally identifiable information within the NEDSS database and
a HMIS data file was stored without adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MDH properly protect sensitive PII information by
encryption or other substantial mitigating controls.
Department’s Response
The Department concurs with the recommendation. The encryption of sensitive
personally identifiable information within the NEDSS database and HMIS data
file is expected to be fully implemented by December 2017. The migration of the
legacy system to the new system will include encryption of all PHI data either at
rest or in motion.
Finding 10
Network access to critical MDH internal network devices was not properly
restricted, intrusion detection prevention system coverage was not complete
or adequate, and certain wireless connections were not configured securely.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MDH
a. configure its firewalls to properly protect all critical network devices,
(repeat)
b. perform and document periodic reviews of its firewalls’ rule bases to
ensure that only necessary rules remain active and unnecessary rules are
deleted/disabled based on these reviews,
c. configure its network-based IDPS devices to prevent high-risk malicious
traffic from entering the network and to continuously log lower-risk
malicious traffic for review and possible investigation, and
d. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS and/or HIPS coverage should be best applied
to its network and implement this coverage for traffic (including
encrypted traffic) from all untrusted parties, and
e. use the strongest possible encryption method available to protect data in
transit over MDH wireless connections.

--- Page 49 ---
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. The rules specifically
referenced have been adjusted as recommended. Completed in May 2017.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. OIT is revising current
procedures to improve the firewall rule review process. The process will
include a requirement for justification to keep “zero hit” rules enabled. A
semi-annual documented review will be conducted, and retained centrally.
Expected to be completed by December 2017.
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation. OIT will implement
intrusion prevention on the network as recommended. Expected to implement
by January 2018.
d. The Department concurs with the recommendation. OIT will annually review
and assess security risks to critical servers and implement IPS where
appropriate. Expected to be completed by January 2018.
e. The Department concurs with the recommendation. As of May 2017, OIT
implemented the strongest possible encryption method for wireless
connections suitable for our system.
Finding 11
Malware protection for MDH computers was not sufficient to provide OIT
with adequate assurance that these computers were properly protected.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that OIT ensure
a. that all MDH computers are running current versions of the malware
protection software and that malware signatures provided by the
malware protection software vendor are installed on these computers
immediately upon issuance, document these efforts, and retain the
documentation for future reference; and
b. that commonly vulnerable applications on MDH workstations and
servers were frequently updated; and
c. that administrative rights on all MDH workstations and servers are
restricted to only system/network administrators or non–IT personnel
authorized in writing to have such rights, with documentation supporting
these authorizations retained for future reference (repeat).

--- Page 50 ---
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. OIT will perform monthly
reviews of antivirus dashboard reports to ensure deployment of the latest
versions of the antivirus client and anti-malware signatures. The
documentation will be retained for future reference. Expected to be completed
by December 2017.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. OIT is in the process of
upgrading system management servers that are used for this purpose.
Software package updates will be created and deployed as necessary. A new
software management environment will be operational by September 2017.
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation. OIT now requires
supervisors to sign an authorization form prior to allowing administrative
permissions on workstations and servers. The signed authorization form is
retained. Expected to be fully implemented by December 2017.
Finding 12
Information technology contractors had unnecessary network-level access to
the MDH network.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MDH
a. limit IT contractors’ network-level access to only those network devices
and ports required for them to perform their duties; and
b. create and maintain, on a current basis, a centralized schedule of all IT
contractor personnel working onsite within MDH and use this schedule to
ensure that network-level access for these contractors is appropriately
limited as noted in the aforementioned recommendation.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with this recommendation as it relates to remote
contractors. Prior to the current audit OIT has been limiting remote contractor
VPN access as specified by the requestors of VPN tokens, when the recipient
is identified as a contractor. We recognize the concern regarding on-site
contractors; however, OIT does not currently have the capability to efficiently

--- Page 51 ---
limit network level access of on-site contractors. Further, OIT does not
manage LANs at all MDH remote locations.
b. The Department does not concur with the recommendation. A list or log
would be cost prohibitive to implement and unreliable in practices given the
highly-distributed nature of MDH and the statutory independence of many
MDH units in terms of managing their IT teams and assets. MDH believes
that such a list might create a false sense of security. OIT does, however,
agree with the goal of maximizing network security, toward which goal it
provides (amongst other practices) only minimally necessary access for any
person on the network whether they are employees or contractors.
Auditor’s Comment: During previous discussions with MDH personnel
on these issues, MDH stated that their new Chief Information Security
Officer would perform a risk assessment for the MDH network relative to
contractors’ access, which would identify risks, controls and expected
benefits of restricting such access, and present this assessment to MDH
management for its consideration. In addition, MDH personnel agreed
that a list of all contractors was necessary and would be created.
Cash Receipts
Finding 13
Controls were not established to ensure collections were properly accounted
for, deposited, and secured.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that MDH comply with the Accounting Procedures Manual
and the Policy on the Use of Remote Deposit Services. Specifically, we
recommend that MDH ensure that
a. the deposit verification is performed by an employee who does not handle
or record collections,
b. collections are verified to deposit using the related initial record,
c. proper segregation of duties are established over cash receipts and
accounts receivable functions,
d. access to mail is adequately restricted to authorized personnel only, and
e. remotely deposited checks are destroyed in a timely manner and
independently reconciled to the initial check logs.

--- Page 52 ---
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. Fiscal Services will
assess staff duties and assign deposit verification responsibilities accordingly.
b. The Department partially concurs with the recommendation. DGA will
ensure that collections per DGA’s initial record are verified to a receipt and
that total daily collections per our cash receipts records are independently
verified to bank deposit(s).
As for amounts received from MDH units, it is the responsibility of a unit’s
employee to ensure the accuracy of the receipt issued before leaving the
Cashier. Furthermore, it is the responsibility of a unit’s CFO to have
procedures in place to ensure that the DGA’s receipt agrees with their initial
log and the applicable transaction appears on their financial statement. Each
MDH CFO will be advised of the above requirement.
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation. The cashier no longer has
access to DGA’s electronic check log. Except for referencing an invoice
number on a cash receipt, if provided by payee or it is determined that
payment applies to an invoice, the cashier has no involvement in the accounts
receivable process. DGA cashiers do not generate customer invoices, cannot
approve an invoice adjustment/cancellation, cannot add or change customer
names and addresses, and are not involved in the monthly review of
delinquent accounts receivables or receipt/mailing of statements.
d. The Department concurs with the recommendation. As of March 2017, the
Central Services Division has implemented procedures that secure the
Department’s mail from unauthorized individuals and requires a State
identification and a signature on a log sheet to retrieve.
e. The Department partially concurs with the recommendation. Starting
September 2017, cash receipts information (i.e. cash receipts summary,
correspondence accompanying deposit) will be reconciled to the value of
checks being destroyed. At least one person on the destruction team will be
independent of the cash receipts function, and will perform the
aforementioned reconciliation and initial the remote deposit check destruction
log. Also, see Response #13B.

--- Page 53 ---
Accounts Receivable
Finding 14
MDH did not adequately pursue collection of certain Division of Cost
Accounting and Reimbursements delinquent accounts receivable.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that MDH ensure delinquent accounts receivable are
adequately pursued for collection and transferred to CCU as required
(repeat).
Department’s Response
The Department concurs with the recommendation. Effective October 2016 a
new process was implemented in which monthly reports are sent to the field
office supervisors who review and ensure that the accounts are adequately being
followed up on to prevent account delinquency.
Payroll
Finding 15
Overtime earned by certain Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment
Program employees for an extended period appeared questionable and was
not investigated.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that MDH
a. investigate the legitimacy of the overtime for the employees cited as
having questionable overtime; and
b. take necessary actions to reduce overtime, consistent with budgetary
levels, and ensure that overtime charges are charged against proper
agency budgets.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. The Department’s Office
of Human Resources (OHR) will work with local management at SETT to
determine whether the employee’s hours cited in this report were legitimate,
and thereafter determine the appropriate and applicable actions to take. This
review will begin in October 2017.

--- Page 54 ---
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. OHR will begin
developing a report that can be used to identify occurrences of potentially
excessive overtime usage. This will provide the Department improved
oversight of overtime usage. The Department will contact local SETT
management and human resources with regard to recruiting positions
currently vacant, and to determine whether a change in the process for
assigning overtime might result in a more even distribution of hours worked.
These processes will begin in October 2017.
Corporate Purchasing Cards
Finding 16
MDH did not comply with certain corporate purchasing card requirements
relating to the sharing of cards and certain purchasing activities.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that MDH comply with the Corporate Purchasing Card
Policy and Procedures Manual. Specifically, we recommend that MDH
ensure that
a. purchasing cards are not shared by more than one employee so that
individual accountability exists for each purchase,
b. purchasing card purchases are not artificially split into smaller purchases
to circumvent the procurement regulations and individual transaction
limits, and
c. purchasing cards are not used to purchase gift cards.
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. Our Division of General
Accounting (DGA) will revise the CPC Activity Log statement certified by
the cardholder and reviewer, accordingly. The Log will state “...Purchases of
gift cards (and other cash-like items), use of card by anyone other than
cardholder, and split purchases to circumvent procurement regulations and/or
single purchase limit are forbidden.” The revised Log will be required
starting with the CPC cycle ending September 2017.
However, we do not view the handling of the Department’s Travel card as
sharing. MDH has been operating in this same manner, without audit
exception, since the introduction of the Travel CPC which spans numerous

--- Page 55 ---
audits. After consultation and confirmation with GAD, we will continue our
current practice, one Travel card for MDH.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. DGA will revise the CPC
Activity Log statement certified by the cardholder and reviewer, as stated
above.
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation. Currently, both the
monthly CPC Certification form submitted by each MDH agency and the CPC
Activity Log contain language regarding prohibition of the purchase of gift
cards using the CPC. In addition, every six months, MDH will send a mass
email reminding employees of certain CPC requirements/restrictions along
with other items of concern. The first “bulletin” was sent in March 2017.
Equipment
Finding 17
MDH physical inventory procedures did not comply with certain DGS
requirements.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that MDH comply with the requirements of the Department
of General Services’ Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we recommend
that MDH
a. investigate and resolve missing items identified through physical
inventories,
b. report missing or stolen items to DGS within 10 days of discovery, and
c. conduct annual physical inventories of sensitive equipment (repeat).
Department’s Response
a. The Department concurs with the recommendation. Investigations have been
conducted and the Department is continuing to investigate to resolve the
missing items through physical inventories.
b. The Department concurs with the recommendation. The Department has
informed all units, hospitals and local health departments that Form DGS-950-
8 (Report of Missing and Stolen Personal State Property) must be forwarded
to DGS within 10 working days of discovery of loss.

--- Page 56 ---
c. The Department concurs with the recommendation. All units within the
Department are conducting annual physical inventories of sensitive
equipment. In addition, the MDH RFID Inventory System will be expanded to
include the units that have extensive sensitive inventories.

--- Page 57 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Adam M. Auerback
Jeneba R. Jalloh, CPA
Senior Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Melanie A. Bishop-Crouch
Lindsay M. Fertig, CPA
Jessica A. Cacho, CPA, CFE
Victoria L. Hohl-Mariani
Staff Auditors
Robert H. Dean
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Justin P. Vlahacos
Information Systems Staff Auditors