Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Deer's Head Hospital Center
Date: 05/26/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ecc9d7245606743b0
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:23:45.989265
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Deer’s Head Hospital Center
April 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC), which is located in Salisbury,
Maryland, provides chronic care and treatment to patients requiring a hospital-
level rehabilitation program, long-term nursing home care, and inpatient and
outpatient kidney dialysis services. During fiscal year 2013, DHHC had a
licensed capacity of 146 inpatients, a budgeted average daily population of 73
inpatients, and an actual average daily population of 62 inpatients. DHHC’s
dialysis unit also provided 9,959 dialysis treatments to 103 patients. DHHC is
accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2013, DHHC
expenditures totaled approximately $22 million.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated May 26, 2011. We determined that DHHC
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of DHHC’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less
significant finding was communicated to DHHC that did not warrant mention in
this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to DHHC. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Deer’s Head Hospital Center (DHHC) of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period beginning December 20,
2010 and ending January 5, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHHC’s financial
transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, accounts receivable, procurements
and disbursements, materials and supplies, equipment, and payroll.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DHHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DHHC provides certain support services (billing and collection for kidney dialysis
services) to the DHMH – Western Maryland Center. These support services are
included within the scope of the audit of DHHC.
4

--- Page 7 ---
DHHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditor