Title: Maryland Higher Education Commission
Date: 10/29/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d724560674446
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:52:46.702240
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Higher Education Commission
March 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 20, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Higher Education
Commission (MHEC) for the period beginning April 1, 2020 and ending
November 30, 2023. MHEC provides statewide planning, leadership,
coordination and advocacy for Maryland’s postsecondary educational institutions.
MHEC also administers several aid programs to these institutions and provides
financial assistance to students.
Our audit disclosed that MHEC monitoring of recipient compliance with career-
based financial aid service obligations was not timely or comprehensive. For
example, follow-up notices to verify that required service obligations were being
met were often sent weeks or months late, delaying further follow-up action. In
addition, MHEC did not have adequate procedures and controls for accounting
and collecting amounts due from recipients that did not meet their service
obligations. For example, MHEC did not ensure that amounts due were posted to
its accounts receivable records and that dunning notices and referrals to the
State’s Central Collection Unit (CCU) were performed timely. According to
MHEC’s records, as of January 18, 2024, there were 1,835 active recipients of
career-based financial aid with original awards totaling $30.9 million.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under

--- Page 4 ---
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
In addition, we noted that MHEC did not independently review Student Loan
Debt Relief Tax Credits and did not ensure the propriety of payments made to
community colleges for retirement and pension contributions, which totaled $61.7
million in fiscal year 2023.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings
contained in our preceding MHEC audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings, we determined that MHEC satisfactorily addressed one of those four
findings. The remaining three findings are repeated in this report.
MHEC’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of MHEC’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We have also edited MHEC’s
response to remove certain vendor names and applicant information, as allowed
by our policy.
In accordance with State law, we reviewed the response to our findings and
related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
MHEC.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 8
Career-Based Financial Aid
* Finding 1 – The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) did not 9
always send required service questionnaires and employer verifications
timely, and did not place the recipients in repayment mode when
responses were not received.
* Finding 2 – MHEC did not independently review adjustments to accounts 10
receivable records, did not ensure that amounts due for unsatisfied
service obligations were posted to the accounts receivable records, and
did not send dunning notices or refer delinquent accounts to the State’s
Central Collection Unit timely.
Financial Aid Records
Finding 3 – MHEC did not perform annual reconciliations of financial aid 12
awards recorded in the Maryland College Aid Processing System
(MDCAPS) to the State’s accounting records and investigate and
resolve differences on a timely basis.
Information System Controls
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 13
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 13
Student Loan Debt Relief Tax Credits
Finding 6 – MHEC did not independently review Student Loan Debt 13
Relief Tax Credits. Our test of 20 credits disclosed 4 that were not
adequately supported and may not have been eligible for the credit.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Aid to Community Colleges
* Finding 7 – MHEC did not implement effective procedures for ensuring 14
that all payments made to community colleges for retirement and
pension contributions were proper.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 17
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) provides statewide
planning, leadership, coordination, and advocacy for Maryland’s postsecondary
educational institutions. MHEC also administers several aid programs to these
institutions and provides financial assistance to students. Student financial aid
programs administered by MHEC are primarily State funded. According to the
State’s records, during fiscal year 2023, MHEC provided approximately $564.5
million in financial assistance to public and non-public institutions of higher
education (including community colleges) and more than 49,000 financial aid
awards totaling approximately $194.5 million to students pursuing postsecondary
education (see Figure 1 below). In addition, MHEC provided approximately
$15.5 million in other education grants to various State, local, and private
institutions during fiscal year 2023.
Figure 1
Fiscal Year 2023 Financial Assistance to Institutions and Students
Financial Assistance to Financial Aid to Students
Institutions (In Millions)
(In Millions)
Formula
Need-
grants
$473.7 Fringe benefits based Legislative $14.2
$129.9
(retirement and
pension) $61.7
Career based
(including service
obligation) $32.2
Other $28.1
Nursing Other $18.2
support
program $1.0
Source: MHEC Records
According to the State’s records, MHEC's expenditures totaled approximately
$805.4 million during fiscal year 2023, primarily funded with State general funds
(see Figure 2 on following page). During the period April 1, 2020 through June
30, 2023, MHEC had vacancy rates that ranged from 8.3 percent to 20 percent.
5

--- Page 8 ---
As of June 30, 2023, 20 percent of the total 75 positions were vacant. These
vacancies may have contributed, at least in part, to the findings in this report.
Figure 2
MHEC Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2023
Positions Percent
Filled 58 77.3%
Frozen1 2 2.7%
Vacant 15 20.0%
Total 75
Fiscal Year 2023 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages and Fringe Benefits $ 6,684,638 0.8%
Technical and Special Fees 307,107 0.1%
Operating Expenses 798,366,979 99.1%
Total $805,358,724
Fiscal Year 2023 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $758,509,214 94.2%
Special Fund 45,214,495 5.6%
Federal Fund 402,616 0.0%
Reimbursable Fund 1,232,399 0.2%
Total $805,358,724
Source: State financial and personnel records
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated June 24, 2021. As disclosed in Figure 3 on the
following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that
1 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Agencies
were not authorized to fill frozen positions according to budgetary instructions from the
Department of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not
been filled since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions are now available to be filled.
6

--- Page 9 ---
MHEC satisfactorily addressed one of the four findings. The remaining three
findings are repeated in this report.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Finding Description Status
MHEC did not monitor service obligation compliance in
a timely and comprehensive manner, and consequently Repeated
Finding 1
did not ensure that repayments were pursued when (Current Finding 1)
required.
Adjustments made to recipient accounts were not subject
to independent review and approval, and MHEC did not
Repeated
Finding 2 ensure that repayments from recipients who did not meet
(Current Finding 2)
their service obligation were recorded in its accounts
receivable system.
Sufficient controls were not established over the issuance
Finding 3 Status Redacted2
and monitoring of user access to MDCAPS.
MHEC did not adequately restrict user access to the
Service Obligation Loan Repayment module resulting in
Status Redacted2
Finding 4 employees with unnecessary access to process critical
functions and others with the ability to process
adjustments without independent review and approval.
MHEC had not implemented effective procedures for
Repeated
Finding 5 ensuring that all payments made to community colleges
(Current Finding 7)
for retirement and pension contributions were proper.
MHEC did not ensure that community colleges returned
Finding 6 unspent English for Speakers of Other Languages grant Not repeated
funds as required.
MHEC maintained sensitive personally identifiable
information (PII) in a manner that did not provide
Finding 7 adequate safeguards and lacked assurance that adequate Status Redacted2
security protections existed over PII on the vendor-hosted
development servers.
MHEC did not use a web application firewall to provide
Finding 8 security over MDCAPS, which is a critical public web- Status Redacted2
enabled system.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Career-Based Financial Aid
Background
The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) awards certain career-
based financial aid that requires fulfillment of a service obligation. For example,
recipients of graduate nursing faculty scholarships are required to work as a full
or part-time nurse faculty member, hospital educator, or in an approved
educational role for one year for each academic year the award was received (or 2
years of part-time service for each year received). Recipients who do not fulfill
their service obligations must repay their awards unless the obligation is forgiven
(for example, due to an unforeseen disability). According to MHEC’s records, as
of January 18, 2024, there were 1,835 active recipients of career-based financial
aid with original awards totaling $30.9 million in one of four obligation statuses
(see Figure 4):
• Deferral – Recipients are placed in this status while still enrolled as a student
during which the service obligation is deferred.
• Pending – Recipients are placed in this status when no longer enrolled as a
student and must start fulfilling their service obligation.
• Service – Recipients are placed in this status when their reported service
employment is confirmed by MHEC.
• Repayment – Recipients are placed in this status when MHEC is unable to
confirm that a recipient in pending status is
fulfilling their service obligation.
Figure 4
Status of Service Obligation
MHEC’s policy is to request each recipient in
pending status to provide information on a
Awards
(as of January 18, 2024)
questionnaire as to whether they were fulfilling
Award
their service obligation. Eligible service
Status Recipients Amount
employment reported by the recipient is
(millions)
confirmed with the employer using an
Deferral 857 $12.6
employment verification notice. These requests
Pending 294 6.6
and confirmations are repeated annually until the
Service 397 7.7
service obligation is fulfilled. On a monthly Repayment 287 4.0
basis, MHEC generates various automated Total 1,835 $30.9
reports to help monitor the status of recipients Source: MHEC Records
and to identify accounts requiring follow-up
action, such as generating the aforementioned requests for recipient employment
information or employer verifications, or moving an account from one status to
another.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 1
MHEC did not always send required service questionnaires and employer
verifications timely, and did not place the recipients in repayment mode
when responses were not received.
Analysis
MHEC did not always send required service questionnaires and employer
verifications timely, or follow up timely when recipients or employers did not
respond to these notices. MHEC’s policy requires initial employment information
requests (including service questionnaires and employer verifications) to be sent
either six months or one year after student graduation, depending on the type of
grant awarded. Two follow-up requests are sent at 21-day intervals when
recipients or employers do not respond to initial requests. Failure to respond to
these requests results in the recipient being transferred to repayment status 21
days after the third follow-up notice. The collection efforts for accounts in
repayment status are generally not initiated by MHEC’s accounting department
until all required requests have been sent and no response has been received.
Our review disclosed that MHEC did not send required service questionnaires and
employer verifications timely. We tested 10 recipients who received financial aid
awards totaling $241,183 during our audit period and noted that 7 had not
responded to one or more employment information requests.3 Our review
disclosed that for 6 of these recipients with outstanding obligations totaling
$167,757, the initial or follow-up requests were sent to the recipients between 31
and 391 days late. For example, the initial service questionnaire for one recipient
should have been sent May 15, 2021 but was not sent until November 14, 2022
(391 days late) and as of February 23, 2024, no subsequent notices were sent
when the recipient did not reply.
Our review further disclosed that MHEC did not place recipients in repayment
mode timely. Specifically, 6 of the aforementioned 7 recipients for which the
recipient and employer did not respond had still not been placed in repayment
mode as of February 23, 2024 (between 78 and 381 days after the third notice had
been sent).
Similar conditions were commented upon in our four preceding audit reports
dating back to 2010. In its response to our preceding audit report, MHEC agreed
to conduct a review of each recipient’s account and stated that by December 31,
3 We selected test items that had material award amounts from the two most significant aid
programs with services obligations – the Graduate Nursing Faculty program and the Workforce
Shortage Student Assistance Grant. Each of the recipient accounts tested were placed into their
current status (pending and active) during our audit period.
9

--- Page 12 ---
2021, it would run monthly reports to ensure adequate follow-up was performed
in a timely manner. In addition, MHEC stated all service questionnaires and
employer verifications will be generated periodically. However, MHEC
management advised us that these procedures were not implemented because of
staffing issues.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHEC ensure that all required service questionnaires
and employer verifications are sent timely, and that recipients are placed in
repayment mode when responses to these notices are not received, including
those noted above (repeat).
Finding 2
MHEC did not independently review adjustments to accounts receivable
records, did not ensure that amounts due for unsatisfied service obligations
were posted to the accounts receivable records, and did not send dunning
notices or refer delinquent accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit
(CCU) timely.
Analysis
MHEC did not independently review adjustments to accounts receivable records,
did not ensure that amounts due for unsatisfied service obligations were posted to
the accounts receivable records, and did not send dunning notices or refer
delinquent accounts to CCU timely.
No Independent Review of Adjustments to Accounts Receivable Records
MHEC did not generate and review reports of accounts receivable adjustments to
verify the propriety of the adjustments. Adjustments include closing accounts due
to the recipient’s fulfillment of their service obligation. According to MHEC’s
records, 1,799 accounts receivable adjustments totaling approximately $6.9
million were processed during our audit period. The Comptroller of Maryland’s
Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual requires supervisory review and
approval of adjustments to accounts receivable records. Our test of 10
adjustments totaling $195,760 processed between May 2020 and August 2023
disclosed that the adjustments were proper.4
MHEC Did Not Ensure Amounts Due for Service Obligations Were Recorded
MHEC did not ensure that amounts due from recipients who did not meet their
service obligation were posted to its accounts receivable records. Specifically,
4 We selected ten material adjustments, most of which occurred in fiscal year 2023. Consequently,
six of the ten adjustments tested were from fiscal year 2023.
10

--- Page 13 ---
MHEC did not reconcile the total amount due from students on its financial aid
system to the corresponding amount in its separate accounts receivable system,
which is used for collection activity. MHEC’s policies require an annual
reconciliation between its financial aid system and its accounts receivable records.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that all amounts due had been
recorded in MHEC’s accounts receivable system and pursued for collection. Our
arbitrary test of 10 recipients that were placed in repayment status between March
2020 and November 2023 with amounts due totaling approximately $256,000,
disclosed that they were properly posted to the accounts receivable system.
Dunning Notices and Referrals to CCU Were Not Timely
MHEC did not send dunning notices for delinquent accounts to recipients or
forward delinquent accounts to CCU within the required timeframes. Our
arbitrary test of 10 delinquent accounts totaling $347,347 that were opened
between September 2020 through July 2023, disclosed that for 8 accounts totaling
$253,769, dunning notices were sent 37 to 766 days late. Furthermore, for 7 of
the aforementioned 8 accounts, MHEC sent the accounts to CCU 70 to 148 days
after the final dunning notice.
As of November 2023, there were 344 recipient accounts with unpaid balances
totaling approximately $3.8 million. We could not readily determine the number
of these recipients who should have been referred to CCU due to the lack of
available records. State regulations require agencies to send three written
payment demands at 30-day intervals. These regulations also require accounts
deemed uncollectible by an agency to be referred to CCU for additional collection
efforts 15 days after the final payment demand.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of independent review of adjustments to
accounts receivables records and not reconciling the financial aid and accounts
receivable systems were noted in our preceding audit report. In response to our
preceding audit report, MHEC agreed it would perform an independent
documented review of adjustments and would periodically reconcile the financial
aid system to the accounts receivable system by September 30, 2021. However,
MHEC management advised us that the agreed upon tasks were not completed
because of high employee turnover.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MHEC
a. generate output reports of adjustments posted to recipient accounts
receivable records and independently verify and document the propriety
of adjustments processed (repeat);
11

--- Page 14 ---
b. ensure that all repayments due from recipients are posted to its accounts
receivable system by periodically reconciling its financial aid and
accounts receivable systems as required by its policies (repeat); and
c. send timely dunning notices to recipients and forward delinquent
accounts to CCU as required, including those noted above.
Financial Aid Records
Finding 3
MHEC did not perform annual reconciliations of financial aid awards
recorded in the Maryland College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS) to the
State’s accounting records and investigate and resolve differences on a timely
basis.
Analysis
As of February 8, 2024, MHEC had not completed reconciliations of financial aid
awards recorded in MDCAPS to awards recorded in the State’s accounting
records since fiscal year 2021. Although a reconciliation had been started for
fiscal year 2022, differences totaling approximately $8 million between MDCAPS
($124.9 million) and the State’s accounting records ($116.9 million) had not been
investigated and resolved. A reconciliation for fiscal year 2023 had not been
started.
Timely and complete reconciliations are critical to help ensure the accuracy and
propriety of financial aid transactions and the related records. The Comptroller of
Maryland’s Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual requires a monthly
reconciliation of separate agency-based systems to the State’s accounting records.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MHEC complete annual reconciliations of financial aid
awards recorded in MDCAPS to the corresponding totals in the State’s
accounting records, and investigate and resolve any differences, including
those noted above.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Information System Controls
We determined that the Information System Controls section, including Findings
4 and 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and
Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in
accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with MHECs responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Student Loan Debt Relief Tax Credits
Finding 6
MHEC did not independently review Student Loan Debt Relief Tax Credits
(SLDRTC). Our test of 20 credits disclosed 4 that were not adequately
supported and may not have been eligible for the credit.
Analysis
MHEC did not independently review SLDRTC to ensure the applicants qualified
for the credit. According to MHEC’s records, MHEC issued $18 million in
SLDRTC to 8,255 individuals in fiscal year 2023. As a result, MHEC did not
identify and resolve certain discrepancies in the applications. Specifically, our
test of 20 tax credits issued in tax years 2021 through 2023 totaling $52,032
disclosed 4 credits totaling $3,965 did not have adequate supporting
documentation and may not have been eligible for the credit.5 For example, the
supporting tax return for one application included a social security number that
did not agree to applicant’s social security number and another applicant used the
same social security number for three applications. Both of these conditions may
have been detected by an independent review process.
5 We selected our test items based on materiality, timing, and potential high-risk items (duplicates,
Maryland employees, and potential out-of-state applicants) for tax years 2021 through 2023.
13

--- Page 16 ---
MHEC advised that although errors may occur, they rely on the Comptroller to
ensure that all credits issued are proper. However, we continue to believe that
MHEC should ensure reviews are completed properly and conclusions are
supported.
The SLDRTC program was established under the Maryland College Affordability
Act of 2016 to aid Maryland taxpayers in paying off student loan debt and is
administered by MHEC. Current law provides $18 million each year for
SLDRTC, $9 million of which must be prioritized for State employees. The
maximum credit amount is $5,000.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MHEC
a. independently review and approve the processing and issuance of
SLDRTC, and
b. investigate and take appropriate corrective action regarding the four
potentially invalid credits noted above.
Aid to Community Colleges
Finding 7
MHEC did not implement effective procedures for ensuring that all
payments made to community colleges for retirement and pension
contributions were proper.
Analysis
MHEC did not implement effective procedures for ensuring that all payments
made to community colleges for retirement and pension contributions were
proper. The State, through MHEC, directly funds the employers’ portions of the
retirement and pension costs for community college employees who are members
of the Maryland State Teachers Retirement and Pension System (MSTRPS). The
community colleges are required to reimburse MHEC for any retirement and
pension costs paid for employees for whom the college later received federal
financial assistance. The State, through MHEC, also funds an optional private
retirement plan for certain community college employees to help attract and retain
qualified professors. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2023,
MHEC paid the community colleges approximately $45 million for employees in
MSTRPS (of which, $1.5 million was reimbursed by the colleges) and
approximately $16.7 million for the optional retirement costs.
14

--- Page 17 ---
MHEC Did Not Reconcile Its Records to Audited Data
MHEC did not reconcile its records to amounts reported by the community
colleges’ independent auditors. MHEC requires the independent auditors to
provide assurances that amounts reimbursed by the colleges for federally funded
retirement and pension costs were complete and accurate; and that amounts billed
by the colleges for employees in the optional retirement plan were based on actual
costs incurred by the colleges and were for eligible employees. MHEC’s
procedure is to perform a reconciliation between the auditor reported information
and its own records to identify and investigate any differences.
Our review disclosed that as of November 2023 MHEC had not reconciled the
fiscal year 2022 and 2023 data. MHEC subsequently attempted to prepare the
reconciliations, but substantial variances were not investigated and resolved. For
example, according to the audited information, the colleges received $14.6
million from MHEC during fiscal year 2023 for employees in the optional
retirement plan when MHEC records indicated it disbursed $16.7 million (a
difference of $2.1 million). Although there may be legitimate reasons for
differences between these records, such as timing differences, MHEC did not
investigate and resolve the differences.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit reports dating
back to 2001. In response to our most recent audit report, MHEC indicated that
annual reconciliations would be performed, and differences would be resolved to
determine any amounts due to or owed by the colleges. However, during our
current audit MHEC management advised us that these reconciliations did not
occur because of employee turnover.
MHEC Did Not Always Verify Employees Qualified for Reimbursement
MHEC did not always obtain documentation from the Maryland State Retirement
Agency (MSRA) that community college employees qualified for a retirement
matching contribution prior to releasing payments. Per MHEC’s Optional
Retirement Program Payment Processing Manual, to qualify for contribution
reimbursement, MHEC must receive certification documentation that the
employee has met all the requirements.
Our test of 10 employees for whom MHEC paid monthly retirement contributions
totaling $13,728 in fiscal years 2023 and 2024, disclosed that MHEC did not have
certification documentation for 4 of the employees with monthly payments
totaling $4,136.6 We attempted to obtain the missing certification documentation
from MSRA but they could not provide it for 2 of the employees with monthly
6 We selected two new addition employees from the five schools with the highest payment
amounts from MHEC.
15

--- Page 18 ---
payments totaling $2,538. As a result, there is a lack of assurance that these
reimbursements were proper.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MHEC ensure that the amounts paid for the State’s
share of community college employees’ retirement and pension costs are
proper. Specifically, we recommend that MHEC
a. thoroughly review audited retirement and pension contribution data
received from community colleges and resolve, on a timely basis,
differences between the audited data and corresponding amounts in its
own records, including the aforementioned differences (repeat);
b. take appropriate actions to pay or collect differences in amounts owed to
or due from the colleges (repeat);
c. document the actions taken (repeat); and
d. ensure that employee certification documentation is obtained prior to
paying matching retirement contributions for the optional retirement
plan, and investigate and take appropriate actions regarding employees
with missing documentation, including those noted above.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Higher Education
Commission (MHEC) for the period beginning April 1, 2020 and ending
November 30, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MHEC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included financial aid, grants to nonpublic and community
colleges, cash receipts, accounts receivable, budgetary transactions, and
information system controls. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 1, 2020 to November 30, 2023, but may include transactions
before or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit
objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of MHEC’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
17

--- Page 20 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from the Maryland College Aid Processing System
(MDCAPS) for examining user access and the monitoring of certain conditions of
financial aid. We performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that
the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
MHEC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to MHEC, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MHEC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
18

--- Page 21 ---
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MHEC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to MHEC and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
MHEC’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to
any cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MHEC regarding the results of our review of
its response.
19

--- Page 22 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
Career-Based Financial Aid
Finding 1
MHEC did not always send required service questionnaires and employer
verifications timely, and did not place the recipients in repayment mode
when responses were not received.
We recommend that MHEC ensure that all required service questionnaires
and employer verifications are sent timely, and that recipients are placed in
repayment mode when responses to these notices are not received, including
those noted above (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as In response to the audit findings, MHEC's Office of Finance and
deemed necessary. Administration acknowledges the prior backlog and related
administrative challenges. Specifically, the agency faced a substantial
backlog of over 1,000 cases dating back as far as fiscal year 2020. This
backlog contributed significantly to delays and compliance issues
identified during the audit.
To address these issues proactively, MHEC implemented a
comprehensive new process designed to significantly improve case
management efficiency. As a result, we successfully cleared the backlog
of over 1,000 outstanding cases spanning fiscal years 2020 to 2023. All
previously unresolved cases have now been fully addressed.
It is important to note that moving forward, MHEC is fully committed to
ensuring ongoing compliance and maintaining timely resolution of cases.
We are confident that our enhanced procedures will prevent recurrence
of such backlogs, and we will maintain timely and accurate
recordkeeping to remain fully compliant with audit recommendations
and standards moving forward.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: November
2024
Please provide details of The recommendation has already been implemented within MHEC’s
corrective action or Office of Student Financial Assistance’s current process. MHEC has
explain disagreement. reorganized the Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) and
increased staff within the Service Obligation Unit to ensure that all
required service information and employer confirmation requests are
sent, and that follow-up action is taken in a timely manner.
Page 1 of 12

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
The recommendation identified in the audit has already been fully
implemented within the Maryland Higher Education Commission's
(MHEC) Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA). MHEC has
completed an internal reorganization of OSFA, including strategically
increasing staffing within the Service Obligation Unit. This restructuring
ensures timely and consistent issuance of all required service
information and employer confirmation requests.
Furthermore, to enhance internal controls and oversight, MHEC has
instituted an independent review process for critical service-obligation
determinations. Under this new protocol, Nursing Support Program II
(NSP II) staff members—who do not possess system permissions to
directly modify or add records within the MDCAPS system—conduct
independent reviews. These reviews are required whenever there is a
determination of either service obligation fulfillment through eligible
employment or referral of individuals to repayment status due to non-
responsiveness or ineligible service employment.
The implementation of these measures ensures transparency, accuracy,
and compliance with audit recommendations, reinforcing MHEC’s
commitment to robust internal controls and effective administration of
financial assistance programs moving forward.
Page 2 of 12

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
MHEC did not independently review adjustments to accounts receivable
records, did not ensure that amounts due for unsatisfied service obligations
were posted to the accounts receivable records, and did not send dunning
notices or refer delinquent accounts to the State’s Central Collection Unit
(CCU) timely.
We recommend that MHEC
a. generate output reports of adjustments posted to recipient accounts
receivable records and independently verify and document the propriety
of adjustments processed (repeat);
b. ensure that all repayments due from recipients are posted to its accounts
receivable system by periodically reconciling its financial aid and
accounts receivable systems as required by its policies (repeat); and
c. send timely dunning notices to recipients and forward delinquent
accounts to CCU as required, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) acknowledges
additional comments as the findings of the audit and has proactively addressed the identified
deemed necessary. issues within its Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA).
Specifically, MHEC has implemented a rigorous internal control process
to ensure proper oversight of adjustments made to repayment accounts.
Accounting supervisors independently review and provide documented
written approval for all "Remove from Repayment" adjustments before
any changes are applied to client accounts. Throughout the audit period,
despite staffing shortages that contributed to delays, the accounting team
consistently prioritized timely issuance of delinquent account notices
and referrals to the Central Collection Unit (CCU).
Moving forward, MHEC is committed to maintaining adequate staffing
levels and enforcing strict adherence to established internal controls. We
will continue to monitor processes closely to ensure timely referrals to
the CCU and full compliance with state requirements, thereby
addressing the audit recommendations thoroughly and proactively.
Page 3 of 12

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2024
Please provide details of Accounting supervisors verify adjustments through the review of
corrective action or transaction records from the financial aid and accounts receivable
explain disagreement. systems. Once adjustments are completed, accounts receivable
processors provide documentation of the transaction records, along with
system client forms confirming that the adjustments have been properly
processed.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2024
Please provide details of Accounting has made substantial efforts during the audit period to
corrective action or reconcile repayment recipients’ accounts. Since the audit, reconciliation
explain disagreement. of repayment recipients’ accounts between the financial aid system and
accounts receivable records is ongoing. To further strengthen this
process, accounting has introduced an additional measure, which
includes a monthly schedule for repayment referrals sent to accounting
from the Scholarship Program Managers. Furthermore, accounting
periodically reviews repayment account statuses with the Scholarship
Program Managers to ensure the accuracy of account records.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 9/30/2024
Please provide details of Regarding the issuance of CCU dunning notices and the timely referral
corrective action or of delinquent accounts, MHEC acknowledges that staffing shortages
explain disagreement. during the audit period resulted in some processing delays. Nevertheless,
the accounting team diligently worked to issue delinquent notices and
refer accounts to the Central Collection Unit (CCU) at the earliest
allowable intervals.
Moving forward, MHEC has implemented additional measures to ensure
full compliance. Specifically, the accounting department will prioritize
timely issuance of delinquent notices, and accounts will be consistently
referred to CCU at the earliest permitted time frame—ensuring full
adherence to state regulations. We remain committed to maintaining this
compliance through ongoing monitoring, enhanced staffing, and
strengthened internal controls.
Page 4 of 12

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
Financial Aid Records
Finding 3
MHEC did not perform annual reconciliations of financial aid awards
recorded in the Maryland College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS) to the
State’s accounting records and investigate and resolve differences on a timely
basis.
We recommend that MHEC complete annual reconciliations of financial aid
awards recorded in MDCAPS to the corresponding totals in the State’s
accounting records, and investigate and resolve any differences, including
those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide In response to the audit findings, the Maryland Higher Education
additional comments as Commission (MHEC) acknowledges the discrepancies identified in the
deemed necessary. reconciliation processes within the Office of Student Financial
Assistance (OSFA).
At the close of fiscal year 2022, OSFA underwent a significant
leadership transition. Subsequently, six months into this transition,
MHEC’s Director of Finance and Budget resigned, and a replacement
was not appointed until the beginning of fiscal year 2023. These
leadership gaps impacted the timely completion of critical financial
management processes.
Following the staffing transitions, MHEC thoroughly reviewed its
internal reconciliation procedures and identified the primary cause of
discrepancies between expenditures reported in MDCAPS and the
State’s accounting records. Specifically, the issue arose from a
previously established “wash” process in MDCAPS, where institutional
refunds owed from prior fiscal years were recouped by reducing
payments in subsequent fiscal years. This practice inadvertently caused
inconsistencies in reported disbursement totals across various financial
aid programs.
MHEC recognizes that the correct reconciliation methodology involves
directly comparing the total invoiced amounts for each program to the
State’s official accounting records, rather than relying on the totals after
adjustments made by the “wash” process. To rectify this issue, MHEC
Page 5 of 12

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
has eliminated the problematic process and implemented an updated
reconciliation procedure aligned with state guidelines. This new method
ensures accurate tracking of program expenditures and proper alignment
with the State's accounting systems.
MHEC remains committed to full compliance, improved transparency,
and enhanced accuracy in financial reporting, and we anticipate that
these corrective measures will resolve the audit findings moving
forward.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 2025
Please provide details of For fiscal 2025, MHEC has resolved the issue by altering the “wash”
corrective action or process to only process refunds owed by institutions within the same
explain disagreement. fiscal year as the payment. In this manner, all payments and reductions
will count toward the same fiscal year and provide a true count of all
expenditures to match with State accounting records.
MHEC identified that for fiscal years prior to 2025, it is not possible for
MHEC to match financial aid awards recorded in MDCAPS to the
corresponding totals in the State’s accounting records. This is because
of the prior wash process, which has been resolved for fiscal 2025 and
moving forward, but is unable to resolve for prior years. For prior years,
the only thing that we can do is match payments/invoices from
MDCAPS with the State's accounting records which is what MHEC has
already done.
Page 6 of 12

--- Page 29 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
Information System Controls
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that Findings 4 and 5
related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore is
subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the findings,
including the analyses, related recommendations, along with MHEC’s responses,
have been redacted from this report copy, MHEC’s responses indicated agreement
with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 7 of 12

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
Student Loan Debt Relief Tax Credits
Finding 6
MHEC did not independently review Student Loan Debt Relief Tax Credits
(SLDRTC). Our test of 20 credits disclosed 4 that were not adequately
supported and may not have been eligible for the credit.
We recommend that MHEC
a. independently review and approve the processing and issuance of
SLDRTC, and
b. investigate and take appropriate corrective action regarding the four
potentially invalid credits noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 6a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of Yes, MHEC will independently review and approve the processing
corrective action or and issuance of Student Loan Debt Relief Tax Credit (SLDRTC)
explain disagreement. applications and tax credit awards. As part of this process, MHEC
conducts a thorough review of each application to ensure
accuracy, eligibility, and compliance with program requirements.
The review process includes the following steps:
1. Identity Verification:
• The applicant’s name on the SLDRTC application is cross-
referenced with the name on lender documents, college
transcripts, and Maryland income tax returns.
• Any discrepancies identified during this review result in the
application being returned to the applicant for correction.
2. Database Review and Validation:
• From July 1st through the end of October, the entire
database of applications is downloaded weekly into Excel
for systematic review.
• Applications are evaluated based on key criteria:
Page 8 of 12

--- Page 31 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
• Duplicate Social Security Numbers: Applications with
matching Social Security Numbers are rejected.
• Payment Delinquencies: Applications with proof of
payment delinquencies are rejected.
• Prior Year Award Claims: Applications incorrectly claiming
that the applicant did not receive a prior year award are
returned for correction.
3. Document and Data Verification:
• Attachments submitted with the application are reviewed
for consistency with the information provided in the
application form.
• The following comparisons are conducted to identify
discrepancies:
• Lender Documents: The dollar amounts entered for the
current balance and original loan amount are compared
against supporting documents.
• Maryland Income Tax Return: The adjusted gross income
(AGI) reported on the tax return is cross-checked against
the AGI field on the application.
• College Transcripts: Reviewed to confirm the degree
awarded, the date of conferral, and, where applicable, the
name of the qualifying Pell-eligible institution.
MHEC maintains strict oversight throughout the review and
approval process to ensure that only eligible applicants receive tax
credit awards. The comprehensive verification procedures are
designed to uphold the integrity of the SLDRTC program, prevent
errors or fraudulent claims, and ensure compliance with program
guidelines.
Recommendation 6b Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of MHEC has taken action with respect to the four credits as identified as
corrective action or invalid.
explain disagreement.
Exception Item # 1 response:
Award Year: 2021
The Comptroller gets a master list each year from MHEC of allowed tax
credit award recipients. This ensures they issue only one award per SSN
per tax year. Each year, MHEC reviews applications for duplicate SSNs
and rejects all duplicates. Starting with 2024 awards, MHEC will review
applications for duplicate names. The resolution to the duplication came
in August 2024 when MHEC discovered the duplication for this
Page 9 of 12

--- Page 32 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
applicant and contacted the Comptroller about it. It was confirmed that
this applicant was given only one tax credit.
Exception Item # 2 response:
Award Year: 2022
Starting in 2024, it became a requirement for the name on the OneStop
account be the applicant's name to prevent duplications and other errors
when parents or spouses fill out applications on behalf of their relatives.
The resolution for this tax credit comes from this applicant not being
able to claim it if the applicant did not file a 2022 Maryland income tax
return. The Comptroller confirmed that the applicant did claim the 2022
tax credit on the applicant’s Maryland income tax return.
Exception Item # 3 response:
Award Year: 2022
The Comptroller gets a master list each year from MHEC of allowed tax
credit award recipients. This ensures they issue only one award per SSN
per tax year. The resolution to the two awards for this applicant came
from the Comptroller’s process of comparing tax returns to MHEC’s
master list. The Comptroller confirmed that this applicant received only
one tax credit in tax year 2022.
Exception Item # 4 response:
Award Year: 2022
Same resolution as in item 3, above.
Page 10 of 12

--- Page 33 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
Aid to Community Colleges
Finding 7
MHEC had not implemented effective procedures for ensuring that all
payments made to community colleges for retirement and pension
contributions were proper.
We recommend that MHEC ensure that the amounts paid for the State’s
share of community college employees’ retirement and pension costs are
proper. Specifically, we recommend that MHEC
a. thoroughly review audited retirement and pension contribution data
received from community colleges and resolve, on a timely basis,
differences between the audited data and corresponding amounts in its
own records, including the aforementioned differences (repeat);
b. take appropriate actions to pay or collect differences in amounts owed to
or due from the colleges (repeat);
c. document the actions taken (repeat); and
d. ensure that employee certification documentation is obtained prior to
paying matching retirement contributions for the optional retirement
plan, and investigate and take appropriate actions regarding employees
with missing documentation, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide We acknowledge and agree with the concerns raised in the audit
additional comments as regarding the adequacy of procedures for ensuring that all payments
deemed necessary. made to community colleges for retirement and pension contributions
are accurate and proper. As of now, 15 community colleges are
participating in the Optional Retirement Program (ORP), with a total of
2,526 active employees. We have taken steps to improve the verification
and documentation processes related to employee certifications and to
ensure proper payments are made.
Recommendation 7a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/30/2024
Please provide details of We recognize the importance of reconciling the audited retirement and
corrective action or pension data with our records. We have begun a comprehensive review
explain disagreement. process of the data provided by the community colleges and are working
to resolve any discrepancies on a timely basis. Regular audits and cross-
checks are now being implemented to ensure that all reported amounts
align with our records.
Page 11 of 12

--- Page 34 ---
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 7b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/30/2024
Please provide details of MHEC has identified discrepancies between payments made and
corrective action or amounts owed and is actively addressing these issues. We are currently
explain disagreement. initiating corrective measures to promptly resolve all outstanding
differences. This process includes settling discrepancies by either issuing
additional payments or collecting owed amounts from the respective
colleges. Moving forward, MHEC will strengthen monitoring processes
to prevent future discrepancies and ensure accurate financial
reconciliation and reporting.
Recommendation 7c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/30/2024
Please provide details of We understand the importance of maintaining clear documentation of all
corrective action or corrective actions. We have implemented a standardized process to
explain disagreement. document all actions taken to resolve discrepancies, including
communication with community colleges, adjustments to payments, and
resolutions of any outstanding issues.
Recommendation 7d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 12/30/2024
Please provide details of We have already gathered all employee certification documents from the
corrective action or participating community colleges and stored them securely on our shared
explain disagreement. drive. We are also verifying certification statuses before processing
reimbursements to ensure compliance with ORP requirements. For
employees with missing documentation, we are reaching out to the
respective colleges to obtain the necessary certifications and will take
appropriate action if required.
Page 12 of 12

--- Page 35 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Amanda M. Jones
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Dorian A. Fournier, CIA
Chau D. Mai
John E. Rooney
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Information Systems Staff Auditor