Title: Maryland Commission on Human Relations

NOTE: Effective 10/1/11, the Maryland Commission on Human Relations is now named the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights.
Date: 06/26/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742d6
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:45:36.715324
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Commission on Human Relations
June 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
June 26, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Maryland Commission on Human Relations for the period
beginning March 24, 2006 and ending March 30, 2009. The Commission is
responsible for investigating and resolving cases of discrimination in the areas of
employment, housing, and public accommodations.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by the Commission
during the course of this audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
In accordance with Article 49B of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Maryland
Commission on Human Relations was established to further equal opportunities
by eliminating discrimination, to assure civil rights, and to promote better human
relations throughout the State. In that regard, the Commission is responsible for
investigating and resolving cases of discrimination in the areas of employment,
housing, and public accommodations. According to the State’s records, during
fiscal year 2008, the Commission’s operating expenditures totaled approximately
$3.3 million, of which the vast majority represented payroll costs for its 45
employees.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Commission’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to the Commission that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Commission. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Maryland Commission on Human Relations for the period
beginning March 24, 2006 and ending March 30, 2009. The audit was conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Commission’s
3

--- Page 6 ---
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Commission’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls for federal financial
assistance programs and an assessment of the Commission’s compliance with
federal laws and regulations pertaining to those programs because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including the Commission.
The Commission’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
4

--- Page 7 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Ronnette L. Bailey, CFE
Senior Auditor
Ryan P. Stecher
Staff Auditor