Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - AIDS Administration
Date: 10/24/2007
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067456c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:18:53.673412
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
AIDS Administration
October 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 24, 2007
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Nathaniel J. McFadden, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the AIDS Administration of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene for the period beginning April 14, 2004 and ending March 20,
2007.
Our audit disclosed that the Administration lacked adequate controls to ensure
that it did not pay pharmacy claims applicable to clients who had third-party
health insurance coverage. For example, although the Administration paid
insurance premiums of approximately $1.6 million for clients insured through the
Maryland Health Insurance Plan (MHIP) during calendar year 2006, the
Administration also paid pharmacy claims for these clients totaling approximately
$1.4 million. MHIP also paid pharmacy claims of $1.2 million for those clients.
Our tests identified a number of pharmacy claims that MHIP, rather than the
Administration, should have paid. Furthermore, the Administration had not
established adequate procedures to restrict user access to the Administration’s
pharmacy and insurance carrier claims payment database and to independently
verify that pharmacy claims paid were supported by authorized physician
prescriptions and the related medications were provided to clients.
Our audit also disclosed that State funds on deposit with the contractor that made
pharmacy claims payments on the Administration’s behalf were not sufficiently
collateralized.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Current Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Pharmacy Claims Processing
Finding 1 – Controls Were Not in Effect to Prevent Payments of Pharmacy 6
Claims for Clients with Third-Party Insurance Coverage
Finding 2 – Verifications Were Not Performed to Ensure Pharmacy Claims 7
Paid Were Properly Supported and Related Prescriptions Were
Provided to Clients
* Finding 3 – User Access to the Pharmacy and Insurance Carrier Claims 8
Payment Database Was Not Adequately Restricted
Bank Accounts
Finding 4 – The Administration Did Not Ensure That State Funds Held in 9
Bank Accounts Maintained by a Private Contractor Were Adequately
Collateralized
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The AIDS Administration provides expert scientific and public health leadership
to combat the spread of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). The
Administration also provides funding to local health departments for HIV/AIDS
counseling and testing, education programs, case management, and home and
community-based services.
In addition, the Administration pays for HIV-related medications that are
provided to clients through its Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program
(MADAP) and for health insurance coverage through its MADAP-Plus and
Maryland AIDS Insurance Assistance Program (MAIAP).
According to the State’s records, the Administration’s fiscal year 2006 operating
expenditures totaled approximately $54.4 million.
Current Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the four findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated November 4, 2004. We determined
that the Administration had satisfactorily resolved three of these findings. The
remaining finding is repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Pharmacy Claims Processing
Background Information
The AIDS Administration provides clients with HIV-related medications through
its Maryland AIDS Drug Assistance Program (MADAP). MADAP helps low to
moderate income Maryland residents pay for certain drugs prescribed to treat
HIV/AIDS. There is no co-pay for clients in MADAP; however, clients may have
a monthly participation fee depending on their income. According to the State’s
records, during fiscal year 2006, expenditures for medications totaled
approximately $31.9 million.
The Administration, through a contract awarded by the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene - Medical Care Programs Administration, uses the services of a
private vendor whose point-of-sale computer system processes pharmacy claims
for clients enrolled in MADAP. Participating pharmacies that fill prescriptions
for MADAP clients use the system to submit the related claims for
reimbursement. Pharmacies must obtain authorizations from the Administration
prior to dispensing medications to clients. Based on claims information provided
by the vendor, the Administration determines the amounts to be paid to each
pharmacy.
Code of Maryland Regulation, Title 10, provides that MADAP is the payor-of-
last-resort. That is, for clients that may also have third-party health insurance
coverage, the pharmacies are required to first submit the applicable claims to the
client’s other insurance provider prior to requesting payment from the
Administration.
The Administration also provides clients with health insurance coverage through
the MADAP-Plus and Maryland AIDS Insurance Assistance Program (MAIAP).
MADAP-Plus is a federally-funded program that assists clients with paying for
their health insurance premiums thus insuring access to inpatient and outpatient
health care as well as prescription coverage. MAIAP is a State-funded program
that provides health insurance premium assistance for eligible clients who are
disabled due to HIV/AIDS. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year
2006, expenditures for health insurance coverage totaled approximately $2.1
million.
Certain Administration clients are enrolled in and received health coverage
through the Maryland Health Insurance Plan (MHIP). MHIP is a state-
administered health insurance program for Maryland residents who do not have
5

--- Page 8 ---
access to health insurance, and is operated by an independent unit within the
Maryland Insurance Administration. MHIP is a specially-funded program that is
primarily financed by an assessment on hospital net patient revenue (in addition to
premium payments from other organizations including the Administration). The
Administration pays the related health insurance premiums as well as prescription
deductibles and co-payments for these clients. Annual prescription deductibles
and co-payments for clients insured through MHIP vary depending on the benefit
plan selected by the client. For example, for an individual client one plan has an
annual prescription deductible of $250 and co-payments of up to $70, with annual
maximum out-of-pocket payments of $2,500.
Finding 1
Adequate controls were not in place to ensure that the Administration did
not pay pharmacy claims for clients with third-party health insurance. For
example, during calendar year 2006 the Administration paid pharmacy
claims totaling approximately $1.4 million applicable to clients insured
through MHIP without determining if MHIP should have paid some of the
claims.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not in place to ensure that the Administration did not pay
pharmacy claims for clients with third-party health insurance. In certain cases,
the Administration could not document why it, rather than the applicable
insurance providers, had paid the pharmacy claims. For example, during calendar
year 2006, despite paying the related insurance premiums totaling $1.6 million,
the Administration paid claims to pharmacies (including deductibles and co-
payments) totaling approximately $1.4 million applicable to clients insured
through MHIP. MHIP also paid approximately $1.2 million for pharmacy claims
for these clients.
The automated point-of-sale system used by the vendor to process pharmacy
claims included certain edit controls to prevent claims from being submitted to the
Administration for payment when clients had third-party health insurance
coverage. However, pharmacies had the capability to override (that is, bypass)
these edits and, thereby, cause the Administration to pay the related claims. In
addition, although required by State Regulations, the Administration did not
require pharmacies to provide documentation to support that claims submitted to
third-party insurers had been rejected by the applicable insurance providers before
paying the claims.
We tested 373 pharmacy claims totaling $290,432 applicable to 10 clients who,
according to the Administration’s records, had active third-party health insurance
6

--- Page 9 ---
coverage. Our test disclosed that the Administration paid 60 claims on behalf of
clients insured through MHIP for prescribed medications that were included in
MHIP’s approved drug formulary. After adjusting for annual prescription
deductibles and co-payments, we estimated that for these 60 claims the
Administration made payments to pharmacies totaling approximately $55,000
that should have been paid by MHIP. Our test also disclosed 126 additional
claims totaling approximately $105,000 that were paid by the Administration on
behalf of clients with third-party insurance that may have been payable by the
third-party insurer. Moreover, the Administration lacked documentation (such as,
support for claims rejections from the third-party insurer) to substantiate why the
aforementioned claims were not paid by the clients’ insurance providers.
We discussed the results of our tests with Administration and MHIP management
and were advised that there could be various reasons why it may be appropriate
for the Administration to pay pharmacy claims for clients with third-party health
insurance coverage. For example, the client could have reached the maximum
pharmacy benefit limit provided by their particular insurance policy. However,
the reasons suggested to us by the Administration and MHIP were taken into
consideration during our test with respect to MHIP clients.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Administration implement controls to ensure that it
does not pay pharmacy claims applicable to clients with third-party health
insurance coverage unless each such claim is accompanied by documentation
substantiating the reason for non-payment by the client’s insurance
provider. We also recommend that the Administration recover all pharmacy
claim payments, including those payments identified by our audit, which
should have been paid by third-party insurance carriers including the MHIP.
Finding 2
The Administration had not established adequate procedures to
independently verify the propriety of pharmacy claims submitted and paid.
Analysis
The Administration had not established adequate procedures to independently
verify the propriety of pharmacy claims submitted and paid. Specifically, the
Administration did not verify that claims were supported by valid physician
prescriptions that had been filled and provided to clients or that claims paid by the
Administration had not also been paid by third-party insurers. As a result, a
pharmacy could request authorizations to dispense medications that were not
prescribed and inappropriately bill the Administration for these additional
7

--- Page 10 ---
medications or bill the Administration for claims that were also paid by third-
party insurers without detection.
The Administration had implemented certain procedures (such as, negative
confirmations which were not required to be returned by the client if the
information they contained was accurate) to help ensure the propriety of claim
payments made to pharmacies. However, these procedures provided only limited
assurance that submitted claims were properly authorized and the related
prescriptions were dispensed to clients since unreturned negative confirmations
typically do not provide explicit evidence that the information contained on the
confirmation is correct.
The Medical Care Program Administration, which also administers certain drug
prescription programs, periodically performs audits to determine whether selected
pharmacy claims are supported by required documentation (such as physicians’
prescriptions and claim rejection notices). Similar audits could be performed by
the Administration or by vendors contracted by the Administration for this
purpose.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Administration establish procedures to help ensure
that only valid pharmacy claims were paid. For example, the Administration
could perform periodic audits to ensure that pharmacies have documentation
(that is, physicians’ prescriptions) to support claims paid. We also
recommend that such procedures be designed to determine whether any
pharmacy claims paid by the Administration were also paid by third-party
insurers. We further recommend that, in the event the procedures
performed disclose instances in which the Administration had paid
inappropriate claims, the Administration take the necessary follow-up
actions.
Finding 3
User access to the Administration’s pharmacy and insurance carrier claims
payment database was not adequately restricted.
Analysis
User access to the Administration’s database used for processing payments to
pharmacies and insurance carriers was not adequately restricted. Specifically, we
determined that three employees who could enter prescription authorizations into
the MADAP database could also add pharmacies and clients. Pharmacies must
obtain prescription authorizations from the Administration prior to dispensing
8

--- Page 11 ---
medications to clients, and these authorizations are matched to the pharmacy
invoices prior to payment. Furthermore, nine employees who could enter
insurance premium invoices to the MAIAP / MADAP-Plus database could also
add insurance carriers and clients.
As a result, unauthorized payments could be made that may not be readily
detected by the Administration’s management. Similar conditions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We again recommend that the Administration segregate incompatible
payment processing capabilities. Specifically, we again recommend that
employees with the ability to add a pharmacy to the system be denied the
ability to enter a prescription authorization, and that employees with the
ability to add an insurance carrier in the system be denied the ability to enter
an invoice.
Bank Accounts
Finding 4
The Administration did not ensure that State funds held in bank accounts
maintained by a private contractor were adequately collateralized.
Analysis
The Administration did not ensure that State funds held in bank accounts
maintained by a private contractor were adequately protected against risk of loss.
Specifically, the primary bank account used by the contractor to pay pharmacy
claims and insurance premiums for eligible program clients was not collateralized
by either the bank or the contractor. During our audit period, the Administration
advanced funds to the contractor which deposited the funds in bank accounts
maintained by the contractor. At the direction of the Administration, the
contractor disbursed funds from these accounts to pharmacies and insurance
carriers monthly. During the six-month period from July 2006 through December
2006, the primary bank account had an average month-end balance of
approximately $1.8 million.
The Annotated Code of Maryland requires that State funds on deposit with a
financial institution be secured by collateral having a market value that equals or
exceeds the total funds not covered by deposit insurance (such as Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation). Moreover, the Administration’s related contract requires
9

--- Page 12 ---
that State funds on deposit be secured by the contractor with collateral that
identifies the State as beneficiary.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Administration, in conjunction with the State
Treasurer, ensure that all related bank accounts used by the contractor are
adequately and properly collateralized as required by law and the contract.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the AIDS Administration of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene for the period beginning April 14, 2004 and ending March 20,
2007. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the
Administration’s financial transactions, records and internal control, and to
evaluate its compliance with applicable State laws, rules and regulations. We also
determined the current status of the findings contained in our preceding audit
report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Administration’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to the Administration
by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Office of the Secretary and
related units. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing, maintenance of
accounting records and related fiscal functions) are included within the scope of
our audits of the Department’s Office of the Secretary.
We did not audit the Administration’s Federal financial assistance programs for
compliance with Federal laws and regulations because the State of Maryland
engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such programs
administered by State agencies.
Our audit scope was limited with respect to the Administration’s cash transactions
because the Office of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the State’s main
bank accounts during a portion of the audit period. Due to this condition, we
were unable to determine, with reasonable assurance, that all Administration cash
transactions prior to July 1, 2005 were accounted for and properly recorded on the
related State accounting records as well as the banks’ records.
11

--- Page 14 ---
The Administration’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider significant
deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could adversely
affect the Administration’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. Another less
significant finding was communicated to the Administration that did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
The Department’s response, on behalf of the Administration, to our findings and
recommendations, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 1
Adequate controls were not in place to ensure that the Administration did
not pay pharmacy claims for clients with third-party health insurance. For
example, during calendar year 2006 the Administration paid pharmacy
claims totaling approximately $1.4 million applicable to clients insured
through MHIP without determining if MHIP should have paid some of the
claims.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Administration implement controls to ensure that it
does not pay pharmacy claims applicable to clients with third-party health
insurance coverage unless each such claim is accompanied by documentation
substantiating the reason for non-payment by the client’s insurance
provider. We also recommend that the Administration recover all pharmacy
claim payments, including those payments identified by our audit, which
should have been paid by third-party insurance carriers including the MHIP.
Administration’s Response:
The AIDS Administration concurs with this finding. MADAP has instructed its
pharmacy benefits manager, ACS, to automatically deny pharmacy claims when
the client has primary third-party prescription insurance and the pharmacy
indicates that the primary insurance is paying $0 on the claim. The pharmacy will
then be required to contact MADAP/ACS directly to provide an explanation of
the reason for the primary insurance rejecting the request to pay. MADAP/ACS
will authorize payment of a claim if an appropriate rejection rationale is provided.
There are many reasons for a third-party insurer to appropriately reject a claim
request: deductible is still being met; cap on prescription coverage has been met;
client requesting refill prior to insurance’s policy to do so; the medication is not
on the insurance formulary etc. We have requested that ACS implement this
process by November 1, 2007.
The AIDS Administration is developing a Request for Proposals (RFP) for a
pharmacy audit contract which will also perform routine audits of a sample of
claims with override codes to ensure the required documentation of third-party
insurance rejections are available and appropriate payments were made. The
AIDS Administration has consulted the Department of Budget Management
(DBM) website for a sample RFP and a list of approved contractors for this
activity and has a draft RFP in development.
The AIDS Administration has discussed the current Medicaid process for the
recovery of pharmacy claim payments with the DHMH Office of the Inspector

--- Page 17 ---
General (OIG) and is implementing a similar process for requesting recovery for
those pharmacy claims that third party insurers might have been responsible for
paying. The recovery request will be sent to the third party insurers by November
30, 2007.
Finding 2
The Administration had not established adequate procedures to
independently verify the propriety of pharmacy claims submitted and paid.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Administration establish procedures to help ensure
that only valid pharmacy claims were paid. For example, the Administration
could perform periodic audits to ensure that pharmacies have documentation
(that is, physicians’ prescriptions) to support claims paid. We also
recommend that such procedures be designed to determine whether any
pharmacy claims paid by the Administration were also paid by third-party
insurers. We further recommend that, in the event the procedures
performed disclose instances in which the Administration had paid
inappropriate claims, the Administration take the necessary follow-up
actions.
Administration’s Response:
The Department concurs with this finding. The AIDS Administration is
developing a Request for Proposals (RFP) for a pharmacy audit contract for the
performance of routine pharmacy audits to verify documentation of receipt of
physician’s prescriptions and documentation of pharmacy claims payments by
third-party insurers. The AIDS Administration has consulted the Department of
Budget Management (DBM) website for a sample RFP and a list of approved
contractors for this activity and has a draft RFP in development. The AIDS
Administration will provide the DHMH Office of the Inspector General with a
request for appropriate follow-up action if the pharmacy audit contract audit
findings warrant follow-up action.
The AIDS Administration does also send an annual questionnaire to a
representative sample (minimum 3%) of clients that requests verification for the
drugs received by that client. That questionnaire process substantiates the
existence of provider prescriptions at the pharmacy as a client could not have
received the medication otherwise. During discussions with the Office of
Legislative Affairs auditors, they indicated that this process would no longer be
necessary when the pharmacy audit contract is operational.

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 3
User access to the Administration’s pharmacy and insurance carrier claims
payment database was not adequately restricted.
Recommendation 3
We again recommend that the Administration segregate incompatible
payment processing capabilities. Specifically, we again recommend that
employees with the ability to add a pharmacy to the system be denied the
ability to enter a prescription authorization, and that employees with the
ability to add an insurance carrier in the system be denied the ability to enter
an invoice.
Administration Response:
The Department concurs with this finding. Data system restrictions within the
Center for HIV Care Services have been partially implemented since the last
audit, however, the current MADAP data system is antiquated and we are not able
to apply full segregation of access for employees without system failures in other
areas when such segregation is implemented. While we are addressing the
database system limitations, we have implemented a combined manual and
electronic process for pharmacy and insurance carrier additions and restricted the
indicated employees to “read only” access. Since this implementation, a
pharmacy is only added to the system by the pharmacy benefits manager, ACS,
and this only occurs after receiving signed documentation from either the Chief,
Deputy Chief of HIV Care Services or the Administration Director. In the case of
a new insurance carrier addition to the system, this capability now resides with the
Deputy Chief and the database manager upon written approval of the Chief of
HIV Care Services or the Administration Director. All other employees have
been restricted to a read only access. These actions were taken in September
2007.
Finding 4
The Administration did not ensure that State funds held in bank accounts
maintained by a private contractor were adequately collateralized.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Administration, in conjunction with the State
Treasurer, ensure that all related bank accounts used by the contractor are
adequately and properly collateralized as required by law and the contract.

--- Page 19 ---
Administration Response:
The Department partially concurs with this finding. The Administration had
worked closely with the previous auditor to ensure that the aggregate balance of
the bank accounts not exceed the maximum specified in the contract as well as
ensuring that the contractor’s fidelity bond is sufficient to cover all deposited
monies. The Administration therefore believes it complied with the requirement
that funds on deposit be secured by the contractor with collateral that identifies
the State as beneficiary. The bank’s government liaison has indicated that the
bank does have an agreement with the State Treasurer insuring collateralization of
all State bank accounts. The bank accounts referenced in this finding have State
ID # but were not titled as a State of Maryland account. The Administration is
already working with the bank, the contractor, and the State Treasurer’s Office to
rectify the issue immediately.

--- Page 20 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Peter J. Klemans, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock
Senior Auditor
Kimberly H. Ugalde
Staff Auditor