Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Community Health Administration
Date: 05/02/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067456a
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:18:25.992996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Community Health Administration
May 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 3 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
May 2, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Community
Health Administration (CHA) for the period beginning February 3, 2005 and
ending October 31, 2007.
Our audit disclosed that the Department’s Audit Division noted a number of
procedural and internal control deficiencies at the local health departments for
which CHA provides oversight. CHA should ensure that the local departments
address the related recommendations. Our audit also disclosed several
deficiencies during our review of one local health department. For example,
proper controls were not established to ensure that all collections were deposited.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
2

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Community Health Administration (CHA) protects the health of the
community by preventing and controlling infectious diseases, investigating
disease outbreaks and environmental health issues, and protecting the health and
general welfare of the public from foods, substances, and consumer products
which may cause injury or illness. CHA is also responsible for aiding in the
development and implementation of health services (such as communicable
disease control) in the local health departments of the State’s 23 counties and
Baltimore City. According to the State’s records, total CHA expenditures were
approximately $89.6 million during fiscal year 2007, including $74.3 million
provided to the local health departments.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated September 29, 2005. Based on our current
audit, these findings were not repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Local Health Departments
Local health departments are located in each political subdivision in Maryland
and are operated with funding provided through grants and human services
contracts from various Department of Health and Mental Hygiene units (including
CHA) and local funding (grants from local governments and collections from
clients). Each local health department has a local health officer and various
support personnel (such as nurses and technicians). Based on the Department’s
records, funding provided to the local health departments by all Departmental
units during fiscal year 2007 totaled approximately $309 million, of which $74.3
million was provided by CHA.
CHA has oversight responsibilities for all local health departments. Generally, we
have relied on the work of the Department’s Audit Division to provide audit
coverage of the local health departments. Accordingly, our audit procedures were
primarily limited to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance. However, we
did perform audit procedures at one local health department to supplement the
work of the Department’s Audit Division.
3

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 1
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Audit Division noted a
number of procedural and internal control weaknesses during its audits of
the local health departments.
Analysis
Our review of the audit reports related to local health departments issued by the
Department’s Audit Division during fiscal years 2005, 2006, and 2007 disclosed
that the reports contained a number of procedural and internal control weaknesses
and made recommendations to correct these deficiencies. For example, of the 21
audit reports issued related to local health departments during that period, 13
reports contained findings related to controls over cash receipts (collections from
clients).
State regulations require the Department to periodically examine the accounts and
records of local health departments receiving funds under contracts and grants
with the Department. In accordance with this regulation, it is the Department’s
Audit Division’s policy to audit each local health department at least every four
years (certain large local departments are to be audited every three years).
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CHA ensure that the local health departments
adequately address the recommendations made by the Department’s Audit
Division.
Finding 2
One local health department reviewed did not comply with its established
policies, and certain internal control deficiencies were noted.
Analysis
Our review of one local health department disclosed certain instances of
noncompliance with its established policies, as well as deficiencies in internal
control:
• The local health department had not established adequate internal control over
collections, which totaled approximately $443,000 during fiscal year 2007.
Specifically, the employees who received collections from clients also
recorded the related charges in the automated system and had the ability to
adjust charges and void transactions in the system without supervisory review
and approval. Additionally, although supervisory personnel subsequently
reviewed output reports of all adjustments to charges recorded in the system,
4

--- Page 8 ---
documentation provided by the clients supporting the adjustments was not
reviewed by supervisory personnel. Consequently, errors and irregularities
could occur without detection.
• The local health department did not always obtain adequate documentation to
verify client identity and income, and did not always charge the proper fee for
services rendered. Specifically, our test of services provided to 25 clients
during the period from March 2007 through January 2008 disclosed that
documentation related to proof of identity (such as a driver’s license) was not
on file for 6 clients. Additionally, 5 clients had not provided any proof of
income (such as a pay stub or W-2) which is necessary to determine the
amount of the fee that should be charged to the client for services provided
based on a sliding scale. Furthermore, we noted that 2 clients had provided
proof of income documentation to the local health department, but were
charged the wrong fee based on income documentation provided. The local
health department’s policy is to obtain proof of identity and proof of income
from clients.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that employees who process collections not have the ability
to record and adjust charges or void transactions in the automated system.
We also recommend that supervisory personnel review documentation
supporting adjustments to charges recorded in the system, at least on a test
basis. Finally, we recommend that proper documentation of proof of client
identity and income be obtained and proper fees be charged based on the
proof of income provided.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Community
Health Administration (CHA) for the period beginning February 3, 2005 and
ending October 31, 2007. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CHA’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
5

--- Page 9 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of CHA’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided by the Department’s
Office of the Secretary and related units to the other units of the Department,
including CHA. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) are within the
scope of our audit of the Office of the Secretary. In addition, we did not audit
CHA’s federal financial assistance programs for compliance with federal laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies.
Our scope was limited with respect to CHA’s cash transactions because the Office
of the State Treasurer was unable to reconcile the State’s main bank accounts
during a portion of the audit period. Due to this condition, we were unable to
determine, with reasonable assurance, that all CHA cash transactions prior to July
1, 2005 were accounted for and properly recorded on the related State accounting
records as well as the banks’ records.
CHA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect CHA’s ability to
maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit did not disclose
6

--- Page 10 ---
any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to CHA that did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of
CHA, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise CHA regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Audit Division noted a number of
procedural and internal control weaknesses during its audits of the local health
departments.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CHA ensure that the local health departments adequately
address the recommendations made by the Department’s Audit Division.
Department’s Response
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene agrees that local health departments
should adequately address recommendations made by the Department’s Audit Division.
One purpose of the periodic audits of local health departments by the Department’s Audit
Division is to provide DHMH Administrations with independent assurance of the
existence of adequate financial controls. Since the Audit Division’s procedures
incorporate a follow-up protocol for material findings, effective immediately, the
Department will take appropriate action to address the findings in a timely manner.
Finding 2
One local health department reviewed did not comply with its established policies,
and certain internal control deficiencies were noted.
Recommendation
We recommend that employees who process collections not have the ability to
record and adjust charges or void transactions in the automated system. We also
recommend that supervisory personnel review documentation supporting
adjustments to charges recorded in the system, at least on a test basis. Finally, we
recommend that proper documentation of proof of client identity and income be
obtained and proper fees be charged based on the proof of income provided.
Department’s Response
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene and the local health department agree
with the Legislative Auditor’s recommendations. The first recommendation pertains to
self-pay clients and co-pays by third party insured clients, as recoveries from third party
payers (79.5% of clinic collections) are handled centrally by the local health department’s
Fiscal Services Unit and are all properly segregated and controlled. Third party billings
are prepared by the Accounts Receivable Supervisor who does not have access to
receipts. Payments are received by the Finance Director’s Assistant who does not have
access to the accounts receivable records. For self-pay clients, as of April 1, 2008, the
functions of 1) fee determination, and recording and adjusting related charges and

--- Page 13 ---
voiding transactions in the automated system, and 2) handling fee collections, were
assigned to two different employees at each clinic site.
In response to the second recommendation, as of April 1, 2008, all fee adjustments
entered into the local health department’s automated system will be accompanied by a
statement signed by the Clinic Site Supervisor or designee certifying that written
documentation supporting all adjustments is on file at the clinic site. Furthermore, the
local health department’s Fiscal Services Unit will test periodically the adequacy of
documentation supporting fee adjustments recorded in the automated system.
Finally, in response to the third recommendation, current policies and procedures
followed by the local health department require verification of client identity and
documentation of income and, if applicable, proof of third party insurance coverage.
Clients are financially responsible for 100% of the charge for a rendered service unless
documentation is provided within 30 days of the date of service that supports a fee
adjustment. By July 1, 2008, the local health department’s Fiscal Services Unit will re-
instruct all employees involved with clinic fee determinations to obtain adequate proof of
identity and income and, as applicable, proof of third party insurance coverage, for all
clients, and re-emphasize the importance of accuracy in making fee determinations based
upon a sliding fee scale.

--- Page 14 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark A. Ermer, CPA
Audit Manager
Susanne M. Anacker
Senior Auditor
Tamufor A. Nchumuluh
Aknea K. Smith
Staff Auditors