Title: Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems
Date: 11/10/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d7245606743de
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:38:56.950981
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Institute for Emergency
Medical Services Systems
March 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) is
governed by the Emergency Medical Services Board whose members are
appointed by the Governor. MIEMSS is responsible for coordinating the delivery
of statewide emergency medical services, licensing and certifying emergency
medical service providers, providing emergency medical service research and
education, maintaining a statewide communication system, and regulating and
licensing commercial ambulances. According to the State’s records, MIEMSS’
expenditures totaled approximately $14.6 million during fiscal year 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 12, 2012. We determined that
MIEMSS satisfactorily addressed three of these findings. The remaining finding
is repeated in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Ambulance Licenses and Fees
Finding 1
MIEMSS lacked adequate procedures to account for commercial ambulance
license decals and related fees.
Analysis
MIEMSS lacked adequate procedures to ensure that all commercial ambulance
license decals and related license fees were accounted for. License decals serve
as evidence that the required ambulance licenses were issued.
The employee responsible for verifying that a fee was received and deposited for
each decal issued had unrestricted access to, and could modify information in, the
automated system used to record and monitor decal activity, as well as physical
access to the decals themselves. Furthermore, another employee who reconciled
the record of decals received from the vendor and issued during the year to the
number of decals on hand or destroyed at year-end also had routine access to the
decals. Under these conditions, there was a lack of assurance that a fee had been
3

--- Page 6 ---
received for all license decals issued and that all decals received had been
independently accounted for as to issued, destroyed, or on hand.
Commercial ambulance operators are required to obtain an annual license from
MIEMSS for each ambulance operated, and the decals are to be displayed on the
ambulance. According to the State’s records, license fees deposited in fiscal year
2014 totaled approximately $400,000 and individual license fees ranged between
$50 and $1,090 depending on the type of ambulance and the licensing period.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MIEMSS ensure that
a. the employee responsible for verifying that a fee was received and
deposited for each decal issued does not have access to modify the decal
records or physical access to the decals, and
b. an employee who does not have routine access to the decals reconciles the
decal records to decals issued, destroyed, or on hand at year end.
We advised MIEMSS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Equipment
Finding 2
Physical inventory results were not fully reconciled to the detail records.
Analysis
The results of annual physical inventories of sensitive equipment were not fully
reconciled to the related detail records, including the investigation and resolution
of unlocated items. As of September 2014, MIEMSS had not accounted for the
status of 96 sensitive equipment items (such as computer and phone equipment)
with an aggregate cost of approximately $508,000, and these items had remained
unlocated for periods ranging from 15 months to more than three years.
The Department of General Services (DGS) Inventory Control Manual requires
that all sensitive equipment be inventoried annually, the results reconciled to the
detail records, and any missing items be investigated and reported to DGS for
removal from the records if not found. According to its records, the book value of
MIEMSS’ equipment as of June 30, 2014 totaled approximately $13.6 million. A
similar condition has been commented upon in our five preceding audit reports
dating back to October 1999.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MIEMSS comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual by ensuring that the results of physical inventories
are fully reconciled to the detail records, including the investigation and
resolution of unlocated items (repeat).
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Institute for
Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) for the period beginning March
2, 2011 and ending September 21, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MIEMSS’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, equipment, and procurements and
disbursements. We also determined the status of the findings contained in our
preceding audit report.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MIEMSS’ operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
5

--- Page 8 ---
MIEMSS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MIEMSS’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
MIEMSS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MIEMSS regarding the
results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Ambulance Licenses and Fees
Finding 1
MIEMSS lacked adequate procedures to account for commercial ambulance license decals and
related fees.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MIEMSS ensure that
a. the employee responsible for verifying that a fee was received and deposited for each decal
issued does not have access to modify the decal records or physical access to the decals, and
b. an employee who does not have routine access to the decals reconciles the decal records to
decals issued, destroyed, or on hand at year end.
We advised MIEMSS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
Agency Response:
MIEMSS concurs with the recommendation. An employee who does not have access to either the
physical license decals or the electronic decal records is currently responsible for verifying that the
license fees are received and deposited. In addition, an employee who does not have access to the
physical license decals will reconcile the decal records to decals issued, destroyed, or on hand at year
end.
Equipment
Finding 2
Physical inventory results were not fully reconciled to the detail records.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MIEMSS comply with the requirements of the DGS Inventory Control
Manual by ensuring that the results of physical inventories are fully reconciled to the detail
records, including the investigation and resolution of unlocated items (repeat).
Agency Response:
MIEMSS concurs with the recommendation. MIEMSS conducts physical inventories of sensitive
equipment annually and non-sensitive inventory every three years as required by the Department of
General Services (DGS) Inventory Control Manual. The Agency’s inventory is spread over the entire
state, including pieces in hospitals and at difficult-to-access communications towers located at remote
sites. Notable gains have been realized and the list of items not located has been reduced significantly
with each audit period. For those MIEMSS equipment items that are difficult to track, MIEMSS will
work through more than one inventory period before concluding that the items cannot be found. Many
long unseen items are ultimately found and retained in the inventory.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Annette L. Manning
Staff Auditor