Title: Maryland Energy Administration
Date: 01/11/2017
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d7245606743e0
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:39:08.794959
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Energy Administration
January 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
arren G. Desehenaux Thomasj.BarnickelIII,CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor
January 11,2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Maryland Energy
Administration (MEA) for the period beginning May 13, 2013 and ending June
30, 2016. MEA manages various programs related to the reduction ofenergy
consumption, the use ofrenewable energy resources, and the promotion ofenergy
efficiency. MEA also provides grants and loans to governmental units, non-
profits, and private entities.
Our audit disclosed that procedures and controls over cash receipts and accounts
receivable need to be strengthened.
MEA’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish
to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by MEA during the course ofthis
audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Thomas Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) manages programs which help
reduce energy consumption in State facilities and operations; encourage the use of
renewable energy resources; and promote energy efficiency in the industrial,
commercial, and residential sectors. MEA also provides grants and loans for
State agencies, local governments, nonprofit organizations, and the commercial
sector. MEA advises the Governor’s Office on energy policy and managing
energy disruptions and emergencies. MEA is the state conduit for federal energy
programs from the U.S. Department of Energy. According to the State’s records,
MEA’s total expenditures for fiscal year 2016 were $44.3 million, including
grants and loans of $32.2 million.
The majority of MEA’s funding comes from the Maryland Strategic Energy
Investment Fund (SEIF). In this regard, State law established the Maryland
Strategic Energy Investment Program for the purpose of decreasing energy
demand and increasing energy supply to promote affordable, reliable, and clean
energy to fuel Maryland’s future prosperity. By law, MEA administers the
Program, as well as SEIF, which was established to implement the Program.
SEIF funds various programs, including the promotion, development, and
implementation of cost-effective energy efficiency and conservation programs;
renewable and clean energy resources; climate change programs; and demand
response programs that are designed to promote changes in electric usage by
customers. In addition, SEIF funds are used to supplement funds for low-income
energy assistance, to provide rate relief by offsetting electricity rates, to provide
grants and loans, and to implement energy-related public education and outreach
initiatives. SEIF also provides funding for programs in certain other State
agencies, such as the Department of Human Resources. SEIF is funded primarily
by quarterly auctions of carbon allowances through the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative. According to its annual report, SEIF revenues and expenditures totaled
approximately $86.0 million and $76.3 million, respectively, during fiscal year
2015.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Maryland Clean Energy Center
Chapter 138, Laws of Maryland 2008, effective July 1, 2008, created the
Maryland Clean Energy Center (MCEC) as an instrumentality of the State. State
law requires coordination with MEA in the administration of MCEC programs.
MCEC’s purpose includes the following Statewide initiatives:
 promote economic development and jobs in the clean energy industry
sector
 promote the deployment of clean energy technology
 serve as an incubator for the development of the clean energy industry
 collect, analyze, and disseminate industry data
 provide outreach and technical support to further the clean energy industry
According to MEA’s records, since its inception, MCEC has received
approximately $6 million in grants and loans from MEA for the purpose of
funding start-up and operating costs. However, MCEC has been unable to make
current payments on certain loan funds due. Annual payments of $50,000 on a
fiscal year 2009 loan of $400,000 were to have begun in fiscal year 2011;
however, MEA has deferred the payment due dates multiple times. As of July
2016, only one payment of $50,000 had been made. Additional loans of $140,000
and $760,000 were made to MCEC in fiscal years 2014 and 2015, with repayment
on each to begin in July 2017 and January 2018, respectively.
Each year MCEC engages an independent certified public accounting firm to
conduct an audit of its financial statements. For the years ended June 30, 2014
and June 30, 2015, the independent auditors reported that MCEC had significant
net operating losses and working capital deficits, and that MCEC must depend on
a new potential loan or grant from MEA to meet cash flow demands. The
auditors stated that these conditions raised substantial doubt about MCEC’s
ability to continue as a going concern.
State law created a task force in June 2016 to assess certain MCEC programs, to
review past and potential future funding operations, and to identify funding
choices in order to assist MCEC to become self-sustaining. The task force was to
report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General
Assembly on or before December 1, 2016; however, the task force requested a
delay in its submission until January 30, 2017.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts / Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) did not have adequate
procedures to ensure that all collections were deposited and that accounts
receivable records were proper.
Analysis
MEA lacked adequate procedures and controls to ensure that all collections were
deposited and that the related accounts receivable records were properly
maintained. During fiscal year 2016, MEA’s collections totaled approximately
$3.9 million. Of this total, $3.3 million represented a single check relating to
certain proceeds from the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, while the
remaining collections of approximately $600,000 related primarily to repayments
of energy conservation improvement loans.
Although checks were recorded immediately upon receipt, they were not
restrictively endorsed. Specifically, collections were forwarded to a second
employee who restrictively endorsed the checks and prepared them for deposit.
In addition, there was no independent verification to ensure that all recorded
collections were deposited. Rather, the employee who prepared the deposits
made copies of the related checks and subsequently compared those copies to the
validated deposit slip. According to the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting
Procedures Manual, agencies are required to restrictively endorse checks
immediately upon receipt, and ensure that the original recordation of collections is
compared to deposit documentation by an employee independent of the cash
receipts function to verify that collections are deposited intact.
Furthermore, one employee had complete control over the accounts receivable,
which were primarily related to energy conservation improvement loans. This
employee was solely responsible for recording amounts due, sending invoices and
late payment notices, and recording payments on accounts. Although this
employee did not have access to collections, based on the aforementioned
functions, a payment could be redirected (for example, by altering an invoice to
direct payments to an improper address) and the accounts receivable records
altered to conceal a misappropriation. As of June 30, 2016, according to MEA’s
records, accounts receivable totaled $13.9 million.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Based on these conditions, assurance was lacking that all cash receipts had been
deposited and that payments posted to the related accounts receivable records
were proper.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MEA
a. restrictively endorse checks immediately upon receipt,
b. ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts function
performs documented verifications that collections initially recorded are
subsequently deposited, and
c. ensure that an independent employee reviews the accounts receivable
records to verify that all amounts due were recorded and all collections
recorded in the accounts receivable records were deposited.
We have advised MEA on accomplishing the necessary segregation of duties
using existing personnel.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Energy
Administration (MEA) for the period beginning May 13, 2013 and ending June
30, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MEA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included grant and loan programs, cash receipts, contract
procurement, and special funds, including the Strategic Energy Investment Fund.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to MEA by the
Executive Department – Governor. These support services (such as maintenance
of FMIS accounting records and related fiscal functions) are included within the
scope of our audits of the Executive Department – Governor. Our audit also did
not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws
and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of
MEA’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the State of
Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MEA.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Administration’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions
were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers
risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical
audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of
the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from
which the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
7

--- Page 10 ---
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from this source
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background
or informational purposes was not assessed.
MEA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MEA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This finding is also regarded as a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to MEA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
MEA’s response to our finding and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the MEA regarding the results of
our review of its response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
APPENDIX
MaiylandEnergy
Larry Hogan, Governor
Boyd K. Rutherford, Lt. Governor
Mary Beth Tung, Director
January 6, 2017
Thomas J. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
State ofMaryland
Office ofLegislative Audits
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Bamickel:
Attachedplease find this agency’s response to the draft audit report on the Maryland Energy
Administration for the periodbeginning May 13, 2013 and ending June 30, 2016.
I would like to take this opportunity to again thank the members ofthe Office ofLegislative
Audits for theirprofessionalism, patience and support extended to our team during this period of
high staffturnover.
Ifyou have any questions or need further information, please do not hesitate to contact me
directly or my ChiefofStaff, Greg Williams, at 410-537-4134.
Sincerely,
Mary Beth Tung
Director
Attachment
cc: G. Williams
R. Scherini
L. Myers
1800 Washington Boulevard Baltimore, MD 21230’ Phone: (410) 537-4000 Fax: (410) 537-
4096 WWW.ENERGY.MARYLAND.GOV

--- Page 12 ---
Attachment for Maryland Energy Administration’s final audit report:
Finding 1 Concur: MEA has adapted its internal procedures to meet the audit team’s
—
recommendations.
1800 Washington Boulevard Baltimore, MD 2l230Phone: (410) 537-4000 fax: (410) 537-
4096 WWW.ENERGY.MARYLAND.GOV

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditor