Title: Department of Housing and Community Development


NOTE: Previously, separate audits were conducted of DHCD's operating divisions (Development Finance, Credit Assurance, and Neighborhood Revitalization) and administrative support divisions (Office of the Secretary, Division of Finance and Administration, and Division of Information Technology). Effective with this report, a combined audit of all divisions was conducted.
Date: 11/16/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d724560674456
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:54:46.269124
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Housing and Community Development
November 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Financial Statement Audits 8
National Mortgage Loan Servicing Practices Settlement 8
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 9
Findings and Recommendations 11
Multifamily Housing Program
Finding 1 – DHCD Did Not Monitor Housing Projects to Ensure That 11
Rental Units Were Reserved for Low-Income Households
As Required
Neighborhood Revitalization Grants
Finding 2 – Documentation of the Proposal Evaluation Process for 13
Certain Grants Was Not Maintained
Finding 3 – Written Procedures Were Lacking for Performing and 13
Documenting Program Compliance Monitoring of Certain
Grants
State-Funded Loans
Finding 4 – Receivable Balances Were Not Adequately Reconciled With 14
Loan Servicer Records
Single Family Loan Accounting System
Finding 5 – Controls Over Employee Access to the Single Family Loan 15
Accounting System Were Not Sufficient
Procurements
Finding 6 – DHCD Did Not Always Comply With State Procurement 16
Regulations
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 19
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD)
November 2015
 DHCD did not timely monitor State-funded multifamily housing projects
to ensure that the required number of rental units was reserved for low-
income households. Specifically, the annual certification process was not
completed in a timely manner (Finding 1).
DHCD should complete the annual certification process in a timely manner.
 Documentation of the proposal evaluations for certain neighborhood
revitalization grant awards, which totaled $29 million in fiscal year 2013,
was not maintained. For example, for all 39 grants awarded under one
grant program in fiscal year 2013, DHCD could not provide
documentation of its evaluation process. In addition, DHCD lacked
written procedures for performing on-site monitoring reviews of certain
grants to ensure grantees complied with program requirements (Findings
2 and 3).
DHCD should maintain documentation supporting the grant award process
and should establish and document ongoing grant monitoring procedures.
 DHCD’s procedures for reconciling its State-funded housing loans
receivable balances as recorded on the State’s records with its loan
servicer records did not ensure that reconciliations were properly
performed and that reconciling items were resolved in a timely manner.
Numerous reconciling items identified by DHCD remained unresolved for
periods of seven months to eight years (Finding 4).
Supervisory review of the monthly reconciliations should include a
verification of reconciling items and a review of the related supporting
documentation. In addition, all reconciling items should be promptly
investigated and resolved during the reconciliation process.
 Employee access to the single family loan accounting system was not
reviewed on a regular basis to ensure access was appropriate and was not
disabled upon termination of employment. Finally, DHCD did not
always comply with certain procurement regulations with respect to
5

--- Page 8 ---
bidding requirements and publishing service contract awards (Findings 5
and 6).
DHCD should establish appropriate controls over access to the loan
accounting system and should consistently comply with State procurement
regulations.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) provides
services to strengthen communities and provides affordable housing for people of
limited income. The mission of DHCD is to work with partners to finance
housing opportunities and revitalize places for Maryland citizens to live, work,
and prosper. This audit report includes the operations of all six DHCD divisions:
Office of the Secretary
Division of Finance and Administration
Division of Information Technology
Division of Development Finance (including Community Development
Administration)
Division of Credit Assurance
Division of Neighborhood Revitalization
DHCD’s three operating divisions (Development Finance, Credit Assurance, and
Neighborhood Revitalization) administer various housing and neighborhood
revitalization programs which assist families with affordable homeownership,
foreclosure prevention counseling, affordable rental housing, and housing
rehabilitation needs. Through these housing programs, DHCD provides loans for
the purchase and/or rehabilitation of single-family homes and for the acquisition,
construction, renovation, and/or rehabilitation of multifamily rental housing.
DHCD’s remaining divisions provide administrative support to assist in achieving
its goals. Previously, we audited and reported upon the operating divisions and
the administrative support divisions separately.
DHCD’s programs are funded primarily by revenue bonds it issues, federal funds,
and State appropriations. According to the State’s records, DHCD’s expenditures
totaled approximately $348.5 million during fiscal year 2014.
The following chart presents certain financial data pertaining to DHCD’s
outstanding loans as of June 30, 2014:
7

--- Page 10 ---
Loans Outstanding as of June 30, 2014 (in millions)
(net of allowances for loan losses)
Single Family Multifamily Other Total
From State Funds $86.0 $455.8 $75.4 $617.2
From Revenue Bonds 1,435.0 504.9 123.6 2,063.5
Total Loans Receivable $1,521.0 $960.7 $199.0 $2,680.7
Source: Audited Financial Statements
Financial Statement Audits
DHCD engaged independent accounting firms to perform audits of certain of its
financial activities. Based on significance and risk, we reviewed the following
financial statements for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014:
 Community Development Administration (CDA) Single Family Housing
Revenue Bonds
 CDA Revenue Obligation Funds
 CDA Multifamily Mortgage Revenue Bonds
 State-Funded Loan Programs
In the related audit reports, the firms stated that the financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the related financial positions as of June 30, 2014,
and the changes in net position and cash flows for the year then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
National Mortgage Loan Servicing Practices Settlement
In February 2012, the nation’s five largest mortgage servicers agreed to a
significant national settlement over questionable mortgage loan servicing and
foreclosure practices. Through the Maryland Office of the Attorney General
(OAG), Maryland received approximately $60 million in settlement funds for
foreclosure prevention programs, including foreclosure fraud prevention, housing
counseling, and neighborhood revitalization. In May 2012, a workgroup which
included representatives from OAG; DHCD; the Department of Labor, Licensing
and Regulation (DLLR); Baltimore City; and Prince George’s County, completed
a three-year spending plan for these funds. Refer to the chart on page 9 for the
allocation of the settlement funds.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Approximately $29 million of the $60 million was allocated to DHCD to enhance
existing programs for housing counselor services, legal assistance organizations,
and neighborhood revitalization. As of June 30, 2014, DHCD had spent
approximately $14.3 million of the funds. In addition, DHCD is responsible for
monitoring $10 million allocated to Baltimore City and $10 million allocated to
Prince George’s County. As of June 30, 2014, approximately $1.9 million of
those funds had been spent.
Allocation of Maryland's Portion of
the National Mortgage Loan
Settlement (in millions)
$3
OAG ($3 million)
$10
DHCD ($29 million)
$6 DLLR ($2 million)
$29 Baltimore City ($10 million)
$10 State's General Fund ($6 million)
Prince George's County ($10 million)
$2
Source: Maryland Attorney General’s Office Publication
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Based on our assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives,
our audit included a review to determine the status of two of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report of the DHCD – Office of the Secretary,
Division of Finance and Administration, and Division of Information Technology
dated April 18, 2012. We determined DHCD satisfactorily addressed those
9

--- Page 12 ---
findings. We did not follow up on the remaining finding which pertained to
equipment inventory procedures.
Our audit also included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report of the DHCD – Division of Development
Finance, Division of Credit Assurance, and Division of Neighborhood
Revitalization dated July 19, 2012. We determined that DHCD satisfactorily
addressed those findings.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Multifamily Housing Program
Finding 1
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) did not
timely monitor State-funded multifamily housing projects to ensure that
rental units were reserved for low-income households, as required.
Analysis
DHCD did not timely monitor State-funded multifamily housing projects to
ensure that the required number of rental units was reserved for low-income
households, in accordance with State law and the financing agreements. DHCD
had established a self-certification process requiring project owners to report on a
calendar year basis, tenant information, including income levels, for multifamily
housing units reserved for low-income households to demonstrate that the project
served the required number of low-income households. However, DHCD did not
require these certifications in calendar year 2012. In addition, the certification
process for 2013 did not begin until November 2014 and was not completed as of
May 2015. Without this information, DHCD could not readily verify that the
housing projects were in compliance with financing terms and State law during its
site visits. We were advised by DHCD management that the delay in certifying
the multifamily projects was the result of staff turnover.
State law and the financing agreements require that a portion of the rental units in
each multifamily housing project that receives financing from DHCD be reserved
for low-income households for the greater of 15 years or the number of years
required by federal law (if the project also receives federal assistance). The
number of units reserved for each project is based on the ratio of funds received
from DHCD to the financing for the entire project.
According to DHCD records as of October 2014, there were 221 multifamily
housing projects with 12,807 units financed, in part, by DHCD. During fiscal
year 2014, DHCD approved 20 State-funded multifamily projects totaling
approximately $45.8 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHCD complete the annual certification process timely
to ensure that rental units are reserved for low-income households, as
required by State law and the related financing agreements.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Neighborhood Revitalization Grants
Background
The Division of Neighborhood Revitalization provides funding and technical
assistance to local governments, nonprofit organizations, community groups, and
businesses to help revitalize communities, improve basic infrastructure, and create
housing opportunities. Neighborhood Revitalization grants are generally financed
by State appropriations and federal funds. In 2012, DHCD was allocated
approximately $29 million of the $60 million awarded to the State as part of a
national mortgage settlement over questionable mortgage loan servicing and
foreclosure practices. Following this allocation, the State entered into a second
settlement agreement with a different loan servicer that resulted in an additional
$3 million allocated to DHCD. DHCD’s settlement funds were used to expand
the funding for two existing programs – the Home Owners Preserving Equity
(HOPE) program and the Neighborhood Conservation Initiative (NCI) program.
The HOPE program provides three-year grants to nonprofit organizations for legal
services (such as for foreclosure prevention) and housing counseling (such as for
mediation and credit counseling). DHCD awards the HOPE grants through a
competitive process and distributes funding in quarterly installments. Grantees
are required to submit annual performance data to DHCD to continue to receive
funding for the remainder of the award period.
The NCI program provides grants to communities, generally for a two-year
period, to address abandoned and foreclosed homes in neighborhoods which have
been impacted by foreclosure and sub-prime lending. Funds are awarded through
a competitive process to local governments, public housing authorities, and
nonprofit organizations. Grant recipients are responsible for providing down
payment and closing cost assistance to eligible home buyers, and are responsible
for the acquisition and rehabilitation of housing and abandoned property for resale
or rental purposes. Grant funds are paid in advance or on a reimbursement basis,
depending on the individual grants.
According to its records, during fiscal year 2013, DHCD awarded 39 HOPE
housing counseling grants totaling approximately $12 million and 9 HOPE legal
services grants totaling approximately $9 million. DHCD also awarded 17 NCI
grants totaling $17 million during fiscal year 2013. These grants included the
aforementioned $32 million in mortgage settlement funds. As of December 2014,
the most recent grants were awarded during fiscal year 2013.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 2
DHCD did not maintain complete documentation of the proposal evaluation
process for certain HOPE and NCI grants.
Analysis
Documentation of the grant proposal evaluation process for certain HOPE and
NCI programs was not maintained. Specifically, DHCD could not provide
documentation of the proposal evaluation process, including the selection
committee scores and proposal rankings, for all 39 HOPE housing counseling
grants awarded in fiscal year 2013. In addition, DHCD could not provide
documentation of certain committee member scores for the 17 NCI grants
awarded in fiscal year 2013. Specifically, committee member scores were not
recorded for 18 of the 32 grant applicants, including 8 of the 17 applicants that
were ultimately awarded funds. Furthermore, an overall rating score was not
tabulated for any of the applicants. Without evidence of the proposal evaluation
process, there is no assurance that grants were awarded in appropriate amounts to
entities that were most able to effectively meet program goals.
For both of these grant programs, a five-member selection committee was
responsible for evaluating each proposal and scoring each proposal based on the
established criteria. These criteria included the entity’s experience and expertise,
the proposed programs and related goals, and the locations and number of people
to be served. The proposals also included a requested amount for the grant.
According to the Requests for Proposals, the committee was supposed to rank the
proposals based on the scores and, based on this ranking, determine the amounts
awarded to each applicant.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, DHCD maintain documentation
supporting the grant proposal evaluation process for the HOPE and NCI
programs.
Finding 3
DHCD lacked written procedures for performing and documenting program
compliance monitoring of NCI grants.
Analysis
DHCD had not established formal procedures for performing on-site monitoring
reviews of NCI grants to ensure grantees had complied with program
requirements. Consequently, our test of five judgmentally selected NCI grants
awarded in fiscal year 2013, totaling $8 million, disclosed that the on-site
13

--- Page 16 ---
monitoring of these grants was inconsistently performed and documented by the
project managers. For one grant tested, the applicable project manager did not
perform any on-site performance monitoring reviews, whereas the two project
managers assigned to the remaining four grants tested had conducted on-site
reviews but only partially completed a monitoring checklist in each case to
document the monitoring procedures they performed. For example, in one
instance where grant funds were used to rehabilitate a property, there was no
indication on the checklist that the project manager had evaluated certain critical
information, such as the appraised and fair market values of the property, to
ensure that the subsequent sale of the property complied with program guidelines.
While DHCD had established formal monitoring guidelines and checklists for
similar grant programs, we were advised that the project managers performing the
monitoring of NCI grantees were given flexibility in performing their monitoring
efforts.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHCD
a. establish written procedures for performing on-site program compliance
monitoring of NCI grants to ensure that services were performed in
accordance with the grant agreements, and
b. document all grant monitoring efforts consistent with these procedures.
State-Funded Loans
Finding 4
DHCD’s procedures for reconciling the receivable balances for State-funded
loans did not ensure that reconciliations were properly performed and that
reconciling items were resolved in a timely manner.
Analysis
DHCD’s procedures for reconciling its receivable balances for State-funded
housing loans as recorded on the State’s records with its loan servicer records did
not ensure that reconciliations were properly performed and that reconciling items
were resolved in a timely manner. Specifically, although supervisory personnel
reviewed and approved these reconciliations, this review did not include a
verification of reconciling items for propriety and a review of related supporting
documentation, such as loan documents. Under these conditions, errors or
misappropriations could occur without timely detection.
We judgmentally selected and reviewed the June 30, 2014 reconciliations for five
loan programs with significant outstanding loan balances totaling $463 million.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Our testing disclosed that the reconciliations for one loan program with
outstanding loan balances totaling $15.5 million included 273 identified
reconciling items totaling approximately $327,000 that had been unresolved for
periods of seven months to eight years. For example, the reconciliation for this
program disclosed approximately $83,000 in principal adjustments processed for
13 mortgage loans by the mortgage servicer in March 2012 that were not updated
by DHCD in the State’s accounting records as of December 2014.
DHCD has entered into contracts to obtain servicing of its loans, including
maintenance of loan records. The loan servicer provides DHCD with monthly
reports summarizing loan activity. DHCD is responsible for reconciling these
reports with the State’s records to ensure that all loan activity has been properly
accounted for. According to State records, there were 15,228 State-funded
housing loans with outstanding principal balances totaling $708 million as of June
30, 2014.
Recommendation 4
We recommend
a. that the supervisory review of the monthly State-funded loans receivable
reconciliations include a verification of reconciling items and a review of
related supporting documentation; and
b. that all reconciling items, including the aforementioned 273 items, be
promptly investigated and resolved during the reconciliation process.
Single Family Loan Accounting System
Finding 5
Controls over employee access to DHCD’s single family loan accounting
system were not sufficient.
Analysis
DHCD had not established sufficient controls over employee access to its single
family loan accounting system, which is used for loan processing, debt service,
foreclosures, loan monitoring and tracking, and cash management. According to
audited financial statements, the single family loan receivables balance as of June
30, 2014 totaled approximately $1.5 billion.
 Access was not disabled when individuals were no longer employed by
DHCD, as required. As of December 12, 2014, there were 253 active userids,
of which 105 were assigned to individuals who had been separated from
DHCD employment for periods of 8 to 47 months. DHCD management
15

--- Page 18 ---
advised us that these userids were preserved so that they could be copied to
readily establish userids for new employees. Consequently, unauthorized
activity could be recorded and not detected. While DHCD management
advised that there had not been activity on these accounts subsequent to the
employees’ separation, the system does not track transactions by user
accounts and, accordingly, this could not be confirmed. Subsequent to our
audit, the aforementioned 105 userids were disabled in March 2015.
 DHCD did not periodically review available system reports of user access
capabilities, as required. As of December 18, 2014, DHCD had not performed
such a review since August 2012. Consequently, DHCD lacked assurance
that capabilities were assigned in a manner that only granted employees those
capabilities needed to perform their job duties.
The Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy
requires each agency to immediately disable access upon a change in employment
status, where appropriate. In addition, the Policy requires agencies to monitor the
controls over their information systems at least annually.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DHCD establish appropriate controls over employee
access to its single family loan accounting system in accordance with the
DoIT Information Security Policy requirements. Specifically, we recommend
that DHCD
a. disable user access capabilities upon termination of employment, and
b. periodically review system user capabilities to ensure that access granted
is appropriate.
Procurements
Finding 6
DHCD did not always comply with certain requirements of State
procurement regulations for service contracts awarded through the
competitive sealed bid process.
Analysis
DHCD did not always comply with State procurement regulations with respect to
bidding requirements and publishing awards made through the competitive sealed
bid process. DHCD did not secure vendor bids prior to opening. Rather, the bids
were stored in an unlocked bin in the mailroom that was accessible to many
16

--- Page 19 ---
employees. In addition, bid openings were not witnessed by at least two State
employees, as required. DHCD management advised us that only one employee
opened all vendor bid proposals but documentation of who was present when the
proposals were opened was not maintained. We judgmentally selected three
significant service contracts totaling $2.5 million that were competitively
procured during our audit period and confirmed that DHCD did not document
who was present when the proposals were opened. Our review of these three
contracts also disclosed that the contract awards had not been published on
eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
State procurement regulations generally specify that contracts exceeding $25,000
shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding and also require that competitive
sealed bid proposals be opened in the presence of two State employees.
Additionally, State procurement regulations require that contract awards greater
than $25,000 be published on eMaryland Marketplace within 30 days of the
contract award. During fiscal year 2014, DHCD awarded 41 service contracts
totaling approximately $21.2 million that were individually greater than $25,000.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DHCD comply with State procurement regulations by
a. securing all vendor bids prior to opening,
b. ensuring that two State employees witness the openings of competitive
sealed proposals and maintaining documentation of the employees
present, and
c. publishing contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace within the
required time frame.
17

--- Page 20 ---
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) for the period beginning March 30, 2011 and
ending June 30, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHCD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included payroll, cash receipts, procurements and
disbursements, certain State-funded loan program transactions, and specific
programs (such as multifamily and single family housing grants and loans) used
by DHCD to promote housing opportunities and revitalize localities throughout
the State. We also determined the status of five of the six findings contained in
our preceding audit reports.
DHCD engaged independent accounting firms to perform audits of certain of its
financial activities. Based on significance and risk, we reviewed the following
financial statements of the Division of Development Finance’s Community
Development Administration (CDA) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014:
 CDA Single Family Housing Revenue Bonds
 CDA Revenue Obligation Funds
 CDA Multifamily Mortgage Revenue Bonds
 State Funded Loan Programs
In the related audit reports, the firms stated that the financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the related financial positions as of June 30, 2014,
and the changes in net position and cash flows for the year then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to
provide audit coverage of the aforementioned revenue bonds issued by DHCD’s
19

--- Page 22 ---
CDA. Our audit procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to
obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs (such as
Section 8 Housing) and an assessment of DHCD’s compliance with those laws
and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
DHCD.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
DHCD’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from DHCD’s Multifamily Management Information System
(MMIS) for the purpose of testing multifamily project applications, construction
management, and monitoring efforts. We performed various tests of the relevant
data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of
data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
DHCD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DHCD’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DHCD that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
DHCD’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHCD regarding the
results of our review of its response.
21

--- Page 25 ---
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Responses to Findings and Recommendations Contained in the
Legislative Audit Report of the Department
For the Period Beginning March 30, 2011 and Ending June 30, 2014
Finding 1
The Department of Housing and Community Development did not timely monitor State-funded
multifamily housing projects to ensure that rental units were reserved for low-income households,
as required.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Department complete the annual certification process timely to ensure that
rental units are reserved for low-income households, as required by State law and the related financing
agreements.
Department’s Response:
The Department of Housing and Community Development concurs with the auditors’ recommendation.
However, the Department believes that it does adequately monitor its State-funded multifamily house
projects to ensure compliance with income requirements. Specifically, the Department’s multifamily
projects are subject to annual project inspections administered by Portfolio Managers within the
Division of Credit Assurance. These inspections include sample reviews of each project’s tenant files to
ensure adherence to the income requirements, as mandated by the Department’s various loan programs.
Also, many of the multifamily projects receive an allocation of Low Income Housing Tax Credits and
subsequently, are subject to triennial reviews to ensure compliance with the income requirements of the
program. These reviews are performed, per agreement with the Department, by Spectrum, Inc., a
leading provider of Low Income Housing Tax Credit compliance monitoring services. Spectrum, Inc.
performed compliance reviews for 101 of the properties in 2013 and 199 properties in 2014.
In February 2014, the Department filled the position of Compliance Coordinator. Since that time, a
database of all multifamily projects and applicable restrictions has been created and maintained to aid in
the Department’s efforts to ensure compliance to all low income household restrictions. Furthermore,
the Department has reinforced the annual certification process, having completed certifications for 2013
and with the 2014 and 2015 certifications scheduled for completion by November 30, 2015 and April
30, 2016, respectively. Moving forward, the Department will strengthen its procedures for the annual
certification process to ensure timely monitoring of multifamily housing projects.
Finding 2
The Department of Housing and Community Development did not maintain complete
documentation of the proposal evaluation process for certain Homeowners Preserving Equity
(HOPE) and Neighborhood Conservation Initiative (NCI) grants.
1

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, the Department maintain documentation supporting the grant
proposal evaluation process for the Homeowners Preserving Equity and Neighborhood Conservation
Initiative programs.
Department’s Response:
The Department concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The Department will institute additional
measures to ensure retention and safeguard the integrity of physical and electronic documentation
supporting the proposal evaluation process, including individual committee member scores and overall
rating scores
Finding 3
The Department lacked written procedures for performing and documenting program compliance
monitoring of Neighborhood Conservation Initiative grants.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Department:
a. establish written procedures for performing on-site program compliance monitoring of
Neighborhood Conservation Initiative grants to ensure that services were performed in
accordance with the grant agreements, and
b. document all grant monitoring efforts consistent with these procedures.
Department’s Response:
The Department concurs with the auditors’ recommendations. However, the Department does not
perform program compliance monitoring of Neighborhood Conservation Initiative grants without
guidelines. Specifically, the Department uses the written procedures governing the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Neighborhood Stabilization Program as a guideline
for the implementation of the Neighborhood Conservation Initiative program. Also, financial reviews
are part of on-going grant monitoring through reviews of payment requests, monthly activity reports,
quarterly reports and in-person on-site reviews. Additionally, the Department conducts a final financial
review upon completion of all Neighborhood Conservation Initiative grant activities. Grants are closed
out only after all activities and expenses have been monitored and compliance issues, if any, have been
resolved.
In regards to the issue of consistency during on-site monitoring; since the Neighborhood Conservation
Initiative program funds a variety of activities, program managers use a risk-based approach in order to
focus their review on different activities during on-site monitoring. For example, a program manager
may conduct a review of beneficiaries during one monitoring visit and a review of construction activities
during a subsequent monitoring visit. The Department believes this approach allows program managers
to provide effective monitoring to all Neighborhood Conservation Initiative grants. Currently, the
Department is in the process of establishing written procedures for performing on-site compliance
monitoring of Neighborhood Conservation Initiative grants, which will be completed by November 30,
2015.
2

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 4
The Department’s procedures for reconciling the receivable balances for State-funded loans did
not ensure that reconciliations were properly performed and that reconciling items were resolved
in a timely manner.
Recommendation 4
We recommend:
a. that the supervisory review of the monthly State-funded loans receivable reconciliations include a
verification of reconciling items and a review of related supporting documentation; and
b. that all reconciling items, including the aforementioned 273 items, be promptly investigated and
resolved during the reconciliation process.
Department’s Response:
The Department concurs with the auditors’ recommendations. However, it has always been the practice
of the Department’s Division of Finance and Administration to conduct supervisory review of State-
funded loan receivable reconciliations and supporting documentation. This documentation is readily
available electronically through Docushare software, in accordance with the Division’s approved records
retention policy. The supervisor is now required to initial the reconciliations as evidence of this review.
With regard to the aforementioned reconciling items, the Department has put into effect an action plan
that will result in the resolution of all outstanding items by June 30, 2016.
Finding 5
Controls over employee access to the Department’s single family loan accounting system were not
sufficient.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Department’s establish appropriate controls over employee access to its single
family loan accounting system in accordance with the Maryland Division of Information Technology
Information Security Policy requirements.
Specifically, we recommend that the Department:
a. disable user access capabilities upon termination of employment, and
b. periodically review system user capabilities to ensure that access granted is appropriate.
Department’s Response:
The Department concurs with the auditors’ recommendations. The Department will disable user access
to its network upon notification of termination of employment. To achieve compliance, the
Department’s Division of Information Technology will rely upon separation documents from divisional
staff, cross referenced with separation data from Human Resources and Facilities staff, in order to
accurately identify user accounts to be disabled. The Department will also conduct an annual review of
user capabilities to ensure account access capabilities are appropriate. To achieve compliance, on an
annual basis, the Department’s Division of Information Technology will circulate current user account
information to appropriate divisional staff, whom will then validate acceptable user access, and also
identify any user capabilities that should be modified or disabled.
3

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 6
The Department did not always comply with certain requirements of State procurement
regulations for service contracts awarded through the competitive sealed bid process.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that the Department comply with State procurement regulations by:
a. securing all vendor bids prior to opening,
b. ensuring that two State employees witness the openings of competitive sealed proposals and
maintaining documentation of the employees present, and
c. publishing contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace within the required time frame.
Department’s Response:
The Department concurs with the auditors’ recommendations. However, in response to recommendation
(a), the Department believes that the vendor bids it receives are secured prior to opening. Specifically,
all bids and proposals are logged in the mailroom managed by the Department’s Facilities and Fleet
Management Services unit and stored in a separate area monitored by FFMS staff. The mailroom itself
is locked when not staffed. The documents are then picked up by the procurement officer or delivered by
Facilities and Fleet Management Services to the procurement officer once the deadline for submission
has passed, at which time the procurement officer signed to accept delivery.
In regards recommendations (b) and (c), the Department will ensure that a minimum of two state
employees are present, and documented as such, to witness the opening of competitive sealed technical
proposals. Additionally, the Department will ensure that all contract awards are published on eMaryland
Marketplace within 30 days to ensure compliance with State procurement regulations.
4

--- Page 29 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Marissa L. Eby, CPA
Amanda M. Jones
David O. Mauriello
Michell Min
Tu N. Vuong
Kimberly J. Wagner
Staff Auditors