Title: Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
Date: 03/08/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d724560674584
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:21:47.721139
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission
June 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Financial Statement Audits 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Contract Procurement and Disbursements
Finding 1 – MPBC’s procurement policy did not contain certain 7
provisions required by State law for entities with procurement
exemptions, and contracts awarded under its exemption were not
always reported to or approved by MPBC’s governing commission.
Finding 2 – MPBC did not always comply with State procurement 8
regulations for sole source and competitively bid contracts that
were not part of its procurement exemption.
Finding 3 – MPBC significantly understated the approximate quantity 10
of mailings in a procurement solicitation for direct marketing and
fundraising services which could have affected the bid prices
received.
* Finding 4 – MPBC did not adequately monitor contract terms and 11
payments for three contracts related to fundraising services.
Finding 5 – MPBC did not have an adequate process to evaluate the 13
reasonableness of the amount it was charged by the Public
Broadcasting Service for its annual subscription dues which
exceeded $3.0 million.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Fundraising Information Systems
Finding 6 – MPBC did not periodically review user access capabilities 13
for critical fundraising systems, and numerous users had unnecessary
access to information required to be kept confidential by State law.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 15
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) is responsible for
operating and maintaining a system of regional and local facilities to provide
educational and cultural television and radio programs throughout the State.
MPBC is also responsible for the preparation, content, and presentation of
programs for the public. MPBC operates six television stations located in
Annapolis, Baltimore, Frederick, Hagerstown, Oakland, and Salisbury. MPBC is
governed by an 11-member commission whose members are appointed by the
Governor.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2015, MPBC’s operating
expenditures totaled approximately $28.2 million. These expenditures consisted
of approximately $18.0 million in special funds (primarily from viewer and
corporate contributions), $8.2 million in State general funds, $1.5 million in
reimbursable funds, and $500,000 in federal funds.
Financial Statement Audits
In compliance with the audit requirements established by the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting (a federally funded, nonprofit organization that provides
funds to MPBC as well as to other public broadcasting stations), MPBC engaged
an independent accounting firm to perform audits of the combined financial
statements of MPBC and the Maryland Public Broadcasting Foundation, Inc., an
affiliated nonprofit foundation.
In the related audit reports for fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2013, and 2014,
the firm stated that the combined financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the combined financial position of MPBC and the Foundation,
and the respective changes in net assets and cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with Financial Reporting Guidelines prescribed by the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting.
In the related audit report for fiscal year ended June 30, 2015, the firm stated that
the combined financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
combined financial position of MPBC and the Foundation, and the respective
changes in financial position and cash flows for the years then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report on MPBC dated November 28, 2012. We
determined that MPBC satisfactorily addressed three of the findings. The
remaining finding is repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contract Procurement and Disbursements
Background
Under State law, the Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) is
exempted from State procurement regulations when procuring the services of
artists for educational and cultural television productions and when planning for
or fulfilling the obligations of grants or cooperative agreements that support these
activities. According to State records, during the period from July 1, 2012 to June
30, 2015, MPBC awarded contracts totaling approximately $33.0 million,
including $23.0 million in contracts that were considered exempt from State
procurement regulations based on this law. The remaining contract awards
totaled $10.0 million, of which at least $3.7 million were sole source
procurements.
Finding 1
MPBC’s procurement policy did not contain certain provisions required by
State law for entities with procurement exemptions, and revisions to this
policy were not approved by its governing commission. MPBC also did not
document that it reported to, or obtained approval from, its commission, as
required for contracts awarded under its State procurement regulations
exemption.
Analysis
MPBC’s procurement policy did not adequately address certain provisions as
required by State law for entities with procurement exemptions. Specifically, the
revised policy did not contain critical provisions regarding solicitation
requirements and when competitive bidding should be used. These provisions
were included in MPBC’s separate standard operating procedure (SOP)
documents but the SOP documents were not included or referenced in its
procurement policy. In addition, although MPBC’s procurement policy was
approved by its commission in 2005, MPBC revised this policy in 2015 and did
not seek approval for the revised policy from its commission.
According to State law, each agency with an exemption from State procurement
regulations is required to have written policies and procedures for its exempt
procurements that should include provisions regarding the procurement method to
be used, the solicitation requirements, and the approval process. State law also
requires these exempt agencies to submit their policies and procedures to their
board, commission, council, or authority for review and approval.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Furthermore, for contracts tested that were awarded under MPBC’s State
procurement regulations exemption between January 2012 and October 2014,
documentation did not exist to support that contracts valued over $500,000 had
been approved by MPBC’s commission and contracts valued between $50,000
and $500,000 had been reported to MPBC’s commission, as required by its SOP.
We tested seven contracts totaling $8.0 million and found that MPBC did not
obtain approval from its commission for four contracts totaling $6.9 million, even
though each of these contracts was valued at more than $500,000. MPBC also did
not report to the commission the other three contract awards totaling $1.1 million
for which the contracts were valued between $50,000 and $500,000.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MPBC
a. revise its procurement policy to comply with the requirements of State
law;
b. submit the revised procurement policy, and all future policy revisions, to
its commission for review and documented approval;
c. ensure all applicable contracts are reviewed or approved by the
commission as required, prior to contract award; and
d. submit the aforementioned contracts to its commission for review and/or
approval.
Finding 2
MPBC did not always comply with State procurement regulations for sole
source and competitively bid contract awards that were not part of its
procurement exemption.
Analysis
MPBC did not always comply with State procurement regulations for sole source
and competitively bid contract awards. Our test of three sole source procurements
totaling approximately $1.4 million and four competitively bid procurements
totaling $2.7 million related to contracts awarded between January 2013 and April
2015—none of which were covered by MPBC’s exemption from State
procurement regulations—disclosed certain deficiencies for each of these
procurements.
• For two sole source contract procurements totaling $928,000 for television
ratings statistics and market research analysis services, MPBC did not prepare
formal justifications to support that only the contracted vendors could provide
the necessary services. Although MPBC asserted that the number of vendors
providing these services were limited, MPBC did not document its research
8

--- Page 11 ---
efforts and decisions supporting this conclusion. MPBC also did not publish
these two contract awards on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) and did not
obtain approval from the Board of Public Works (BPW), as required. State
procurement regulations require that the justifications for sole source
procurements be prepared and approved prior to contract award and that they
be documented in writing, that sole source contracts greater than $100,000 be
approved by BPW, and that sole source contract awards greater than $25,000
be published on eMM within 30 days of the contract award.
In addition, MPBC awarded two sole source contracts totaling $715,800
(including one of the aforementioned contracts) to vendors that either were
not registered with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation
(SDAT) to do business in the State or were not in good standing with SDAT.
According to BPW’s Procurement Advisor, agencies should ensure that
vendors are in good standing with SDAT during the procurement process.
• For the four competitively bid contract procurements totaling $2.7 million,
MPBC did not prepare a register of proposals identifying the date and time bid
documents (technical and price proposals) were received and did not
document that all bids were opened in the presence of at least two State
employees. State procurement regulations require that a register of proposals
(both technical and price proposals) be prepared that identifies proposals
received by each offeror, and that these proposals be opened in the presence of
at least two State employees.
• For three competitive procurements totaling $2.3 million, the evaluations of
the technical proposals by the committee members were not sufficiently
documented to conclusively support the evaluation results and related award
decisions. For example, for one $900,000 contract, each member of the
evaluation committee did not complete substantial elements of the technical
evaluation such as whether the work plan included with the proposal indicated
the specific methodology and techniques to be used to provide the required
services. According to the requests for proposals for all three procurements,
the technical abilities of the bidders were considered more important than the
proposed prices.
• For two competitive procurements totaling $1.9 million, MPBC allowed the
winning vendors to negotiate contract prices or scope changes after selecting
the vendors for the contract awards but prior to making the awards. For
example, for a fundraising management system contract totaling $985,200,
this award amount reflected an increase in the vendor’s proposed price by
approximately $142,000 for additional services (such as credit card
9

--- Page 12 ---
processing) that were not included in the original proposal. As these
negotiations were not part of the competitive bid process, other bidders were
not given the opportunity to provide a response. We were advised by BPW’s
Procurement Advisor that the actions taken by MPBC in these situations were
not proper.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MPBC
a. comply with the aforementioned State procurement regulations,
b. seek retroactive approval from BPW for the aforementioned sole source
awards,
c. ensure that contracts are awarded to vendors who are registered and in
good standing with SDAT,
d. sufficiently document the evaluation of bids received with completed
technical evaluations by each member of the evaluation committee, and
e. discontinue conducting exclusive negotiations with winning vendors after
the bid evaluation process is completed and prior to contract award.
Finding 3
MPBC significantly understated the approximate quantity of mailings in its
contract procurement solicitation for direct marketing and fundraising
services which could have affected the bid prices received.
Analysis
MPBC significantly understated the approximate quantity of mailings in its
contract procurement solicitation for direct marketing and fundraising services,
which could have affected the bid prices received. Effective January 2015,
MPBC entered into an 18-month service contract (including two option years)
with the incumbent vendor for direct marketing and fundraising services for an
amount not to exceed $476,500, of which $188,325 was for the initial 18-month
period. MPBC solicited competitive bids for these services, received two bids,
and determined the incumbent vendor was the only qualified bidder. Contracted
services included supporting membership fundraising, helping MPBC increase its
member contributions, and assisting MPBC in developing improved relationships
with donors.
Nine months after the contract began, MPBC noticed that its authorized contract
funding of $476,500 was almost fully spent and that it had made a significant
error in its estimated mailings in its procurement solicitation, which affected the
contract value. Specifically, the original contract award amount had been based
10

--- Page 13 ---
on 150,000 pieces of mail being sent during the initial eighteen-month period
even though the number of mailings anticipated by MPBC was more than one
million pieces. Accordingly, MPBC obtained BPW approval in August 2015 to
increase the value of the initial 18-month contract from $188,325 to $524,133 (an
increase of 178 percent); the option years were not modified. The new contract
value was based on one million pieces of mail and the vendor’s original billing
rate of $0.32 per mailing.
Information about the expected levels of services could impact vendors’ bidding
decisions, as well as the outcome of the bid evaluation processes. Therefore, the
failure to provide such information based on a documented rationale impedes
MPBC’s ability to determine whether it received the most favorable bids, made
the appropriate award decisions, and established reasonable contract values.
Furthermore, State procurement regulations require that solicitations provide an
approximate quantity of goods for an indefinite quantity contract.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MPBC ensure procurement solicitations contain
realistic approximate quantities of the services needed.
Finding 4
MPBC did not adequately monitor contract terms and payments for three
contracts related to fundraising services.
Analysis
MPBC did not adequately monitor three contracts related to fundraising services.
According to State records, as of September 2015, payments to these vendors
totaled approximately $1.2 million.
• MPBC did not ensure payments to the contractor providing direct marketing
and fundraising services were consistent with the contract rate. Our test of
three task orders for fundraising mailing campaigns totaling $142,740
(including the cost for postage) disclosed that the rates billed did not agree
with the contract rate. Rather, MPBC established different rates for each task
order. As a result, our review of the invoices for the task orders disclosed
$5,940 was overpaid on one invoice, and for two invoices, combined
underpayments totaled $6,625. MPBC management advised that the task
order rates should vary depending on the nature of the mailing; however, this
basis for payment was not established in the contract and this approach
11

--- Page 14 ---
negates the purpose of using competition to obtain the most favorable price.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• MPBC did not adequately monitor the call center services contractor during
pledge drives to ensure payments were consistent with the contract terms.
The contract provided that the vendor was not to bill for services that did not
comply with certain performance standards and MPBC generally was not to
pay for these services. However, MPBC did not obtain detailed call center
activity reports from the vendor to determine whether the vendor met those
standards which required, for example, that callers must not remain in the
queue for more than 30 seconds waiting for the next available operator.
Under the terms of the contract, vendor payments were based on a per-minute
rate for each call, and documentation (such as on-line access to call center
reports) was to be available from the vendor to support each invoice.
Our test of three invoices totaling approximately $82,800 disclosed that
MPBC paid these invoices without determining whether the vendor met the
performance standards for the calls included in the invoices. Based on
summary reports provided by the vendor, we noted that during the month of
March 2015 for example, the average queue time was 49 seconds yet MPBC
paid this invoice without questioning the vendor’s contract compliance.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• MPBC did not review invoices from its donor premium gift fulfillment vendor
to ensure it was invoiced only for premium gifts that were ordered. Twice a
week, MPBC ordered premium gifts (such as, DVDs, CDs, books) from the
vendor based on gifts selected by its donors. The vendor shipped the premium
gifts directly to the donors and invoiced MPBC for the items shipped. While
MPBC did review, on a test basis, the invoiced costs for the premium gifts
shipped, it did not compare the number of premium gifts billed by the vendor
with its record of premium gifts ordered by donors. Payments made on this
contract totaled approximately $736,000 through September 30, 2015.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MPBC
a. ensure that contractor services and payments are consistent with contract
terms and rates (repeat); and
b. obtain and review documentation, including performance reports, to
support all invoices and pursue recovery of charges not supported
(repeat).
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 5
MPBC did not have an adequate process to evaluate the reasonableness of
the amount it was charged by the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) for its
annual subscription dues.
Analysis
MPBC did not have an adequate process to evaluate the reasonableness of the
amount it was charged by PBS for its annual subscription dues. PBS annually
calculates MPBC’s subscription dues based on factors including population
served, non-federal funding sources (such as, donations, tower leasing, production
services, merchandise and content licensing, and DVD sales), and number of
broadcasting transmitters. MPBC advised us that the dues were reviewed for
consistency with the prior year’s dues; however, MPBC did not document its
review and did not obtain relevant supporting documentation from PBS to
thoroughly evaluate the reasonableness of the dues. Our recalculation of the dues
bills for 2014 and 2015, using documentation we obtained from PBS, did not
disclose any obvious discrepancies.
According to State records, during the period from July 1, 2012 to June 30 2015,
MPBC paid subscription dues to PBS totaling approximately $10.0 million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MPBC establish a process to evaluate and document the
reasonableness of its annual PBS subscription dues prior to payment.
Fundraising Information Systems
Finding 6
MPBC did not periodically review user access capabilities for critical
fundraising systems, and numerous users had unnecessary access to
information that is required to be kept confidential by State law.
Analysis
MPBC did not periodically review user access capabilities to critical fundraising
systems and we noted that numerous users had unnecessary access. These
systems are used by MPBC to monitor and account for donations and include
donor information which MPBC is required to keep confidential by State law. As
of September 2015, there were 61 users with active accounts that could access and
modify donor information on the donor database and 11 users with active
13

--- Page 16 ---
accounts that could access and modify credit card donation information, including
account numbers and donation amounts, on the online donation system.
Our review of all users with active accounts disclosed that, based on their job
duties, 10 users did not require access to the donor databases and 4 users did not
require access to the online donation system. During our audit, we brought the
lack of periodic access reviews to MPBC’s attention; as a result, MPBC removed
the access from those users who did not require access. MPBC was also in the
process of reviewing the other active accounts, some of which either had never
used their access or had not used their access in the last three months.
Additionally, our review disclosed that one user had the capability to change bank
account information into which certain credit card donations were deposited even
though the user did not require this capability. This employee was responsible for
generating monthly reports used by another employee to reconcile credit card
donations received through the online donation system with MPBC’s bank
account. Consequently, this user could redirect credit card donations and alter
reports used for reconciling transactions, allowing the misappropriation of credit
card donations without detection. According to MPBC’s records, these credit
card collections totaled approximately $1.3 million during fiscal year 2015.
According to the State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy, agencies shall
continuously (at least annually) monitor the security controls within their
information systems to ensure that the controls are operating as intended.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MPBC
a. perform periodic documented reviews of user access capabilities for its
critical fundraising systems,
b. ensure donor information is kept confidential in accordance with State
law and users are assigned only those capabilities necessary to perform
job duties, and
c. grant access to change bank account information only to applicable
management personnel (such as the Chief Financial Officer).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Public
Broadcasting Commission (MPBC) for the period beginning December 1, 2011
and ending June 30, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MPBC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, payroll, cash
receipts, accounts receivable, and information systems. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs and an
assessment of MPBC’s compliance with those laws and regulations because the
State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to annually audit such
programs administered by State agencies, including MPBC.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MPBC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
15

--- Page 18 ---
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MPBC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MPBC’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MPBC that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from MPBC to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MPBC regarding the
results of our review of its response.
16

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 1
Response: MPBC disagrees with this Finding.
The Exemption Policies
The Finding alleges that MPBC’s “procurement policy” did not contain certain provisions
required for entities with procurement exemptions. The Finding recites the State legal
requirement that entities with exemptions from State procurement have written policies and
procedures for its exemptions. During the period of the audit, MPBC had two procurement
exemptions, one for artists and one for grants. For both of these exemptions MPBC has written
policies and procedures and those policies and procedures comply with State law (the
“Exemption Policies”). The Exemption Policies were created in 2005 and were approved by
MPBC’s governing commission at that time. MPBC has followed these Exemption Policies
without incident since then.
The Procurement Manual
In addition to MPBC’s Exemption Policies, MPBC also maintains a separate procurement
manual. The procurement manual serves as a guide for those persons at MPBC involved with
procuring goods and services through the State procurement process. The manual draws closely
from the State’s procurement regulations set forth in COMAR. There is no legal requirement for
MPBC to have a procurement manual. There is no legal requirement as to what the content
should be in MPBC’s procurement manual. And, there is no legal requirement that the manual
be approved by MPBC’s governing commission.
The Finding Confuses the Exemption Policies and the Procurement Manual
The Finding appears to confuse the Exemption Policies and the procurement manual. The
Finding states that “although MPBC’s procurement policy was approved by its commission in
2005, MPBC revised this policy in 2015 and did not seek approval for the revised policy from its
commission.” In fact, MPBC’s Exemption Policies were approved by its commission in 2005,
not the procurement manual. The procurement manual was created by MPT’s procurement
officer and has never been reviewed or approved by the commission. The procurement manual
is periodically reviewed and modified. Again, there is no legal requirement that the MPBC
commission review or approve the procurement manual. As the Finding points out, there is a
legal requirement that the MPBC commission approve the Exemption Policies, and it did so in
2005. Since then, there have been no substantive changes to the Exemption Policies that would
require commission approval. Nevertheless, MPBC will have its commission approve the latest
version of the Exemption Policies which essentially mirrors the 2005 version.
As part of the confusion, the Finding seems to suggest that the problem with MPBC’s Exemption
Policies is that they are somehow not incorporated into MPBC’s procurement manual, or
1

--- Page 21 ---
alternatively that the procurement manual is not incorporated into the Exemption Policies. It is
unclear why this is an issue at all. It is not clear why it is not sufficient to have separate
Exemption Policies which guide contracts outside of the procurement process and a separate
procurement manual which governs contracts that are inside of the procurement process. This
has not been an issue for MPBC during the last eleven years and blending them together as the
Finding seems to suggest will only lead to greater confusion.
Auditor’s Comment: There is no confusion regarding OLA’s understanding of the
distinction between MPBC’s procurement policy and its procurement manual, which is
identified in the audit report as the standard operating procedures. The audit finding
primarily addresses this fact – that MPBC’s procurement policy did not contain certain
provisions required by State law. Although these provisions can be found in the standard
operating procedures document, they are not included in the policy, which alone is
subject to commission approval. For example, the policy does not contain MPBC’s
solicitation and competitive bidding requirements which is a specific requirement of State
law.
The Exemption Policies do not Require that the Commission Review or Approve Contracts
The Finding continues the confusion by highlighting certain contracts which it claims should
have been approved by or reported to the MPBC commission but were not as allegedly required
by the MPBC “procurement policy”, which as noted above the Finding interprets to mean the
Exemption Policies. MPBC’s Exemption Policies, however, have no requirement that the
commission review or approve any contract. MPBC’s procurement manual, which has no legal
force or effect, does. So, the fact that certain contracts inadvertently may not have been
approved by or reported to the commission is of no legal consequence. Although there is no
legal requirement that it do so, MPBC nevertheless has obtained approval by, or reported to, the
commission all of the contracts at issue.
Auditor’s Comment: The audit finding has been revised to clarify that certain contracts
were not approved by or reported to MPBC’s commission as required by its standard
operating procedures, rather than the procurement policy as originally stated.
Nevertheless, according to State law, the procurement policy should address approval
requirements.
Finding 2
Response: As explained more fully below, MPBC disagrees with much of this Finding.
MPBC Reasonably Believed that the Contracts at Issue were Exempt from Procurement
2

--- Page 22 ---
The first part of the Finding related to sole source contracts involves MPBC’s contracts for
television ratings statistics. For decades, and over the course of multiple audits, MPBC has
treated these contracts as subscription services that are exempt under DGS procurement rules
that exempt subscriptions. No audit has ever challenged MPBC on this practice and MPBC
entered into its recent contracts for ratings statistics on the good faith belief that this practice was
acceptable. Changing the designation now to a sole source after two years of the contract would
not affect the performance or terms of the contract in anyway. In fact, given that MPBC is
dealing with a monopoly and has no alternatives for this service, MPBC has done an excellent
job managing the costs of the contracts. Indeed, MPBC paid less under the contract in 2015 than
it did in 2008 while receiving more services on more channels and in more markets than
previously.
MPBC agrees in the future when the current contracts are ending that it will treat the next
contract as a sole source, instead of exempt, if there are no competitors at that time. This is not a
case of MPBC not complying with the regulations for sole source contracts as stated in the
Finding. MPBC never treated this contract as a sole source at all, and has never done so in its
long history of using these services. MPBC is aware of the sole source requirements and would
have followed them if it viewed the contracts as a sole source, which it did not. To the extent
that the rules have now been changed long after the contracts have commenced, they should be
changed prospectively.
Auditor’s Comment: MPBC’s mischaracterization of the contracts as subscriptions and
not sole source procurements, which also require compliance with State procurement
regulations, does not relieve it of the responsibility to comply with those regulations,
including seeking Board of Public Works’ approval.
MPBC Agrees that for Contracts Subject to the Procurement Process Vendors Must Register
with SDAT, but this Obligation does not Apply to Contracts Exempt from Procurement
As to the reference that two “sole source contracts” were not registered with SDAT, as explained
above for one of the contracts at issue, MPBC understandably believed that the contract was
exempt from procurement and for the other alleged sole source contract, that contract was
unquestionably exempt from procurement. Given that MPBC reasonably believed that the
contracts were exempt from procurement, there is no requirement under Maryland law that the
vendors register with SDAT for contracts that are not part of the procurement process. The
contention in the Finding that “agencies should ensure that vendors are in good standing with
SDAT during the procurement process” is not to the contrary. Indeed, MPBC agrees that for
contracts that are subject to the procurement process, the vendors must register with SDAT. But
that is not the case here, and for these contracts that were not subject to procurement, there was
no obligation to register. MPBC will continue to ensure that for contracts subject to
procurement, the vendors register with SDAT.
3

--- Page 23 ---
Auditor’s Comment: MPBC seems to mistakenly assume that the process of obtaining
services through a sole source contractor does not qualify as a procurement method under
State procurement law. As stated in the report finding, we confirmed with the Board of
Public Works’ Procurement Advisor that agencies should ensure that all vendors,
including those obtained through sole source procurements, are registered and in good
standing with SDAT.
There is no Basis to Support the Finding that MPBC did not Comply with Procurement
Regulations Related to the Receipt of Bid Documents
The Finding’s contention that MPBC did not comply with procurement regulations for a limited
number of contracts is incorrect. The Finding states that MPBC did not “prepare a register of
proposals identifying the date and time bid documents were received” and “did not document
that all bids were opened in the presence of at least two State employees.” There is no
requirement under Maryland law that MPBC identify the date and time bid documents are
received. COMAR 21.05.03.02 (G)(1) is the only regulation that addresses the receipt of bid
proposals and it provides, “Proposals and modifications shall be held in a secure place until the
established due date. Proposals may not be opened publicly but shall be opened in the presence
of at least two State employees. After the established due date, a register of proposals shall be
prepared that identifies each offeror.” This regulation does not require, contrary to the Finding,
that MPBC record the date and time that bids were received, and MPBC did in fact open bids in
the presence of two State employees. Nevertheless, in the future, MPBC will compile this
information in a “register”.
Auditor’s Comment: The primary issue identified in the audit finding is MPBC’s
failure to prepare a register of proposals received for four competitive procurements as
required by State procurement regulations. The contents of the register (that is, the time
and date of receipt of proposals) was not the focus of the audit finding, but illustrates the
nature of the information that typically would be included in the register to help
demonstrate the integrity of the bid receipt process. For the four procurements, MPBC
did not document which bids were opened in the presence of at least two State employees
as stated in the audit finding.
There is no Basis to Support the Finding that MPBC did not Comply with Procurement
Regulations Related to the Evaluation of Bid Proposals
Similarly, the Finding states that “MPBC did not sufficiently document the evaluation of bids.”
Specifically, the Finding asserts that for one contract, the evaluation committee members did not
complete substantial elements of the technical evaluation”. Here too, the Finding is incorrect.
The Finding cites no procurement regulation to support its position, because there is no
applicable regulation. COMAR 21.05.03.03 (A) (c) (6) addresses the evaluation of proposals,
and in particular the role of an evaluation committee and states, “Initial evaluations may be
4

--- Page 24 ---
conducted and recommendation for award made by an evaluation committee. Final evaluations,
including evaluation of the recommendation of the evaluation committee, if any, shall be
performed by the procurement officer and the agency head or designee.” Other than this cryptic
statement, the regulations do not impose any obligations on the evaluation committee. COMAR
21.05.01.07 does require that there be a procurement record on file for each procurement and that
certain documents be maintained therein, but no mention is made of the evaluation committee or
any documents related to it. For the contract at issue, the procurement officer prepared a 10
page, single-spaced board report that evaluated in detail the merits of the proposals. It is
inconceivable that this comprehensive document could have been prepared without extensive
input from the evaluation committee.
Auditor’s Comment: The audit finding does not cite the failure of MPBC to sufficiently
document the evaluation results for three procurements as a violation of State
procurement regulations. Rather, the finding refers to the obvious need for MPBC to
follow its established vendor proposal evaluation procedures to help ensure the integrity
of the process. Because of incomplete evaluation documentation, MPBC could not
conclusively support that the evaluations for these procurements were properly performed
and the award decisions were consistent with the evaluation results.
MPBC did not Negotiate Improperly after the Selection of a Vendor
The Finding asserts that MPBC allowed a winning vendor to negotiate contract prices or scope
changes after selecting the vendor. Specifically, the Finding states that for a fundraising
management system, the total proposed price increased by approximately $142,000 “for
additional services . . . that were not included in the original proposal.” The Finding is incorrect.
A fuller review of the winning vendor’s bid plainly reveals that the services that were offered by
the vendor and that were included in the final contract, were also included as part of the vendor’s
original proposal. While some services were offered on an optional basis with an additional fee,
they were responsive to the scope of work, they were part of the original proposal, and they were
considered as part of the evaluation process. They did not first arise as part of some sort of after-
selection negotiation as the Finding suggests.
Auditor’s Comment: Although MPBC correctly claims that the services costing
$142,000 were contained in the applicable vendor’s proposal, those services were not
included in MPBC’s original request for proposals. Therefore, all bidders were not given
the opportunity to provide a financial bid for these services.
Finding 3
Response: MPBC does not dispute this Finding and agrees with the recommendation that it do a
better job of calculating the quantities needed in its direct mailing contract.
5

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 4
Response: This Finding involves three different contracts. For the first two contracts involving
direct mailing and call center services, MPBC has already modified those contracts to comply
with the recommendation.
For the third contract, the Finding claims that MPBC “did not review invoices from its donor
premium gift fulfillment vendor”. This statement is contradicted by the Finding’s assertion that
“MPBC did review, on a test basis, the invoiced costs for the premium gifts”. The fact is that
MPBC did review and regularly does review invoices from its gift fulfillment vendor. Those
invoices include such detailed information as the name of the donor, the gift shipped, and the
cost of the gift. An invoice could have anywhere from several hundred to several thousand gifts.
Given this large quantity, MPBC reviews approximately 10% of every invoice. The review
consists of, among other things, confirming the gift that was sent, the cost of the gift, and the
member to whom the gift was sent; and checking MPBC member files to compare the member,
the amount of the pledge, and the pledge gift with the invoice. To the extent that the Finding
now suggests that MPBC review every item instead of only some of the items, that would require
MPBC to hire an employee whose task would be nothing other than to review every one of the
thousands of items and to create separate purchase orders for each item. That is not cost-
effective as it would cost MPBC and the State more money than would be saved by adopting the
approach in the Finding. Nevertheless, MPBC will explore other cost-effective options in an
effort to provide greater scrutiny of the invoices.
Auditor’s Comment: The invoice review performed by MPBC during the audit did
verify that the vendor-reported gift shipments were consistent with the amounts billed.
However, because the review did not include a comparison to the donor database, the
review did not ensure that MPBC was only billed for gifts that were ordered and not
previously shipped.
Finding 5
Response: During the nearly fifty years that MPBC has been a Public Broadcasting Service
(“PBS”) member station, MPBC has always thoroughly reviewed its PBS annual dues and
significantly, the Finding states that there are no “obvious discrepancies” in the PBS dues that
were reviewed during the audit period. As to the recommendation that MPBC “document” its
review of the dues, MPBC will comply with that.
6

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 6
Response: MPBC does not dispute the Finding but notes that there has been no breach of any
confidential information. As noted in the Finding, MPBC already has complied with the
recommendation.
7

--- Page 27 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditor
Joshua A. Naylor
Staff Auditor