Title: Maryland Technology Development Corporation
Date: 10/11/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746de
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:48:16.882479
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Technology Development Corporation
June 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Financial Activity
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) was created by
the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 as a public instrumentality of the State to
help businesses get started and grow through commercialization of technology
developed in Maryland by university researchers, the private sector, and federal
laboratories. TEDCO seeks to create and sustain business, and create jobs in
technology-related industry throughout all regions of the State. TEDCO is
governed by a 15-member Board of Directors, which includes the Secretary of the
Department of Business and Economic Development. The remaining 14
members are appointed to the Board by the Governor with the advice and consent
of the Maryland Senate.
To achieve its goals, TEDCO provides certain financial assistance to early-stage
technology businesses, and funds development and patenting of new technologies
at research universities. In addition, TEDCO develops relationships with federal
research facilities in the State and helps companies pursue research funds from
federal and other sources. Through its Maryland Stem Cell Research
Commission, an independent entity, TEDCO also promotes State-funded stem
cell research and cures through grants and loans to private and public entities in
the State.
In February 2013, TEDCO created a for-profit limited liability corporation,
TEDCO Capital Partners (TCP), to manage four planned targeted investment
funds. The goal of these investment funds is to raise capital from private sources
to provide venture capital for specific recipients. As of March 2015, TCP had
recruited a management team for two investment funds. The Propel Baltimore
Fund provides investments to early-stage technology companies located in
Baltimore City. The Veterans’ Opportunity Fund provides investments to
entrepreneurs who served in the United States military.
According to its audited financial statements, TEDCO’s fiscal year 2014
expenses, funded primarily with State general funds, were $22.5 million,
including $603,000 in administrative expenses. TEDCO’s fiscal year 2014 net
operating income totaled $825,000 and, as of June 30, 2014, its net position was
$8.5 million. Since fiscal year 2010, net position has increased $3.8 million
through accumulated earnings, including from non-State sources (such as
investment royalties and management fees from TCP).
3

--- Page 6 ---
Financial Statement Audits
In accordance with the Economic Development Article, Title 10-414 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, TEDCO engaged an independent accounting firm
to perform audits of its financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30,
2012, 2013, and 2014. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that TEDCO’s
financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position
of TEDCO and its changes in financial position and its cash flows for the years
ended in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated October 11, 2012. We determined that TEDCO
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of TEDCO’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less
significant findings were communicated to TEDCO that did not warrant mention
in this report.
A draft copy of this report was provided to TEDCO. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Technology
Development Corporation (TEDCO) for the period beginning May 22, 2012 and
ending January 6, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
4

--- Page 7 ---
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine TEDCO’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included grants and disbursements. We also determined
the status of the finding included in our preceding audit report.
TEDCO engaged an independent accounting firm to perform audits of its
financial statements for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2013, and 2014. In
the related audit reports, the firm stated that TEDCO’s financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of TEDCO and its
changes in financial position and its cash flows for the years ended in accordance
with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
We performed certain steps to satisfy ourselves as to the reliability of the reported
results of the independent audits. Accordingly, we have relied on the work of the
independent accounting firm to provide audit coverage of certain aspects of
TEDCO’s operations (payroll processing functions). Our audit procedures in
these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for
that reliance. Finally, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls
over compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of TEDCO’s compliance with those laws and
regulations because TEDCO engages an independent accounting firm to audit
such programs as appropriate.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
TEDCO’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability
of data used in this report for background or informational purposes was not
assessed.
TEDCO’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
5

--- Page 8 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
David O. Mauriello
Senior Auditor