Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland, Baltimore
Date: 09/22/2016
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d72456067473a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:57:19.609101
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore
March 2023
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative
Audits has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate David Moon
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 1, 2023
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) for the period
beginning July 1, 2018 and ending August 31, 2021. UMB is a comprehensive
public institution of USM and provides professional and graduate level instruction
through its schools of Dentistry, Law, Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, Social
Work, and its Graduate School.
Our audit disclosed that UMB did not independently review changes to student
residency status for propriety. Verifying proper residency status is critical to
ensuring that students are charged the correct tuition amount. In addition, reviews
performed by UMB for ensuring the propriety of certain financial aid award
adjustments were not independent, sufficiently comprehensive, and were not
documented. Furthermore, UMB did not refer certain delinquent grants
receivable balances to the State’s Central Collection unit as required. As of
August 2021, grants receivables totaled $59.6 million, of which $11.8 million was
more than 180 days past due.
Our audit also disclosed that UMB did not perform documented independent
verifications that collections received by university departments were forwarded
to the Cashier’s Office for deposit, and UMB did not adequately document the
review of adjustments to leave balances recorded in its payroll system, resulting
in a lack of assurance that all recorded adjustments were valid. During our audit
period, approximately 3,912 adjustments were recorded that increased employee
leave balances by approximately 245,096 hours.

--- Page 4 ---
Furthermore, our audit disclosed certain risks in UMB’s information systems.
However in accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the finding from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted finding falls under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding were
previously communicated to UMB as well as those parties responsible for acting
on our recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings
contained in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our
determination that UMB satisfactorily addressed both findings.
The USM Office’s response to this audit, on behalf of UMB, is included as an
appendix to this report. We reviewed the response and noted general agreement
to our findings and related recommendations. Subsequent to the response receipt,
but prior to the issuance of the final report, we contacted USM and UMB and
obtained additional clarification that satisfactorily resolved all outstanding
questions and issues. Consequently, we have concluded that the written responses
and additional clarification together indicate that UMB’s corrective actions
identified are sufficient to address all audit issues. Consistent with the
requirements of State law, we have redacted the elements of UMB’s response
related to the cybersecurity audit finding.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
UMB. We also wish to acknowledge USM’s and UMB’s willingness to address
the audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Security Incident 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Student Residency
Finding 1 – The University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) did not 5
independently review for propriety changes to student residency status
that significantly impacted tuition rates.
Financial Aid
Finding 2 – Reviews performed by UMB for ensuring the propriety of 6
certain financial aid award adjustments were not independent,
sufficiently comprehensive, and were not documented.
Grants Receivable
Finding 3 – UMB did not refer certain delinquent grant receivable 7
balances to the State’s Central Collection Unit as required.
Cash Receipts
Finding 4 – UMB did not perform documented independent verifications 8
that collections received by university departments were forwarded to
the Cashier’s Office for deposit.
Payroll
Finding 5 – UMB did not adequately document the review of adjustments 8
to leave balances recorded in UMB’s payroll system, resulting in a
lack of assurance that all recorded adjustments were valid.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 9
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) provides professional and
graduate level instruction through its schools of Dentistry, Law, Medicine,
Nursing, Pharmacy, and Social Work, and its Graduate School. UMB students
who receive instruction in health care professions obtain clinical experience at
various health care facilities, including the University of Maryland Medical
Center, which is a component of the University of Maryland Medical System
Corporation.
Based on UMB’s records for the Spring 2021 semester, UMB’s enrollment totaled
7,087 students. UMB’s budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as tuition
and student fees; a State general fund appropriation; and restricted revenues, such
as federal grants and contracts. According to the State’s records, fiscal year 2021
revenues totaled approximately $1.3 billion, which included a State general fund
appropriation of $231.8 million. These records also indicated that UMB’s
expenditures for fiscal year 2021 totaled approximately $1.3 billion.
Security Incident
In December 2020, UMB experienced a cybersecurity incident resulting in a data
breach. In response to this incident, UMB informed various parties and filed a
cybersecurity insurance claim with its insurance carrier. Appropriate technical
assistance was hired, reviews were conducted, affected individuals were notified,
with credit monitoring offered and the necessary remediation completed. UMB
ultimately paid a $100,000 cybersecurity insurance policy deductible as well as
approximately $7,800 for additional notifications. According to UMB’s records,
the cybersecurity insurance carrier paid approximately $870,000 for covered
services.
The incident did not significantly impact our audit and we were able to obtain
information needed to satisfy our audit objectives and related conclusions.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 10, 2019. We determined that UMB
satisfactorily addressed both of these findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Student Residency
Finding 1
The University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) did not independently review
for propriety changes to student residency status that significantly impacted
tuition rates.
Analysis
UMB did not independently review for propriety changes to student residency
status that significantly impacted tuition rates. UMB generated output reports of
student residency changes made on its automated system to be used by
supervisors to review the changes for propriety. Our review disclosed that as of
October 2021 no review of the reports had been performed since July 2020 and
reviews performed prior to July 2020 were not independent since the reports were
generated by an employee who made changes to residency status rather than
directly obtained from the system by the employee responsible for reviewing and
approving the changes. Specifically, according to UMB’s records, from July
2018 through August 2021, there were 9,058 changes from out-of-state to in-state
residency status, of which 8,165 were made by the aforementioned employee.
Consequently, UMB lacked assurance that all student residency changes made
were appropriate. Accurate student residency determinations are critical because
of the significant differences between in-state and out-of-state student tuition
rates. An example of a significant rate difference is the annual tuition charge for
the Doctor of Dental Surgery program for the 2020-2021 school year, which was
$41,507 for Maryland residents and $77,664 for non-residents, a difference of
$36,157. Our test of 10 adjustments including 8 processed by the aforementioned
employee did not disclose any improper changes.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMB
a. review output reports of changes made to student residency for propriety,
at least on a test basis;
b. ensure that such reviews are documented; and
c. ensure that the employee responsible for generating the output reports
and performing the reviews does not have system access capabilities to
make residency status changes to student accounts.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Financial Aid
Finding 2
Reviews performed by UMB for ensuring the propriety of certain financial
aid award adjustments were not independent, sufficiently comprehensive,
and were not documented.
Analysis
Reviews performed by UMB for ensuring the propriety of certain financial aid
award adjustments were not independent, sufficiently comprehensive, and were
not documented. UMB’s financial aid system automatically calculates award
amounts and generates recommended financial aid award packages for students
based on various eligibility criteria. Certain UMB employees in the Financial Aid
Office could manually record adjustments to these award amounts based on
individual student situations. These adjustments were based on either actions
initiated by the Office or requests from the various academic schools within
UMB. UMB advised that award adjustments requested by the various academic
schools within UMB, which totaled $25.1 million during fiscal 2021, are verified
for propriety by the respective schools after processing by the Financial Aid
Office.
However, our review of 12 material award adjustments totaling $264,000
requested by three academic schools disclosed a lack of documentation that the
above noted review by the schools was performed for each of the adjustments. In
addition, based on UMB representations, employees at each of the three schools
who were responsible for performing the verification of adjustments’ propriety
were the same employees who submitted the adjustment request to the Office.
Finally, we were advised by UMB management that the various schools
(including the three noted above) relied on output reports or confirmation from
the Office rather than obtaining and using an independently generated output
report of adjustments processed. Our review of the aforementioned 12 award
adjustments noted the adjustments appeared proper.
A finding of insufficient controls over financial aid award adjustments directly
processed by the Financial Aid Office was included in our prior audit report; and
in response, UMB established an independent review of award adjustments
initiated and processed directly by the Financial Aid Office.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UMB ensure, at least on a test basis, that financial aid
award adjustments requested by the academic schools are independently
6

--- Page 9 ---
verified using independently generated output reports of all recorded
adjustments, and that these verifications be documented.
Grants Receivable
Finding 3
UMB did not refer certain delinquent grant receivable balances to the State’s
Central Collection Unit as required.
Analysis
UMB did not refer certain delinquent grant receivable balances to the State’s
Central Collection Unit (CCU) as required. UMB receives grants from federal,
State, and local governments, as well as private entities for various purposes, such
as conducting research. UMB periodically bills these entities for reimbursement
of qualifying grant expenditures. According to UMB records, as of August 2021,
grants receivables totaled $59.6 million, of which $11.8 million was more than
180 days past due, including $7 million due from non-State entities.
For testing purposes, we focused on non-State entity debts, and reviewed 12 of
these receivables due from non-State entities1 with balances totaling $860,491.
Our review disclosed six accounts totaling $425,694 were outstanding for
between 377 and 833 days and had not been forwarded to CCU. UMB entered
into payment plans or the entity paid the outstanding balance for the six other
accounts totaling $434,797. However, this action occurred between 114 to 218
days after the accounts were required to be forwarded to CCU.
CCU regulations, as amended for UMB, generally require delinquent accounts,
including grants and contracts awarded from federal, state, local, and private
agencies and organizations, be sent to CCU 180 days after the invoice date. We
were advised by UMB that accounts were not referred to CCU because of
employee turnover, and the learning curve relating to implementation of a new
financial system.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UMB refer delinquent grant receivable balances to
CCU in accordance with CCU regulations, as amended for UMB.
1 We selected material receivables from non-State agencies that were outstanding for more than
180 days.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
UMB did not perform documented independent verifications that collections
received by university departments were forwarded to the Cashier’s Office
for deposit.
Analysis
UMB did not perform documented independent verifications that collections
received by university departments were forwarded to the Cashier’s Office for
deposit. Specifically, we judgmentally selected 13 material collections totaling
approximately $20 million received directly by 5 UMB departments during the
period from January 2020 to July 2021 and found that for 4 of the departments
there was no documentation that the department had verified that 12 of the
collections totaling $18.4 million had been forwarded to the Office for deposit. In
addition, the employee who was responsible for performing the verification for 2
collections tested at one department was not independent of the collection
function.
As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all department collections were
forwarded to the cashier’s office for deposit. We determined that all 13
collections had been deposited by the Office. UMB departments collected $64.1
million during fiscal year 2021, including $25.4 million at the aforementioned 4
departments.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UMB ensure that an independent and documented
verification of collections received to collections forwarded for deposit is
performed by all university departments.
Payroll
Finding 5
UMB did not adequately document the review of adjustments to leave
balances recorded in UMB’s payroll system, resulting in a lack of assurance
that all recorded adjustments were valid.
Analysis
UMB did not adequately document the review of adjustments to leave balances
(including annual, sick, and personal leave) recorded in UMB’s payroll system.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Specifically, UMB supervisors approved the adjustments prior to recording on the
automated system by UMB Payroll Services. We were advised by UMB that
adjustments are verified for propriety by the respective schools after processing
by UMB Payroll Services; however, we found that for items we tested this
verification was not adequately documented. Our test of eight material leave
adjustments that increased employee leave balances by approximately 8,100 hours
disclosed that UMB was unable to provide adequate documentation to support a
review of those adjustments by the respective schools. Further, our review of the
eight adjustments did not disclose any improper transactions. During our audit
period, UMB processed 3,912 adjustments that increased employee leave
balances by 245,096 hours.
We were advised by UMB that several factors contributed to the significant
number of hours requiring adjustment, including a large number of employee
transfers and parental leave that occurred during our audit period.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UMB ensure that leave adjustments processed in its
payroll system are reviewed, at least on a test basis, by its respective schools
for propriety by independent supervisory personnel and that this review be
adequately documented.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Finding 6, related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State Finance
and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available report in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the cybersecurity-related information as well as the following
finding, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with USM’s
response, have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) for the period
beginning July 1, 2018 and ending August 31, 2021. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMB’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements, student
accounts receivable, cash receipts, student financial aid, payroll, and information
systems security and control. Our audit included certain support services (such as
certain construction vendor payments) provided by UMB on a centralized basis
for several other units of USM. We also determined the status of the findings
contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMB by the USM
Office. These support services (such as bond financing) are included within the
scope of our audit of the USM Office. In addition, our audit did not include an
evaluation of internal controls over compliance with federal laws and regulations
for federal assistance programs and an assessment of UMB’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including the components of USM.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of July 1, 2018 to August 31, 2021, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
10

--- Page 13 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of UMB’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from UMB’s financial systems for the purpose of testing
certain areas, such as financial aid and student accounts receivable. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
UMB’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to UMB, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
11

--- Page 14 ---
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMB’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UMB that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation”. Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that a finding in this report falls under
that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all specifics
as to the nature of the cybersecurity finding and required corrective actions have
been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of the cybersecurity finding has been
communicated to the USM Office and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMB, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. Depending on the
version of the audit report, responses to any cybersecurity findings may be
redacted in accordance with State law. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 15 ---
APPENDIX
3300 METZEROTT ROAD // ADELPHI, MD 20783
WWW.USMD.EDU // 301.445.1923
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE
February 22, 2023
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Re: University System of Maryland – University of Maryland, Baltimore
Period of Audit: July 1, 2018 through August 31, 2021
Dear Mr. Hook,
Thank you for the work of your team and the recommendations you provided. I have enclosed the
University System of Maryland’s responses to your draft report covering the examination of the accounts
and records of the University System of Maryland – University of Maryland, Baltimore. Our comments refer
to the individual items in the report.
Sincerely,
Ellen Herbst
Senior Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance
Enclosures
cc: Dr. Bruce Jarrell, President, University of Maryland, Baltimore
Ms. Linda R. Gooden, Chair, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Ms. Ellen Fish, University System of Maryland Board of Regents
Dr. Jay A. Perman, Chancellor, University System of Maryland
Ms. Celeste Denson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Financial Affairs, USM Office
Mr. David Mosca, Vice Chancellor for Accountability, USM Office
Mr. Michael C. Eismeier, Associate Vice Chancellor and CIO, USM Office
Ms. Samantha Norris, Director – Financial Planning and Analysis, USM Office
Ms. Michele L. Evans, Assistant Vice President, Change Management and Advisory Services, University
of Maryland, Baltimore

--- Page 16 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Student Residency
Finding 1
The University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) did not independently review for propriety
changes to student residency status that significantly impacted tuition rates.
We recommend that UMB
a. review output reports of changes made to student residency for propriety, at least on a
test basis;
b. ensure that such reviews are documented; and
c. ensure that the employee responsible for generating the output reports and performing
the reviews does not have system access capabilities to make residency status changes to
student accounts.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Oct 2021
Please provide details of Vacant positions and other challenges faced during the Covid-19
corrective action or pandemic contributed to an interruption in residency reviews. As of
explain disagreement. October 2021, reviews of residency changes have resumed.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Oct 2021
Please provide details of Output reports are generated and reviewed on a quarterly basis and
corrective action or signed and dated to document completion of the review.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Oct 2021
Please provide details of Reviews are completed by the Associate Registrar, whose system
corrective action or access does not include the ability to make residency changes.
explain disagreement.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 17 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Financial Aid
Finding 2
Reviews performed by UMB for ensuring the propriety of certain financial aid award
adjustments were not independent, sufficiently comprehensive, and were not documented.
We recommend that UMB ensure, at least on a test basis, that financial aid award
adjustments requested by the academic schools are independently verified using
independently generated output reports of all recorded adjustments, and that these
verifications be documented.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2023
Please provide details of UMB agrees to ensure that financial aid award adjustments
corrective action or requested by the academic schools are independently verified, at
explain disagreement. least on a test basis, using independently generated output reports of
adjustments processed. It should be noted that these adjustments
requested by the schools are reductions to tuition, which are
distinctly different from financial aid awards that can result in cash
disbursements to students.
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 18 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Grants Receivable
Finding 3
UMB did not refer certain delinquent grant receivable balances to the State’s Central
Collection Unit as required.
We recommend that UMB refer delinquent grant receivable balances to CCU in
accordance with CCU regulations, as amended for UMB.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 2023
Please provide details of In FY22 Sponsored Projects Accounting and Compliance (SPAC)
corrective action or implemented a system that automatically tracks all invoices as they
explain disagreement. are digitally sent and files them by award. Historically many
receivables are delayed by sponsor assertions that they did not
receive an invoice, so this new system should improve timeliness of
payments by allowing SPAC to quickly prove invoices were sent to
the appropriate person. SPAC has added additional staff and an
October 2022 reorganization created a specialized Collections Unit
responsible for monitoring delinquent accounts. This team reviews
invoices in the 180 days aging bracket with the SPAC Director on a
weekly basis to ensure appropriate reporting to CCU.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 19 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 4
UMB did not perform documented independent verifications that collections received by
university departments were forwarded to the Cashier’s Office for deposit.
We recommend that UMB ensure that an independent and documented verification of
collections received to collections forwarded for deposit is performed by all university
departments.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 4 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2023
Please provide details of Cash receipts requirements will be reviewed with departments and
corrective action or deposit verifications will be performed and documented by
explain disagreement. department personnel independent of the collections process.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 20 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Payroll
Finding 5
UMB did not adequately document the review of adjustments to leave balances recorded in
UMB’s payroll system, resulting in a lack of assurance that all recorded adjustments were
valid.
We recommend that UMB ensure that leave adjustments processed in its payroll system
are reviewed, at least on a test basis, by its respective schools for propriety by independent
supervisory personnel and that this review be adequately documented.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 5 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Jan 2023
Please provide details of As noted by the auditors, all leave adjustments are subject to
corrective action or supervisory review prior to recording on the automated system by
explain disagreement. UMB Payroll Services. In January 2023, UMB enhanced existing
review reminders (biweekly emails instructing departments to
independently run leave reports and review all leave adjustments)
by adding precise instructions as to how the departmental review
should be documented. Additionally, UMB central offices will
perform periodic testing to confirm that departments appropriately
complete and document their independent verification.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 21 ---
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland, Baltimore
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security
and Control section, including Finding 6, related to “cybersecurity”, as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3A-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and
therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with State
Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the cybersecurity-related information
as well as the finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s), along with USM’s
response, have been redacted from this report copy, USM’s response indicated agreement with
the finding and related recommendation(s).
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 6

--- Page 22 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Dorian A. Fournier
Paul A. McGrew
Gary B. Staples, CPA
Staff Auditors
Vickey K. Micah
Malcolm J. Woodard
Information Systems Staff Auditors