Title: Maryland Insurance Administration
Date: 11/20/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d724560674483
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:00:27.226795
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Insurance Administration
November 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410 946-5400 or 301
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Premium Tax System
Finding 1 – The Procurement of a New Premium Tax System Did Not 9
Comply With State Procurement Regulations and the Project Was Not
Adequately Planned
Finding 2 – An MIA Management Employee Exercised Excessive Control 12
Over the Premium Tax System Procurement and Implementation
* Finding 3 – The Premium Tax System Was Not Properly Secured and a 14
Contractor Had Complete Control Over the System
Finding 4 – MIA Lacked Assurance That the Premium Tax System Was 15
Properly Protected From External Threats and Unauthorized Changes
Administration of Premium Tax Filings
Finding 5 – MIA Had Not Established Adequate Controls Over Audits of 18
Premium Tax Filings and a Number of Errors Were Detected
Finding 6 – Procedures Were Not Sufficient to Ensure Certain Premium 20
Tax Payments Were Received Timely
Finding 7 – MIA Had Not Established Proper Controls Over Premium Tax 21
Refunds
* Finding 8 – MIA Did Not Reconcile its Records of Premium Tax Revenues 22
With the Corresponding State Accounting Records
Financial Examination Services
Finding 9 – Sufficient Controls Were Not Established Over Financial 24
Examination Services Task Order Awards and Modifications
Cash Receipts
* Finding 10 – MIA Lacked Accountability and Control Over Certain 26
Cash Receipts
* Denotes items repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Producer Licensing
Finding 11 – Sufficient Controls Were Not Established For the 27
Issuance of Producer Licenses
* Finding 12 – MIA Lacked Assurance That Producer Licensing and 28
Pre-Licensing Services Systems Were Protected Against Operational
and Security Risks
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 13 – Proper Internal Controls Were Not Established Over 30
Purchases and Disbursement Transactions
Information Systems Network
Finding 14 – Administrative Access to MIA’s Network Was Excessive 31
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 33
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes items repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA)
November 2014
As a result of our audit, we determined that MIA’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory, in accordance with the rating system we established in
conformity with State law.
 The procurement of the new automated premium tax system did not
comply with State procurement regulations governing competitive
procurements and contract modifications. In addition, the system
development and implementation proceeded without a plan and related
specifications. While the new system provided certain new capabilities,
other capabilities that were available in the former system were lost,
which had adversely impacted operations (Finding 1). Furthermore, an
MIA management employee exercised control over virtually all aspects of
the procurement and implementation of the new premium tax system
(Finding 2). MIA collected premium taxes totaling $458 million during
fiscal year 2014.
MIA should ensure that future procurements comply with State procurement
regulations; develop a comprehensive plan prior to system development
including required functionality and cost estimates; and separate the
procurement, contract monitoring, and invoice approval functions.
 The premium tax system was not properly secured to restrict and control
access. The premium tax system contractor had complete control over
the system and unnecessary access to the remainder of the MIA network
(Finding 3). In addition, MIA lacked assurance that the premium tax
system was properly secured and configured to protect it from external
threats and unauthorized changes (Finding 4).
MIA should restrict access to the premium tax system, including the access
provided to the contractor. MIA should also periodically obtain security
vulnerability assessments and securely configure its servers and applications.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 MIA had not established adequate controls over audits of premium tax
filings, including a lack of independent supervisory review of audit
results. Our tests of the results for 43 audits disclosed inaccuracies or
documentation deficiencies with 11 audits, with premium tax payments
totaling $50.9 million, including the issuance of a duplicate account credit
and failure to assess penalties and interest (Finding 5). In addition,
procedures were not sufficient to ensure certain tax payments were
received timely. Consequently, penalties and interest were not always
assessed for late payments (Finding 6).
MIA should establish controls to ensure premium tax audits are properly
completed and that penalties and interest are assessed, as applicable.
 MIA had not established proper internal controls over premium tax
refunds. For example, certain refunds were approved and authorized for
payment by the same supervisory employee and some refunds appeared
to be duplicates (Finding 7). In addition, MIA did not reconcile its
records of premium tax revenues with the corresponding State
accounting records (Finding 8).
MIA should establish controls to ensure independent supervisory personnel
are responsible for approving refunds. In addition, MIA should reconcile its
premium tax records with the corresponding State records.
 Sufficient controls were not established for the issuance of producer
licenses (Finding 11). MIA also lacked assurance that the outsourced
producer and pre-licensing services systems were protected against
operational and security risks (Finding 12).
MIA should take the recommended actions to ensure the propriety of
transactions recorded in the producer licensing system. In addition, MIA
should seek to amend existing agreements to require service providers to
obtain independent security assurance reports.
 Effective controls were not established over financial examination
services, cash receipts, purchases and disbursements, and IT network
access (Findings 9, 10, 13, and 14).
MIA should ensure that appropriate controls are established and followed.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) operates under the authority of the
Insurance Article, Title 2, of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MIA is
responsible for licensing and regulating insurers, insurance agents, and brokers
who conduct business in the State, and for monitoring the financial solvency of
licensed insurers. MIA is also responsible for collecting taxes levied on all
premiums collected by insurance companies within the State. According to
MIA’s records, as of June 30, 2014, there were 1,723 insurers authorized to
conduct business in the State. MIA’s records also indicated that direct premiums
written by domestic and foreign companies operating in Maryland in calendar
year 2014 totaled $29.4 billion.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2014 MIA’s revenues totaled
$489 million, including $458 million of premium taxes, and its expenditures
totaled $29 million. As required by State law, MIA transferred $338 million in
revenue to the State’s General Fund, $123 million to the Maryland Health Care
Rate Stabilization Fund, and $28 million to the State’s Insurance Regulation Fund
in fiscal year 2014.
As the State’s insurance regulator, MIA is responsible for overseeing and
enforcing many of the requirements under the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (ACA). The federal ACA, as amended by the federal Health Care and
Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, seeks to increase health insurance quality,
reduce costs to individuals and the government, and lower the number of
uninsured individuals by expanding public and private coverage options. During
fiscal year 2013, MIA dedicated staff resources to the contract form and premium
rate review of health insurance policies that are offered on the Maryland Health
Benefit Exchange.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of seven findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated June 22, 2011. We determined that MIA
satisfactorily addressed three of the findings. The remaining four findings are
repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Premium Tax System
Background
The Insurance Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland generally provides for
the imposition of an annual tax on insurance companies for premiums derived
from insurance business transacted in the State. According to Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA) records, premium taxes collected totaled approximately
$458 million during fiscal year 2014. Insurance companies are required to make
estimated tax payments at specific intervals (quarterly) throughout the calendar
year. By March 15 of each year, insurance companies are required to file a final
tax return reporting premiums written during the preceding calendar year and
remit any remaining premium taxes due to the State. Insurance companies that do
not submit premium taxes by the due date are subject to interest charges and
penalties in accordance with State law. Both the premium taxes and related
interest and penalties are subject to subsequent audit by MIA.
For many years, MIA used a legacy premium tax system to record premium taxes
reported by insurance companies on quarterly tax declaration forms and final
returns that were mailed to MIA, along with their payments. In 2011, MIA’s
information technology (IT) staff began in-house development of a new system to
provide additional automated capabilities, including allowing insurance
companies to file the required tax declarations electronically and make statutorily
required payments online. This in-house project was subsequently abandoned
and, in February 2012, MIA implemented a new automated system created by a
contractor under an agreement with MIA.
Finding 1
The procurement of the new premium tax system did not comply with State
procurement regulations and the project was not adequately planned.
Analysis
MIA did not comply with State procurement regulations and did not exercise
appropriate oversight when obtaining IT consultant services pertaining to the
replacement of its legacy premium tax system. Specifically, in September 2011,
MIA conducted an improper procurement process to hire a contractor to assist its
IT staff with the in-house development of a new premium tax system.
Furthermore, when the subsequent decision was made to abandon this project,
MIA significantly changed the scope of the contractor’s services without initiating
a new competitive procurement process. The change required the same contractor
to solely implement an entirely new proprietary premium tax system – a project
that proceeded without the benefit of a project plan with related specifications and
9

--- Page 12 ---
cost estimates. While the new system had additional capabilities to allow
insurance companies to electronically file the required tax forms and make
statutorily required payments online, other capabilities that were available in the
former legacy system were lost, which had adversely impacted operations. As of
April 2014, MIA’s contracts with this IT contractor were valued at approximately
$221,000 and related payments totaled $210,300.
Improper Procurement of IT Consulting Services
MIA did not follow State procurement regulations when it solicited IT consulting
services in September 2011 to create an online payment feature for the new
premium tax system under development by MIA’s IT staff. This would allow
insurance companies to pay premium taxes through a web-based portal. Our
review of the procurement process disclosed that the request for proposals did not
identify the technical requirements and their relative importance for bid
evaluation purposes, as required by regulations. MIA received two bids,
including one from the aforementioned contractor. This contractor was
subsequently awarded the contract even though two of the three employees who
conducted the bid evaluations gave a higher rating to the unsuccessful bidder.
The unsuccessful bidder also offered a lower hourly rate ($68 per hour versus $95
per hour). Furthermore, although both of those evaluators (who were MIA IT
employees) indicated that neither bidder was technically qualified, the contract
was awarded to the lower-rated and higher-cost bidder for $25,000 without any
documentation explaining the basis for the decision or the award amount as
required by regulations. Since the contract did not exceed $25,000, it was not
subject to approval by the Department of Information Technology (DoIT).
Failure to Initiate New Procurement after Significant Scope Change
Shortly after the award, MIA decided to significantly change the scope of the
contractor’s services instead of soliciting a new procurement. Specifically, the
contractor was directed to implement a new premium tax system using an
insurance tax program developed and owned by the contractor and implemented
in one other state. MIA advised that this decision was made because its internal
premium tax system development project was not progressing, and the
management employee overseeing the project was familiar with the contractor’s
product, having previously worked for this other state’s insurance commissioner
during the system’s implementation. This decision was made despite the
availability of other existing software applications, including one endorsed by the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners. In addition, although the
original procurement amount was increased, the change in scope was never
documented or approved.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Lack of Formal Project Planning
A comprehensive development and implementation plan was not prepared for this
new premium tax system, which became operational in February 2012 with basic
functionality. Specifically, at the start of the project, MIA did not prepare
documentation to outline the required system capabilities and features, including
security safeguards, and did not establish maximum cost thresholds or deliverable
dates. Consequently, MIA lacked assurance that the product would meet
functionality requirements, including DoIT security requirements, and would
facilitate its existing business operations. This may have contributed to a number
of additional tasks and costs that were added to the project at various times over
the 22 months following February 2012. While the system did enable insurance
companies to report and pay taxes online, certain other capabilities of the former
system were not implemented until 2013 or not at all. In our opinion, the
implementation of the new premium tax system adversely affected operations and
security controls as commented upon in Findings 3 and 5. For example, the
capability of the previous system to automatically audit the premium tax
information and to calculate amounts due based on prior year overpayments was
lost.
Lack of Approval for Contract Modifications
MIA did not always justify and/or obtain appropriate approvals for related
contract modifications. After the initial contract was executed for $25,000, two
modifications totaling $24,940 were executed without justification for the
modification and without seeking DoIT approval, which was required once the
contract value exceeded $25,000. After system installation and payment of the
aforementioned $49,940, MIA entered into a sole source contract for $42,750
with the contractor to continue the implementation, which was approved by DoIT.
While certain modifications to this sole source contract were approved by DoIT
and the Board of Public Works (BPW), the last modification executed at the time
of our review for $48,100 was artificially split and entered into the State’s records
as two separate transactions in September and December 2013 and thus were not
submitted for approval.
State procurement regulations generally require that all procurements over
$25,000 be competitively bid and that those exceeding $200,000 be approved by
BPW. State procurement regulations also require DoIT to approve all IT contract
awards greater than $25,000 and any modification that results in the cumulative
contract amount exceeding $25,000.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MIA
a. comply with State procurement regulations governing competitive
procurements and contract modifications and obtain BPW and DoIT
approvals, as required;
b. ensure contract modifications are properly justified and not artificially
split to avoid having to obtain required approvals; and
c. develop a comprehensive plan prior to further system development
detailing the required functionality, planned deliverables, and cost
estimates.
Finding 2
An MIA management employee exercised excessive control over the
procurement and implementation of the premium tax system.
Analysis
The MIA management employee who oversaw the premium tax system project
discussed in Finding 1 influenced virtually all aspects of the procurement and
implementation, and due to a familiarity with the contractor subsequently tasked
with developing the new system, created the appearance of a conflict of interest.
The management employee exercised excessive control over the procurement of
the contractor initially hired to assist in the in-house development of a new tax
system and authorized payments for work beyond the original scope, which
resulted in the implementation of an existing proprietary premium tax system that
this contractor had developed. The management employee was also responsible
for monitoring the contractor’s work, requesting contract modifications, and
approving all contactor invoices for payment.
As previously mentioned, in September 2011, MIA procured the services of a
contractor to assist its in-house IT staff with the development of an automated
premium tax system. Prior to the decision to solicit these contractor services, this
MIA management employee communicated with the contractor to obtain the
contractor’s hourly rate for similar services and referred the contractor to MIA
management. While MIA decided it should conduct a formal solicitation, this
contractor’s financial proposal in response to the solicitation reflected the
previously obtained hourly rate.
Furthermore, the management employee was on the three-member evaluation
committee for this procurement. Although the other two evaluators, who were
MIA IT employees, communicated to the management employee that neither
bidder was qualified to assist with the in-house development project, the
management employee recommended to the procurement officer, a direct
12

--- Page 15 ---
subordinate, that the contract be awarded to the other bidder. Certain
documentation provided by MIA was insufficient to determine what ratings were
given by the individual evaluators. MIA was also unable to provide us with
documentation justifying the award except that, according to the procurement
officer’s solicitation summary, the winning bidder’s technical proposal “was
superior in the opinion of one evaluator,” that evaluator being the management
employee. The losing bidder’s cost proposal was ranked higher (had a lower cost)
by all three evaluators.
The original work set out in the contractor procurement was later abandoned, and
this management employee recommended that the contractor instead install the
contractor’s proprietary premium tax system. The management employee was
responsible for monitoring the contractor’s work on this new system and for
approving all contactor invoices for payment. The employee also initiated
modifications to the scope of work and, as mentioned in Finding 1, several
modifications did not include adequate justifications. These modifications were
approved by the aforementioned procurement officer who was the management
employee’s subordinate.
The management employee advised us that knowledge of the premium tax
system’s capabilities and its successful implementation at the employee’s former
place of employment (another state) was what prompted the recommendation of
this contractor and that the employee had only indirect knowledge of the
contractor. According to this employee, the other state is the only state, other
than Maryland, where this premium tax system is currently used.
Senior management personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that the
aforementioned conditions could violate several of the State ethics laws. For
example, Section 5-506 of the General Provisions Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland generally prohibits an employee from intentionally using the prestige
of office or public position for that employee’s private gain or that of another.
Any final decision related to violations of the State ethics laws would ultimately
be determined by the State Ethics Commission.
Furthermore, the Governor’s Executive Order 01.01.2007.01 provides that State
employees shall endeavor to avoid any actions creating the appearance that they
are violating applicable laws or the ethical standards. This Order, dated February
14, 2007, requires that all departments and agencies of the State immediately
report any instance of possible criminal or unethical conduct by an employee or
contractor of the State to the Governor’s Chief Counsel and to the Office of the
Attorney General – Criminal Division.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MIA
a. separate the duties over procurement functions, contract monitoring, and
invoice approval functions, so that one individual does not maintain
excessive control over each process; and
b. immediately refer this issue to the State Ethics Commission and comply
with the Governor’s Executive Order.
We advised MIA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 3
The premium tax system was not properly secured to restrict and control
access. The premium tax system contractor had complete control over the
system and unnecessary access to the remainder of the MIA network.
Analysis
The premium tax system was not properly secured to restrict and control access.
The contractor responsible for the implementation and on-going operation and
maintenance of the system had complete control over the system and had
unnecessary access to the remainder of the MIA network.
 The contractor was responsible for program code development and placing the
code into production without independent review or testing. The contractor,
rather than MIA staff, was also responsible for database administration and
server administration for the host server. As a result, the contractor could
make unapproved changes to the production premium tax system and/or data
without detection. In addition, the contractor and two MIA management
operational employees (including the management employee mentioned in
Finding 2) had unnecessary access to modify security settings in the premium
tax system for themselves and other employees.
 The contractor was also defined as the primary administrator for the third-
party online payment system (provided by a bank) used to process premium
tax payments that automatically post to the premium tax system. Because of
this capability, the contractor could issue credits through the payment system
and alter the underlying records so that improper credits would not be readily
detected. Our testing disclosed that no credits had been processed during our
audit period through the third-party payment system.
 Finally, we noted that the contractor was improperly granted unrestricted
access to the entire MIA internal network. Specifically, MIA allowed the
14

--- Page 17 ---
contractor access to the entire MIA network, over all ports, through a virtual
private network (VPN). However, MIA’s firewalls were not configured to
limit this traffic to only devices and ports required by this contractor. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report with
respect to the previous premium tax system.
The DoIT Information Security Policy states that agencies must ensure that the
systems enforce separation of duties through assigned access authorizations.
Agency systems must enforce the most restrictive access capabilities required for
specified tasks. The Policy also mandates that agencies ensure that only
authorized individuals (employees or agency contractors) have access to
confidential information and that such access is strictly controlled, audited, and
that it supports the concepts of “least possible privilege” and “need to know.”
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MIA
a. establish appropriate review and testing procedures for program code
developed by contractors, ensure only code approved by MIA supervisory
personnel is placed into production, and ensure proper controls are
maintained over database and server administration;
b. remove security modification access to the system from the contractor
and MIA operational employees and assign it to appropriate MIA IT
personnel;
c. immediately remove the contractor’s administrator access to the
premium tax third-party payment system and assign such access to an
appropriate MIA employee; and
d. configure its firewalls to filter VPN traffic and limit contractor access to
only those devices and ports involved with the contractor’s support
activities (repeat).
Finding 4
MIA lacked assurance that the premium tax system was properly secured
and configured to protect it from external threats and unauthorized changes.
Analysis
MIA did not adequately secure and configure the premium tax system application,
host server, and database to protect against external threats and unauthorized
changes.
 Web application vulnerability assessments had not been performed to help
identify the existence of potentially serious security vulnerabilities within the
premium tax system application’s program code. In addition, a web
15

--- Page 18 ---
application firewall was not used to protect the application and the related
database. As a result, the application could contain security vulnerabilities
which, if exploited, could result in improper changes to and unauthorized
disclosure of critical data.
 The premium tax system host server, database, and application were not
configured securely. For example, the application was using the database
default administrator account to connect to the premium tax system database
and, as a result, the application had excessive privileges on the database and
could even delete the database. In addition, all of the approximately 2,774
customer userids and passwords were stored in clear text and were not
encrypted.
 The database was not configured to log any critical database security activity
such as failed login attempts, direct changes to critical data tables, changes to
database security settings, and use of certain critical privileges. These
conditions could result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities affecting the
integrity of the production database information going undetected by
management.
 Neither the premium tax system database nor its host server was updated for
numerous security-related patches. For example, as of December 2, 2013, our
review disclosed that the server’s operating system software had not been
patched for a period of 964 days. Accordingly, the operating system was not
updated for 144 operating system security-related software updates.
 MIA’s account and password controls over the premium tax system
application and database were not sufficient. Specifically, the database
configuration did not require users to comply with database password rules.
Additionally, certain account and password settings for both the application
and the database were not in compliance with the DoIT Information Security
Policy. For example, password length and complexity for both the application
and database either were not enabled or were not set in accordance with DoIT
requirements. In addition, both the application and database did not support
the use of account lockout.
The DoIT Information Security Policy states that agencies shall create and
maintain system hardening procedures to ensure up-to-date security best practices
are deployed at all levels of IT systems (operating systems, applications,
databases, and network devices).
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MIA
a. periodically obtain security vulnerability assessments for the application
code, remediate all confirmed vulnerabilities identified by the
assessments, document these processes, and retain this documentation for
future reference;
b. use a web application firewall to gain additional security protection;
c. securely configure the premium tax system host server, database, and
application;
d. configure the premium tax system database to log critical security
activity, periodically perform independent reviews of these logs,
document these reviews, and retain this documentation for future
reference;
e. update the premium tax system database and host server for all security-
related patches; and
f. implement strong controls over accounts and passwords that are in
accordance with the requirements of the DoIT Information Security
Policy.
Administration of Premium Tax Filings
Background
According to State law, insurance companies must file their final premium tax
returns by March 15 of each year. In addition, companies are required to file
quarterly estimated tax declarations and make quarterly payments if their total tax
liability for the current year is reasonably expected to exceed $1,000. MIA
primarily accepts payments via electronic check or paper check. Electronic check
payments are processed through a third-party online payment system, which
automatically updates the payment history in the premium tax system. Paper
checks are manually input to the premium tax system by MIA.
MIA conducts desk audits of each insurance company’s annual tax return. The
audits are conducted to ensure that premiums written as recorded on the tax return
agree to premiums reported to a third-party database (National Association of
Insurance Commissioners - NAIC) to ensure that both quarterly and final
premium tax payments were made on time and for appropriate amounts, and to
initiate refunds for tax overpayments. According to State law, MIA has up to
three years from the tax return due date to audit the filed tax returns to assess any
additional taxes owed and any penalties and interest. If payments exceed taxes
owed, MIA issues a refund to the company. According to MIA records, as of
October 2013, MIA completed 1,909 audits of 2011 and 2012 tax returns with
taxes paid totaling $488.4 million.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 5
MIA had not established adequate controls over audits of premium tax
filings. Our tests of the audit results disclosed a number of errors, including
the issuance of a duplicate account credit and failure to assess penalties and
interest.
Analysis
MIA had not established adequate controls over audits of premium tax filings. In
addition, our tests of the audits conducted disclosed numerous errors that included
the issuance of a duplicate account credit and the failure to identify reporting
discrepancies and assess interest and penalties as provided by law. In our
opinion, the loss of automated auditing capabilities, which were previously
available in the former premium tax system, coupled with the failure to institute
sufficient controls over the new manual audit process, contributed to the audit
errors.
Our review of controls identified two MIA employees had the capability to record
tax payments in the premium tax system and were also responsible for performing
and finalizing tax audits without independent review. As a result, improper
information could be recorded in the premium tax system which could lead to the
issuance of inappropriate refund checks by MIA. Furthermore, one of these two
employees both performed and finalized the same audits for a six-month period
(January 2013 through June 2013). During this time, we noted audits of 91 tax
returns with premium tax payments totaling $113.8 million related to tax years
2011 and 2012 that were performed and approved by this employee. We were
advised this was the result of an inadequate number of supervisory personnel
available due to vacancies.
Additionally, we noted that certain limitations of MIA’s premium tax system
precluded adequate accountability over changes made to recorded data.
Specifically, after audits were finalized, changes could be made to the tax records
of individual companies maintained on the system without supervisory approval
and a historical record of those changes.
We tested the audits conducted of 43 tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012 for
companies with premium tax payments totaling $141.7 million. Our test
disclosed inaccuracies or documentation deficiencies with 11 audits, with
payments totaling $50.9 million, of which 6 audits were not subject to
independent supervisory review. (Some of these audits contained more than one
deficiency.)
 Our review of the audit performed of one 2011 tax return disclosed that a
credit was improperly applied to the account of one company, which resulted
in a refund. Specifically, a $403,000 refund was properly authorized to the
18

--- Page 21 ---
company for overpayments related to its calendar years 2008 through 2010
returns. However, these overpayments were also credited to the company
during the 2011 calendar year audit. In this regard, the credit was applied
against the 2011 tax liability for that year, which was $190,000, and the
balance of $213,000 was refunded to the company. MIA personnel were
unaware of this situation until we brought it to their attention.
 For 7 audits of premium tax returns with payments totaling $41.6 million (6 of
which were performed by the aforementioned employee without independent
approval), MIA did not assess penalties and interest assessments totaling
approximately $158,000 for late tax payments and underpayments related to
the final tax return. In addition, based on our expanded test of 5 other audits,
we determined that MIA did not always ensure that companies remitted the
proper tax amounts in their quarterly tax declarations in accordance with State
law. Our test of 25 tax payments (quarterly and final payments by these 5
companies) totaling $21.7 million, made for premiums written in calendar
year 2011, disclosed that 7 payments totaling $2.8 million did not include the
proper amounts throughout the year or were paid late. These conditions
should have resulted in penalties and interest totaling $125,000 being
assessed. No explanation regarding the failure to assess these penalties and
interest, or documentation indicating the State Insurance Commissioner had
waived the penalties and interest as allowed by State law, were provided.
 For 2 audits of premium tax returns with payments totaling $14 million, MIA
did not identify differences between the premiums written according to the tax
returns and the companies’ self-reported premiums recorded in NAIC’s
database. Because the tax payments are based on premiums written,
differences could indicate improper premium tax remittances which could
have resulted in penalties and interest being assessed. MIA was unaware of
these differences until we brought them to its attention. Based on the
premiums reported in the national regulatory database, these two companies
underpaid taxes totaling $70,200.
Unlike MIA’s former premium tax system, the new system that was implemented
in February 2012 could not perform the audit function. An automated audit
function would help ensure that duplicate credits are not applied and the amounts
of premiums written according to the tax returns agrees to those reported to the
NAIC. As a result, the audit function was performed manually, which made the
process more prone to errors.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MIA
a. ensure that the individuals responsible for auditing transactions do not
have the capability to record tax payments in the premium tax system;
19

--- Page 22 ---
b. ensure that premium tax audits are reviewed by independent supervisory
personnel;
c. ensure that changes to approved tax audits are approved by supervisory
personnel and that a historical record of the changes is maintained;
d. impose penalties and interest unless a waiver is approved by the State
Insurance Commissioner;
e. ensure that companies remit the proper quarterly tax payments and that
penalties and interest are properly assessed, as applicable;
f. ensure that premiums reported on the tax filings agree with the NAIC’s
database and any differences are resolved; and
g. review the aforementioned discrepancies and take corrective action.
Finding 6
Procedures were not sufficient to ensure certain premium tax payments were
received timely.
Analysis
MIA had not established procedures to ensure certain premium tax payments were
received by the due dates established in State law. Specifically, MIA had not
established procedures to document the date of receipt of premium tax payments
for payments received in the mail. State law requires estimated and final tax
payments to be postmarked by the required filing dates. However, MIA used the
date the premium tax payments were processed on the system rather than the
postmark dates to determine whether taxes were paid timely. The former date
was used, in part, because the premium tax system did not have a dedicated data
field in which the postmark date could be entered for mailed-in payments.
Our test of 27 payments totaling $7.4 million received in the mail between April
2011 and March 2013 disclosed that MIA did not record a postmark date for any
of the payments in the premium tax system. We were able to verify that 5 of the
payments were received timely because MIA had retained the envelopes;
however, no documentation existed for the remaining 22 payments showing the
postmark date. Nine of the 22 payments, totaling $4.5 million, appear to have
been received late based on the dates recorded by insurance companies on the tax
declaration statements (that is, the dates on the documents were subsequent to the
filing deadlines). Based on these dates, penalties and interest totaling $156,000
could have been assessed.
Since the postmark date was not recorded, we were advised by MIA management
that it had decided not to assess penalties and interest for tax returns processed
within 10 days of the required filing date for all March 15, 2013 final tax returns
and within 5 additional days of the required filing date for all subsequent
20

--- Page 23 ---
quarterly tax declaration payments. In January 2013, via postings on its website,
MIA discouraged insurance companies from making payment by direct fund
transfers (ACH credit payments) because of difficulties reconciling the related
records. We noted the number of check payments received through the mail
increased significantly from $14.3 million in the month of June 2012 to $39.8
million in the month of June 2013.
As a result of the aforementioned deficiencies, MIA did not maximize recoveries
of penalties and interest due to the State for late payments made by insurance
companies. Total penalties and interest assessed in fiscal year 2013 was
$930,000.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MIA
a. record the postmark date of premium tax payments so that a
determination can be made regarding the timeliness of payments in
accordance with law, and
b. assess penalties and interest for any late payments, as required.
Finding 7
MIA had not established proper internal controls over premium tax refunds.
Analysis
MIA had not established proper internal controls over premium tax refunds
determined by the related tax audits. As a result, improper refunds could be made
without detection. Our test of 27 refunds totaling $7.8 million issued during the
period from December 2011 through July 2013 disclosed the following
conditions:
 Ten refunds totaling $4.1 million were approved and released for payment by
the same supervisory employee between June and November 2012. Based
on our tests, these ten refunds appeared proper. In December 2012, MIA
changed its procedure to require that refunds be approved and released by
different employees. However, procedures over premium tax refunds were
still not adequate. Specifically, the supervisory employee who approved all
refund request forms was not independent since the employee had full access
to the premium tax system, including the ability to modify the mailing address
where a refund would be sent. Although refunds were released for payment
by a second supervisory employee, this employee did not review the approved
audit results in the premium tax system on which the refunds were based to
confirm that refunds were proper, but relied on the refund request form
approved by the aforementioned employee.
21

--- Page 24 ---
 Five refunds totaling approximately $146,000, issued between August and
November 2012, appeared to be duplicates of previously issued refunds. Four
of the five checks were cashed by the receiving insurance companies. MIA
could not explain how the duplicate refunds occurred and, as of January 16,
2014, these overpayments had not been recovered. We expanded our review
to all 930 refunds, totaling $45.3 million, made during our audit period, and
we identified a total of 28 potential duplicate payments (that is, same payment
amounts and payees) totaling approximately $361,000.
Beginning in March 2012 (final return filing for tax year 2011), MIA
discontinued applying overpayments to future year tax assessments, resulting in a
significant increase in refunds issued from $6.4 million in fiscal year 2011 to $21
million in fiscal year 2012.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that
a. an independent supervisory employee who does not have access to the
premium tax system be responsible for releasing refunds for payment
based on a review of the audit results, and
b. duplicate refunds issued be investigated and appropriate actions be taken
to recover the overpayments.
Finding 8
MIA did not reconcile its records of premium tax revenues with the
corresponding State accounting records.
Analysis
MIA did not reconcile its records of premium tax revenues with the corresponding
State accounting records. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all
revenues were properly reflected in the premium tax system and in the State’s
accounting records.
Premium tax checks received in the mail and direct fund transfers (ACH credits)
are manually posted to the State’s accounting records; MIA separately posts these
transactions to the premium tax system. However, MIA did not reconcile these
transactions in the State’s records with the premium tax system. Our test of 64
payments totaling $27.3 million reflected in the State’s records that were received
during the period between June 2012 and July 2013, disclosed 33 payments
totaling $15.7 million that were not recorded in the premium tax system as of
September 12, 2013.
22

--- Page 25 ---
MIA also did not reconcile the receipt of electronic checks processed through its
third-party online payment system with the State’s accounting records. Payments
processed online post automatically to the premium tax system, even if the
payment ultimately fails to clear the paying bank. Failed payments are identified
by the State Treasurer’s Office and posted to the State’s accounting records and
are to be investigated by MIA personnel and then manually posted to the premium
tax system as a chargeback. We tested five chargebacks posted in the State’s
accounting records totaling $16.4 million, received in fiscal years 2012 and 2013;
our test disclosed one chargeback totaling $2.2 million recorded in the State’s
records on March 19, 2012 that was not recorded in the premium tax system as of
January 2014. Although the chargeback was not reflected in the premium tax
system, we determined that MIA subsequently identified the failed payment
during the desk audit of the company’s tax return and made appropriate
adjustments.
Critical tax data posted to the premium tax system, such as amounts due and paid,
are used when conducting periodic premium tax audits, and for collecting
additional taxes due or issuing refunds for overpayments. Consequently, it is
imperative that all such data be accurately recorded. The lack of comprehensive
reconciliations has been commented upon in our six preceding audit reports
dating back to November 1996.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MIA
a. reconcile its premium tax records with the corresponding State records
(repeat), and
b. investigate the aforementioned differences and take appropriate action.
Financial Examination Services
Background
The Insurance Article, Title 2, of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires MIA
to conduct financial examinations of the approximately 70 insurance companies,
health management organizations, and managed care organizations domiciled in
Maryland at least once every five years. The purpose of these examinations is to
ensure the continued financial solvency of the insurers and compliance with State
law and requirements of the NAIC. MIA’s Examinations and Audits (E&A) unit
is responsible for these examinations.
To supplement E&A employees in conducting the financial examinations, MIA
routinely contracted with certain pre-approved vendors for additional personnel.
Specifically, in September 2011, the Board of Public Works approved a three-
year master contract, valued at $9.5 million, with six pre-approved vendors. The
23

--- Page 26 ---
contract included five different levels of assistance (staff employee, senior
examiner, examiner-in-charge, senior management, and assistant chief examiner).
Each vendor bid a specific hourly rate for each level of assistance, based on an
estimated number of hours as stated in the related MIA solicitation. Work was
awarded to the vendors as needed and a minimum level of work was not
guaranteed.
Assistance for individual examinations was awarded using task order requests for
proposals. All six of the pre-approved vendors are solicited for individual
examinations. The requests for proposals include the actual prior audit time and,
based on projected start and end dates of the examination, the number of staff and
the levels of assistance needed to supplement MIA personnel. The vendors’
responses include a technical proposal describing the experience levels of
available personnel with the specific type of examination, and a financial proposal
stating the number of hours needed by each level of assistance to complete the
examination. The vendor with the highest overall rating is awarded the task.
The selected vendor performs the work described in the task order agreement in
cooperation with and subject to the supervision of MIA personnel who are
responsible for the planning and overall monitoring of the individual
examinations. In addition, the MIA project manager coordinates and oversees all
examination task orders and related billings. As of April 10, 2014, 18 task orders
had been issued through this master contract with related payments totaling $4.7
million.
Finding 9
Sufficient controls were not established over financial examination services
task order awards and modifications.
Analysis
Controls over the awarding and modifying of task orders for financial
examination services were not adequate and the MIA project manager exercised
excessive control over these processes. Specifically, the project manager who
monitored contract activity and authorized vendor payments was primarily
responsible for evaluating task order proposals, compiling the evaluation results,
recommending task order awards, and requesting any subsequent contract
modifications. Effective independent oversight was not exercised to help ensure
the integrity of the award and contract modification decision processes.
The process for evaluating proposals for individual task orders was controlled by
the project manager. The proposals submitted by the pre-approved vendors were
rated by an evaluation committee consisting of the project manager and two
subordinates. The project manager compiled the ratings of the evaluation
24

--- Page 27 ---
committee and notified the procurement officer of the results. However, the
procurement officer did not perform an independent review of the evaluation
results before awarding the task orders. Rather, the procurement officer relied on
the project manager’s recommendation without determining whether there was
appropriate support. Our review of the ratings for the winning vendors for the 18
task order proposals totaling $5.3 million disclosed that, in each instance, certain
evaluations were missing, and 9 evaluations for task orders totaling $2.3 million
were not dated or signed by the evaluators. Furthermore, there was no
documentation of the project manager’s own ratings for any of the proposals. We
also noted that certain proposals from winning vendors included services that
were not originally requested. MIA was subsequently advised by legal counsel
that such proposals should be disqualified by the evaluation committee.
In addition, task order modifications were approved without adequate
justifications. Specifically, 5 of the 18 task orders were subsequently increased
by $1.3 million, representing an increase of 140 percent over the original 5 task
order amounts. Our review disclosed that the project manager’s requests for
contract modifications did not sufficiently explain the need for the increases in
cost, and the procurement officer accepted these requests when approving the
modifications without obtaining additional details. For example, one task order
that was originally issued for $217,508 was later modified to $800,000. The
request did not specify what additional work was necessary or which levels of
assistance would be increased.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MIA
a. establish effective independent oversight of the task order award and
contract modification functions so that one individual does not maintain
excessive control over the related decisions,
b. retain adequate documentation of the task order proposal evaluation
ratings and decisions, and
c. ensure that task order modifications are adequately justified.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Cash Receipts
Finding 10
MIA lacked accountability and control over certain cash receipts.
Analysis
MIA lacked accountability and control over cash receipts received at its office.
According to the State’s records, MIA’s cash receipts totaled approximately $154
million during fiscal year 2013, with the vast majority of these collections
consisting of mail receipts of premium taxes, insurance company assessments,
and licensing fees.
 Checks received in the mail were not recorded immediately upon receipt.
Instead, the checks were forwarded to another employee before being
recorded in a log. In addition, we noted that some checks were not recorded
in the log but were instead posted directly to the State’s accounting records.
Our test of 15 deposits totaling $52.7 million, received between September
2012 and June 2013, disclosed that the checks included in two deposits
totaling $12.5 million were not recorded.
 Collections were not always deposited timely. Our aforementioned test of 15
deposits noted 223 individual premium tax payments totaling $21 million that
were deposited from three to eight days after the dates received.
 Deposit verifications were performed by the employee who recorded the
checks in the log, rather than by an employee independent of the receipt and
deposit functions. Although MIA advised us that new procedures were
established in July 2013 to ensure collections were deposited, our review of
those procedures disclosed that the verification process was not sufficient.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of initial recordation and an independent
verification of cash deposits were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
As a result of the above-noted deficiencies, there is a lack of assurance that all
receipts were deposited and properly accounted for.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MIA ensure that
a. cash receipts are immediately recorded when received (repeat),
b. collections are deposited in a timely manner, and
c. an employee independent of the cash receipts function performs and
documents the deposit verifications (repeat).
We advised MIA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Producer Licensing
Background
The Producer Licensing Unit issues licenses to qualified resident and nonresident
individuals and business entities to act as insurance producers. Insurance
producers sell, solicit, or negotiate insurance contracts and contract renewals for
persons issuing such contracts for compensation. MIA is responsible for licensing
producers who meet requirements set forth in State law, such as education and
experience, and who pass an examination given by MIA. A producer must be
licensed in each category of insurance (for example, life, accident) in which the
producer transacts business. Most licenses are issued for a two-year period. In
fiscal year 2013, 68,198 producer licenses were issued or renewed, with related
collections totaling approximately $2.1 million.
Since December 5, 2009, MIA has contracted with the NAIC to use its producer
licensing system for all producer information, demographics, contacts, and license
status. The vast majority of applicants for a producer license apply online through
this system. For applicants who apply through the mail, MIA employees
manually enter application and payment data and update licensee demographic
data and qualifications into the system. MIA also contracted with a pre-licensing
services vendor to provide a standardized electronic examination system to
include application processing, online examinations, examination grading, and
reporting. The contract provides for the vendor to be compensated with a portion
of the exam fees paid by individual applicants. The vendor received
approximately $247,000 in fiscal year 2013 for the administration of
approximately 9,900 pre-licensing exams.
Finding 11
Sufficient controls were not established for the issuance of producer licenses.
Analysis
Sufficient controls were not established for the issuance of insurance producer
licenses. As a result, improper transactions could be recorded in the producer
licensing system without detection and could result in the improper issuance of
licenses.
 We were advised that the individual who recorded receipts in the producer
licensing system from applicants who applied through the mail also reconciled
licensing receipts recorded in the system with receipts recorded in the State’s
accounting records. This individual was not independent and the
reconciliations performed were not documented and subject to supervisory
review.
27

--- Page 30 ---
 Five employees had the capability to both process (edit) and approve license
applications that were flagged during the online application process. Online
applications are flagged under certain circumstances (such as when there are
questions regarding eligibility). Although we were advised by MIA
management that all licenses are subject to a supervisory review, this review
is limited to a small number (such as less than one percent) of licenses and,
therefore, would not necessarily include licenses processed by the
aforementioned five employees. A total of 181 applications were reviewed
for licenses issued in calendar year 2013.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MIA ensure that
a. reconciliations of all license fees as recorded in the State’s accounting
records with the fees recorded in the producer licensing system are
performed by an independent employee and are documented, and
b. capabilities to process and approve licenses are separated.
We advised MIA on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 12
MIA lacked assurance that the insurance producer licensing and pre-
licensing services systems were sufficiently protected against operational and
security risks.
Analysis
MIA lacked assurance that any operational and security risks related to the
insurance producer licensing and pre-licensing systems had been identified and
corrected, as necessary. Specifically, MIA had not performed security reviews of
the service providers’ operations, or as an alternative, obtained any reports
resulting from independent reviews conducted of either system. Furthermore, the
agreements between MIA and each of the two service providers did not require
that comprehensive, independent reviews be performed of the systems.
Consequently, there was no assurance that the service providers had established
controls to secure MIA data, including personally identifiable information such as
social security numbers. Appropriate controls would ensure that
 intrusion detection, malware prevention, vulnerability scanning, and patch
management have been implemented;
 reports of authorized and unauthorized access attempts, and other security and
audit events, are reviewed on a regular basis;
28

--- Page 31 ---
 policies and procedures for user account and password controls are in
accordance with Maryland government or industry best practices;
 documented policies and procedures exist and have been implemented for
business continuity and/or disaster recovery; and
 system data are backed up, encrypted, and stored offsite in an appropriate
facility, and that such backup and storage procedures are tested regularly.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organizations. Based on this guidance,
service organizations (like the aforementioned service providers) may contract for
an independent review of controls and the resultant independent auditor’s report is
referred to as a Service Organization Controls (SOC) report. There are several
types of SOC reports, with varying scope and levels of review and auditor testing.
One type of report, referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, includes the results of
the auditor’s review of controls placed in operation and tests of operating
effectiveness for the period under review and could include an evaluation of
system security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy.
Due to the nature and sensitivity of the information contained in the insurance
producer licensing and pre-licensing systems, we believe a SOC 2 Type 2 report
would be appropriate. A similar situation regarding the failure to address certain
security and operational risks of the service providers was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MIA
a. seek to amend the existing agreements and ensure that future agreements
with service providers processing MIA data include provisions requiring
the service providers to regularly obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews
pertaining to their system operations (repeat), and
b. obtain and review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports from the service
providers and ensure that the related independent reviews adequately
address critical security concerns over each system and that the service
providers implement all critical report recommendations.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Purchases and Disbursements
Finding 13
MIA did not establish proper controls over purchases and disbursements
and did not always comply with State procurement regulations.
Analysis
Proper internal controls were not established over purchases and disbursements,
and MIA did not always comply with State procurement regulations.
Specifically, MIA did not establish approval paths for all purchases in the State’s
Financial Management Information System (FMIS), as one employee had the
capability to initiate and approve purchase orders in two departments without
independent approval. Within those two departments, we noted purchase orders
processed without independent approval for which payments totaled
approximately $701,000 in fiscal year 2013. Furthermore, two employees
responsible for approving purchase orders online through FMIS for all other
departments, advised us that they did not review supporting documentation, such
as requisitions, bidding quotes, and contracts, to verify the propriety of the
purchases and compliance with State procurement regulations.
Our test of 15 contracts awarded during our audit period totaling $749,000 found
that, for 5 contract awards totaling $298,000, MIA did not comply with certain
procurement regulations. For example, MIA awarded two information
technology (IT) services contracts totaling $161,000 without obtaining DoIT
approval, and Board of Public Works’ (BPW) approval was not obtained for one
of the two (valued at $131,000) that was a sole source award. MIA also could not
provide a sole source justification for that contract.
We also noted that temporary personnel services totaling $390,000 were routinely
procured without obtaining competitive bids and executing a written contract. We
were advised by MIA that the chosen vendor had provided similar services since
fiscal year 2011. Consequently, there is a lack of assurance that the State
obtained these services at the best value.
Finally, the two employees responsible for approving all MIA disbursements
advised us that they did not always verify that goods and services purchased were
received prior to approving invoices for payment. Our test of 20 invoices totaling
approximately $661,000, paid between April 2012 and August 2013, disclosed
that 10 invoices, totaling approximately $397,000, lacked support evidencing that
these individuals had determined that the goods or services had been received.
According to the State’s accounting records, MIA processed disbursements
totaling $20.6 million through FMIS during fiscal year 2013. State procurement
30

--- Page 33 ---
regulations require that any IT contract award (hardware, software, and related
services) over $25,000 be submitted to DoIT for approval. In addition, the
regulations require that all sole source contracts exceeding $100,000 be presented
to the BPW and that the reasons for sole source procurements be documented.
Finally, State procurement regulations generally require that competitive bids be
obtained for all procurements over $5,000 and that written contracts be prepared.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that MIA
a. establish independent online approval requirements for all critical
purchasing transactions;
b. ensure adequate supporting documentation is reviewed to verify the
propriety of critical transactions such as purchase orders and invoices;
and
c. comply with the requirements of the State procurement regulations and
DoIT policies by obtaining the appropriate approvals, providing sole
source justifications when needed, and conducting competitive
procurements when required.
Information Systems Network
Background
MIA’s Management Information Systems Division manages the development,
maintenance, and support of the MIA IT infrastructure including all related
networking and telecommunications systems. The Division maintains a network
which includes email, application and database services, and connectivity to the
Internet. MIA’s critical systems include the premium tax system, the producer
licensing system, and the enterprise system which is used for licensing,
complaints, and case tracking.
Finding 14
Administrative access to MIA’s network was excessive.
Analysis
Administrative access to MIA’s network was excessive. Specifically, we noted
that six accounts (assigned to five different individuals) were improperly
classified as domain administrators. Accounts that are domain administrators are
the most powerful and privileged accounts in the system. As a result of this
condition, these accounts had administrative control over all MIA domain
resources and could make unauthorized modifications to critical data without
detection.
31

--- Page 34 ---
The DoIT Information Security Policy states that each agency must establish an
authorization process which specifically grants access to information ensuring
that access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of “least
privilege possible” and “need-to-know.”
Recommendation 14
We recommend that domain administrator privileges only be assigned to
users requiring such privileges.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA) for the period beginning September 29, 2010 and ending
August 4, 2013. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MIA’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included purchases and disbursements, cash receipts,
information systems security and control, accounts receivable, premium tax
audits, and producer licensing and examinations. We also determined the status
of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MIA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
MIA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MIA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MIA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that MIA’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
rating were the significance of our audit findings, and the number of repeat audit
findings from our preceding report. Our rating conclusion has been made solely
pursuant to State law and rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit
Committee. The rating process is not a practice prescribed by professional
auditing standards.
MIA’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MIA regarding the results of our
review of its response.
34

--- Page 38 ---
Maryland Insurance Administration
Response to Legislative Fiscal Compliance Audit Report
November 19, 2014
The Maryland Insurance Administration’s (“MIA”) responses to each finding and corresponding
recommendation contained in the Legislative Fiscal Compliance Audit Report (the “Report”) for
the period beginning September 29, 2010 and ending August 14, 2013 are set forth below. The
MIA takes seriously the findings in the Report and, as evidenced below, has corrected or is
working to correct the issues noted. The Report contains 14 recommendations, which are
comprised of 42 sub-recommendations. As of November 19, 2014, the MIA has implemented
more than two-thirds of the 42 sub-recommendations, and is in the process of implementing the
remaining sub-recommendations.
Finding 1:
The procurement of the new premium tax system did not comply with State procurement
regulations and the project was not adequately planned.
Recommendation 1:
We recommend that the MIA
a. comply with State procurement regulations governing competitive procurements and contract
modifications and obtain BPW and DoIT approvals, as required;
b. ensure contract modifications are properly justified and not artificially split to avoid having
to obtain required approvals; and
c. develop a comprehensive plan prior to further system development detailing the required
functionality, planned deliverables, and cost estimates.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 1 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA has
implemented organizational changes, personnel changes, and new procedures to ensure
compliance with all state procurement regulations and requirements governing competitive
procurements and contract modifications. Specifically, the MIA has hired a new Procurement
Officer, who shall work within the Office of the Commissioner and will report directly to the
Deputy Commissioner. Beginning September 2014, the MIA also commenced monthly
procurement meetings that include the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner, Procurement
Officer, the MIA’s Principal Counsel, and an Assistant Attorney General with experience in
procurement law. At each meeting, participants review the status of active procurements,
identify the parameters of anticipated future procurements, and ensure compliance with all
applicable legal and procedural requirements. All information technology system procurements
must be supported by a comprehensive plan detailing the required functionality, planned
deliverables, and cost estimates.
1

--- Page 39 ---
Finding 2:
An MIA management employee exercised excessive control over the procurement and
implementation of the premium tax system.
Recommendation 2:
We recommend that MIA
a. separate the duties over procurement functions, contract monitoring, and invoice approval
functions, so that one individual does not maintain excessive control over each process; and
b. immediately refer this issue to the State Ethics Commission and comply with the Governor’s
Executive Order.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 2 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA’s
procurement function now resides in the Office of the Commissioner, and the Procurement
Officer reports directly to the Deputy Commissioner. Contract monitoring functions reside with
the contract manager in the division of the MIA requiring the procured goods or services, and the
MIA’s Fiscal Unit provides final approval of contract invoices for payment.
In accordance with Executive Order 01.01.2007.01, the Commissioner referred the issue raised
in connection with Finding 2 to the Assistant Attorney General who serves as the MIA’s
Principal Counsel, and advised the Chief Legal Counsel to the Governor of that referral.1 By
letter dated October 1, 2014, the MIA’s Principal Counsel, on behalf of the Maryland Insurance
Commissioner, requested that the State Ethics Commission initiate an investigation to determine
whether the actions of the management employee identified in connection with Finding 2
violated State ethics laws.
Finding 3:
The premium tax system was not properly secured to restrict and control access. The premium
tax system contractor had complete control over the system and unnecessary access to the
remainder of the MIA network.
1 Executive Order 01.01.2007.01 provides, in pertinent part:
O. All departments and agencies of the State shall immediately refer to the Assistant
Attorney General of the Department or Agency or to the Deputy Attorney General with
supervisory responsibility for the Attorney General’s Criminal Investigations Division,
any instance of possible criminal or unethical conduct by any employee or contractor of
this State, for such action as the Office of the Attorney General deems appropriate. All
departments and agencies shall also immediately advise the Chief Legal Counsel to the
Governor of any such referrals.
2

--- Page 40 ---
Recommendation 3:
We recommend that MIA
a. establish appropriate review and testing procedures for program code developed by
contractors, ensure only code approved by MIA supervisory personnel is placed into
production, and ensure proper controls are maintained over database and server
administration;
b. remove security modification access to the system from the contractor and MIA operational
employees and assign it to appropriate MIA IT personnel;
c. immediately remove the contractor’s administrator access to the premium tax third-party
payment system and assign such access to an appropriate MIA employee; and
d. configure its firewalls to filter VPN traffic and limit contractor access to only those devices
and ports involved with the contractor’s support activities (repeat).
MIA Response:
With the exception of the following, as it relates to the premium tax system contractor’s access
to the MIA network, the MIA agrees with Finding 3 and the corresponding recommendation.
The MIA disagrees with the statement that the premium tax system contractor had unnecessary
access to the remainder of the MIA network. While the premium tax system contractor had
access to the server dedicated exclusively to the premium tax system, the contractor did not have
the authentication authority (user ID and password) to access any MIA application or database
server other than the server hosting the premium tax system. The contractor also did not have
the administrative rights (user ID and password) to access the MIA network routers, switches or
firewall.*
On a going forward basis, all program code developed by contractors will follow MIA’s standard
procedures to ensure that a segregation of duties exists between the application developer and the
code migration progress. The MIA also will conduct user acceptance testing on code changes to
the premium tax system and all other applications, before changes are migrated into production.
As of May 30, 2014, the MIA removed the premium tax system contractor’s access for security
modifications; removed the contractor’s administrative access to the third party payment system;
and disabled the contractor’s access to MIA’s VPN service.
Effective September 14, 2014, the MIA transferred premium tax system access and user set-up
responsibilities to the agency’s Management Information Systems (“MIS”) unit, to segregate
these functions from employees who have premium tax payment posting, premium tax audit, or
premium tax audit supervisory functions.
________________________
*Auditor’s Comment: The MIA response, while correct, does not address the finding that MIA’s firewalls were not
configured to restrict this contractor’s access to only specific devices over necessary ports. As a result, the
contractor had access, at a network level, to all MIA network devices, thereby putting every device in MIA’s
internal network at risk if they were not properly secured.
3

--- Page 41 ---
Finding 4:
MIA lacked assurance that the premium tax system was properly secured and configured to
protect it from external threats and unauthorized changes.
Recommendation 4:
We recommend that MIA
a. periodically obtain security vulnerability assessments for application code, remediate all
confirmed vulnerabilities identified by the assessments, document these processes, and retain
this documentation for future reference;
b. use a web application firewall to gain additional security protection;
c. securely configure the premium tax system host server, database, and application;
d. configure the premium tax system database to log critical security activity, periodically
perform independent reviews of these logs, document these reviews, and retain this
documentation for future reference;
e. update the premium tax system database and host server for all security-related patches; and
f. implement strong controls over accounts and passwords that are in accordance with the
requirements of the DoIT Information Security Policy.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 4 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA currently is
working with DoIT’s Security Office to schedule a security vulnerability test on MIA web
applications. Once conducted, the MIA will remediate all vulnerabilities identified, document
these processes and retain this documentation for future reference. In addition, the MIA
requested and received approval for a FY15 budget amendment that will provide funds to
purchase a web application firewall to gain additional security protection for all MIA web
applications. This budget amendment also will provide funding to contract with a security
consulting firm to conduct periodic security vulnerability tests on the MIA network infrastructure
and web applications.
The MIA already has increased the security configurations on the premium tax system host
server, database and application and applied all current security-related patches to both the
premium tax system database and the Windows operating system installed on the host server.
The MIA will add logging features to its premium tax system database and a System
Administrator (SA) account will be created to provide the MIA Database Administrators with
access to the system logs for daily reviews. Documentation of these reviews also will be created
as evidence for future audit verification. In addition, the MIA will strengthen the password
capabilities in the premium tax system to comply with the requirements of the DoIT Information
Security Policy.
4

--- Page 42 ---
Finding 5:
MIA had not established adequate controls over audits of premium tax filings. Our tests of the
audit results disclosed a number of errors, including the issuance of duplicate account credit and
failure to assess penalties and interest.
Recommendation 5:
We recommend that MIA
a. ensure that individuals responsible for auditing transactions do not have the capability to
record tax payments in the premium tax system;
b. ensure that premium tax audits are reviewed by independent supervisory personnel;
c. ensure that changes to approved tax audits are approved by supervisory personnel and that a
historical record of the changes is maintained;
d. impose penalties and interest unless a waiver is approved by the State Insurance
Commissioner;
e. ensure that companies remit the proper quarterly tax payments and that penalties and interest
are properly assessed, as applicable;
f. ensure that premiums reported on the tax filings agree with the NAIC’s database and any
differences are resolved; and
g. review the aforementioned discrepancies and take corrective action.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 5 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA wishes to
clarify, however, that although its prior premium tax system had certain automated auditing
capabilities, those capabilities were limited, unreliable, and required a 100% manual review.
The MIA has implemented, or is in the process of implementing, all aspects of Recommendation
5. Specifically, effective September 15, 2014, the premium tax audit function was reassigned to
the MIA’s Examination and Auditing Division (“E&A”), while the responsibility for posting
premium tax payments remains with the MIA’s Fiscal Unit. There is no overlap of staff in these
two distinct areas of the Agency, and MIA E&A personnel have no capability to record tax
payments in the premium tax system. Any changes to premium tax audits must be approved and
documented by supervisory personnel who do not conduct premium tax audits. Adherence to
this requirement is monitored by way of a quarterly report identifying the premium tax auditor
and the approving supervisor for each premium tax audit. The MIA has amended its written
premium tax audit procedure to make clear that in all cases, the auditor must compare the
premiums reported on tax filings with those reported on the NAIC annual statement and resolve
any discrepancies.
The MIA is conducting a review of the audits identified as deficient in connection with Finding
5. If the MIA’s analysis confirms that penalties or interest could have been assessed, that finding
5

--- Page 43 ---
will be documented in the MIA’s audit notes and the penalties and interest will be assessed or the
rationale for waiving penalties and interest will be documented.2
Finding 6:
Procedures were not sufficient to ensure certain premium tax payments were received timely.
Recommendation 6:
We recommend that MIA
a. record the postmark date of premium tax payments so that a determination can be made
regarding the timeliness of payments in accordance with law, and
b. assess penalties and interest for any late payments, as required.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 6 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA has
implemented procedures for receiving, sorting and distributing mail that require envelopes to be
stapled to all mail received as a record of the date on which the item was postmarked. In
addition, MIA staff who post payment information in the premium tax system now are required
to record the postmark date of each payment received. The MIA will assess penalties and
interest for late payments as appropriate, or will document the rationale for waiving such
penalties and interest.3
Finding 7:
MIA had not established proper internal controls over premium tax refunds.
Recommendation 7:
We recommend that
a. an independent supervisory employee who does not have access to the premium tax system
be responsible for releasing refunds for payment based on a review of the audit results; and
b. duplicate refunds issued be investigated and appropriate actions be taken to recover the
overpayments.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 7 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA has
established and implemented a procedure pursuant to which an independent supervisory
employee who does not have access to the premium tax system is responsible for releasing
refunds for payment based on a review of the audit results.
2 The Commissioner may waive the penalty and interest on late payments if the insurer proves that it: (i)
made a good faith effort to comply with the requirements of § 2-113 of the Insurance Article (related to
the payment of taxes of fees in immediately available funds); and (ii) exercised due diligence to initiate
payment correctly and on a timely basis.
3 See footnote 2.
6

--- Page 44 ---
The MIA has investigated all 28 refunds identified in the Report as potential duplicate refunds.
To date, the MIA has recovered approximately $131,000 in duplicate payments, and is pursuing
recovery of the additional $15,000.
Finding 8:
MIA did not reconcile its records of premium tax revenues with the corresponding State
accounting records.
Recommendation 8:
We recommend that MIA
a. reconcile its premium tax records with the corresponding State records (repeat), and
b. investigate the aforementioned differences and take appropriate action.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 8 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA has
implemented a policy requiring that all financial transactions must be posted in the premium tax
application within 48 hours of deposit and reconciled with State accounting records on a monthly
basis.
The MIA is in the process of investigating the differences identified in the report and will take
any appropriate corrective action.
Finding 9:
Sufficient controls were not established over financial examination services task order awards
and modifications.
Recommendation 9:
We recommend that MIA
a. establish effective independent oversight of the task order award and contract modification
functions so that one individual does not maintain excessive control over the related
decisions;
b. retain adequate documentation of the task order proposal evaluation ratings and decisions;
and
c. ensure that task order modifications are adequately justified.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 9 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA has
implemented organizational changes, personnel changes, and new procedures to help ensure
compliance with all state procurement regulations and requirements governing competitive
procurements and contract modifications. Specifically, the MIA has hired a new Procurement
Officer, who shall work within the Office of the Commissioner and report directly to the Deputy
Commissioner. Beginning September 2014, the MIA also commenced monthly procurement
meetings that include the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner, Procurement Officer, the
7

--- Page 45 ---
MIA’s Principal Counsel, and an Assistant Attorney General with experience in procurement
law. At each meeting, meeting participants review the status of active procurements (including
task order awards and contract and task order modifications), identify the parameters of
anticipated future procurements (including task order awards and contract and task order
modifications), and ensure compliance with all applicable legal and procedural requirements,
including proper segregation of duties.
In addition, the MIA has changed its staffing approach for financial examinations. With the
exception of specialty financial examination services,4 all financial examination services for
financial examinations commenced on or after March 4, 2014 are being conducted by MIA-
employed financial examiners. The MIA no longer is awarding task orders for those financial
examination services.
Finding 10:
MIA lacked accountability and control over certain cash receipts.
Recommendation 10:
We recommend that MIA ensure that
a. cash receipts are immediately recorded when received (repeat);
b. collections are deposited in a timely manner; and
c. an employee independent of the cash receipts function performs and documents the deposit
verifications (repeat).
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 10 and the corresponding recommendation. Specifically, the MIA
agrees that all receipts should be deposited in a timely fashion. To that end, in November 2013,
the MIA converted to an online remote deposit service system by which all mail receipts are
electronically recorded and deposited on the day they are received. The MIA also has revised its
procedures to ensure that an employee independent of the cash receipts function performs and
documents deposit verifications. Further, the MIA is investigating the feasibility of purchasing a
scanner for the mail room employee who opens envelopes and immediately restrictively endorses
checks received, to enable that employee to create a log by scanning the check as a .pdf
document, prior to providing the check to a second employee for deposit.
Finding 11:
Sufficient controls were not established for the issuance of producer licenses.
4 Specialty financial examination services include those services performed by specialists in the areas of
information technology, actuarial science, investment, and reinsurance. Specialty financial examination
services are performed on behalf of the MIA by a primary contractor or, if the primary contractor is
unavailable or has a conflict, by a secondary contractor. No task orders are awarded in connection with
these services.
8

--- Page 46 ---
Recommendation 11:
We recommend that MIA ensure that
a. reconciliations of all license fees as recorded in the State’s accounting records with the fees
recorded in the producer licensing system are performed by an independent employee and are
documented; and
b. capabilities to process and approve licenses are separated.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 11 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA has
established and implemented a procedure requiring that an independent employee reconcile all
license fees as recorded in the State’s accounting records with the fees recorded in the producer
licensing system on a monthly basis, document that reconciliation, and obtain written verification
of that reconciliation by an MIA supervisory employee.
The MIA also has established a procedure segregating the producer license application
processing function from producer license application approval function, and shall confirm
adherence to that procedure based upon a monthly audit of approximately 20% of all applications
processed.
Finding 12:
MIA lacked assurance that the insurance producer licensing and pre-licensing services systems
were sufficiently protected against operational and security risk.
Recommendation 12:
We recommend that MIA
a. seek to amend the existing agreements and ensure that future agreements with service
providers processing MIA data include provisions requiring the service providers to regularly
obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews pertaining to their system operations (repeat); and
b. obtain and review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports from the service providers and
ensure that the related independent reviews adequately address critical security concerns over
each system and that the service providers implement all critical report recommendations.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with the importance of ensuring that Producer Licensing services are protected
against operational and security risk. On a going forward basis, the MIA will seek to include in
producer pre-licensing and licensing vendor contracts a requirement that the vendor regularly
obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews and provide the MIA with copies of those reviews.
The MIA obtained from its pre-licensing vendor a copy of its SOC 2, Type 2 audit for the period
covering July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2014. The audit included review and testing of 34 functions.
Only one exception was noted, and that exception was corrected. The MIA’s licensing vendor,
which provides services to every department of insurance in the United States, obtains SOC 1
9

--- Page 47 ---
audits conducted by a third party on an annual basis. That vendor provided and will continue to
provide the MIA with copies of its independent audit results.
Finding 13:
MIA did not establish proper controls over purchases and disbursements and did not always
comply with State procurement regulations.
Recommendation 13:
We recommend that MIA
a. establish independent online approval requirements for all critical purchasing transactions;
b. ensure adequate supporting documentation is reviewed to verify the propriety of critical
transactions such as purchase orders and invoices; and
c. comply with the requirements of the State procurement regulations and DoIT policies by
obtaining the appropriate approvals, providing sole source justifications when needed, and
conducting competitive procurements when required.
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 13 and the corresponding recommendation. The MIA has updated
its Fiscal Procedures to ensure that appropriate approval for all purchase and disbursement
transactions is obtained, and that MIA employees approving such transactions document their
review of supporting documentation.
The MIA also has implemented organizational changes, personnel changes, and new procedures
to help ensure compliance with all state procurement regulations and requirements governing
competitive procurements and contract modifications. Specifically, the MIA has hired a new
Procurement Officer, who shall work within the Office of the Commissioner and report directly
to the Deputy Commissioner. Beginning September 2014, the MIA also commenced monthly
procurement meetings that include the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner, Procurement
Officer, the MIA’s Principal Counsel, and an Assistant Attorney General with experience in
procurement law. At each meeting, participants review the status of active procurements,
identify the parameters of anticipated future procurements, and ensure compliance with all
applicable legal and procedural requirements.
Finding 14:
Administrative access to MIA’s network was excessive.
Recommendation 14:
We recommend that domain administrator privileges only be assigned to users requiring such
privileges.
10

--- Page 48 ---
MIA Response:
The MIA agrees with Finding 14 and the corresponding recommendation, and has resolved this
issue. As of May 30, 2014, MIS Technical Support personnel and infrastructure project resource
staff have been removed from the MIA domain administrator account. As an aside, the premium
tax system contractor never had domain administrator account privileges.
11

--- Page 49 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Terry S. Gibson, CFE
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Brian S. Han, CPA
Joshua A. Naylor
Richard Tran
Staff Auditors