Title: Department of State Police
Date: 11/23/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d16cc9d72456067454c
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:33:35.931596
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of State Police
February 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 28, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of State Police
(DSP) for the period beginning May 21, 2018 and ending May 31, 2022. DSP
comprises the Maryland State Police, the Office of the State Fire Marshal, and the
State Fire Prevention Commission.
Our audit disclosed that DSP did not ensure that a sufficient number of quality
control (QC) reviews of handgun qualification license applications (HQL) and
firearm registration applications were conducted. DSP conducted QC reviews of
3.1 percent of firearm registration applications during our audit period while its
policy requires 10 percent of firearm applications be reviewed. In addition, DSP
modified its policy and reduced the required number of QC reviews for HQL
applications from 10 percent to 1 percent which, in our opinion, is not sufficient.
DSP could not readily provide us with the number of HQL QC reviews performed
during our audit period nor the percentage of past errors for HQL applications.
Additionally, the majority of QC reviews were not completed timely, in
accordance with DSP written policies, and certain HQL QC reviews were
conducted by employees who processed the related HQL.
DSP did not have a comprehensive process to ensure the accuracy of all firearm
registration data recorded in its automated record of regulated firearms. We
identified approximately 600 discrepancies with data entered in the system and
noted another 15,100 firearm registrations had not yet been entered as of
September 2022.
In addition, audits DSP performed on registered firearm dealers were not properly
documented to allow for supervisory review or follow up. Furthermore, DSP had
not established adequate controls over its cash collections and related accounts
receivables.

--- Page 4 ---
Our audit also disclosed certain cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the 11 findings
contained in our preceding audit report. For the non-cybersecurity-related
findings we determined that DSP satisfactorily addressed 6 of these findings. The
remaining 2 findings are repeated in this report and presented as 3 findings.
DSP’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response to our findings and related recommendations, and have
concluded that the corrective actions identified are sufficient to address all audit
issues. Additionally, in accordance with our policy, we have edited DSP’s
response to remove vendor names or products. Finally, consistent with State law,
we have redacted the elements of DSP’s response related to the cybersecurity
audit findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this
audit by DSP. We also wish to acknowledge DSP’s willingness to address the
audit issues and implement appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Maryland Center for School Safety 6
Special Review of Emergency Procurements Related to the State of 7
Maryland’s COVID-19 Response
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Firearm Licensing and Registration
* Finding 1 – The Department of State Police (DSP) did not ensure that a 11
sufficient number of quality control reviews of handgun qualification
licenses and firearm registrations were conducted, the reviews were
independent and timely, and the results were properly tracked.
* Finding 2 – DSP did not have a comprehensive process to ensure the 13
accuracy of all critical firearm registration data and the timely
recordation of this data in the Maryland Automated Firearms
Services System.
Firearm Dealer Audits
Finding 3 – DSP firearm dealer audits were not supported. 14
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 15
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 15
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 15
Finding 7 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 16
Cash Receipts
* Finding 8 – DSP had not established adequate controls over its cash 16
collections and the related accounts receivables.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 18
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of State Police (DSP) operates under the provisions of Title 2 of
the Public Safety Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The Code provides
that DSP shall safeguard the lives and the safety of all persons within the State,
protect property, and assist in securing to all persons the equal protection of the
laws. DSP provides these services through a headquarters unit located in
Pikesville, Maryland and 23 barracks and detachments located throughout the
State. In addition, DSP includes the State Fire Marshal and the State Fire
Prevention Commission. According to the State’s accounting records, during
fiscal year 2022, DSP’s expenditures totaled approximately $469.7 million (see
Figure 1 on the following page).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
DSP Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 2,250 86.6%
Vacant 347 13.4%
Total 2,597 1
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $389,551,564 82.9%
Technical and Special Fees 2,327,971 0.5%
Operating Expenses 77,828,212 16.6%
Total $469,707,747
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $343,439,758 73.2%
Special Fund 108,601,200 23.1%
Federal Fund 12,375,831 2.6%
Reimbursable Fund 5,290,958 1.1%
Total $469,707,747
Source: State financial and personnel records
Maryland Center for School Safety
Our previous audit of DSP included a review of the Maryland Center for School
Safety (MCSS). Chapter 30, Laws of Maryland 2018, effective June 1, 2018,
established MCSS as an independent unit within the Maryland State Department
of Education (MSDE) and transferred the existing appropriations and positions
from DSP to MSDE. As such, MCSS activity from May 21, 2018 through May
31, 2018 was subject to audit during this audit. MCSS activity after May 31,
1 The 2,597 full-time equivalent positions listed in Figure 1 is approximately 100 positions more
than DSP’s budgeted regular positions of 2,505 for fiscal year 2022. According to DSP
management, in addition to the budgeted positions, DSP has 100 non-budgeted “placeholder”
positions in the State’s personnel system that are used to place candidates into the State Police
Academy. Once a candidate graduates from the academy, they are then assigned a budgeted
position. Excluding the candidate placeholder positions, the filled and vacant position totals
above would be 2,206 and 299, respectively.
6

--- Page 9 ---
2018 was not included in our MSDE audit scope, but subject to a separate audit
with the results included in an audit report dated January 11, 2023.
Special Review of Emergency Procurements Related to the State
of Maryland’s COVID-19 Response
On December 13, 2021, we issued a report on our Review of Certain Emergency
Procurements Related to the State of Maryland’s COVID-19 Response. This
review included an assessment of the procurement and accountability of certain
emergency procurements associated with the State’s COVID-19 response. As
part of this assessment, we tested 15 emergency procurements procured or used
by 6 State agencies including 1 procurement related to DSP. The finding related
to DSP included the following:
 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) items were not procured in
accordance with State procurements regulations which included
requirements for contracts to contain critical provisions regarding
modifications, delays, and extensions.
 Documentation was lacking to support that the PPE purchases were
received and that they were inspected to ensure they met the applicable
requirements.
 Documentation was lacking to support that the PPE purchases were
distributed to DSP barracks or other State agencies.
Due to the close proximity of this review’s date to our current DSP audit period,
we did not follow up on the aforementioned finding during our current audit.
Status of Findings from Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 11 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated September 23, 2019. As disclosed in Figure 2,
for the non-cybersecurity-related findings we determined that DSP satisfactorily
addressed 6 of the findings. The remaining 2 findings are repeated in this report,
but presented as 3 findings.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Indirect cost billing rates were not revised timely, resulting in
Finding 1 Not repeated
unrecovered indirect costs totaling an estimated $2.7 million.
During fiscal years 2016, 2017, and 2018, DSP recorded certain
transactions to several special fund balances that were not consistent
Finding 2 Not repeated
with State law, to eliminate an unexplained $2.5 million deficit
dating back to at least June 30, 2015.
DSP had not established adequate controls over its collections and Repeated
Finding 3 the related accounts receivable from other governmental units and (Current Finding
private entities. 8)
DSP did not determine the composition of a non-budgeted fund
clearing account balance totaling $821,000 nor report the balance to
Finding 4 Not repeated
the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division as
required.
DSP did not comply with State procurement regulations when
Finding 5 procuring helicopter maintenance services and aviation fuel valued Not repeated
at approximately $12.1 million.
DSP did not have a comprehensive process in place to ensure the
Repeated
accuracy of all critical handgun registration data recorded in its
Finding 6 (Current Finding 1
automated record of regulated firearms, and did not conduct timely
and 2)
independent quality control reviews of approved applications.
Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by DSP in
Finding 7 Status Redacted 2
one licensing system was stored without adequate safeguards.
DSP lacked assurance that adequate security and operational controls
Finding 8 Status Redacted 2
existed over its Records Management System.
Certain outdated software and security-related settings on DSP
Finding 9 computers were not sufficient to provide DSP with adequate Status Redacted 2
assurance that its computers were properly protected.
DSP did not periodically review daily fuel usage reports to verify the
Finding 10 Not repeated
propriety of fuel dispensed into its State vehicles.
DSP lacked documentation that annual physical inventories of its
sensitive equipment were completed, and could not document the
Finding 11 Not repeated
investigation and reporting of certain sensitive items recorded in its
equipment records as missing.
2 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been
redacted from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Firearm Licensing and Registration
Background
Obtaining and registering a regulated firearm3 in Maryland is a multi-step process
with specific procedural and documentation requirements for firearm dealers, the
Department of State Police
(DSP), and firearm applicants as Figure 3
noted in Figure 3. The Firearms Maryland’s Firearm Licensing and
Safety Act of 2013, effective Registration Process
October 1, 2013, provides that a
firearm dealer or any other
1. Handgun Qualification License (HQL)
person may not sell, rent, or
transfer a firearm unless the
•Individual is fingerprinted and has the results
individual receiving the firearm submitted to DSP.
first obtains and presents to the •Individual completes a DSP approved firearm
safety training course (unless exempt).
dealer or other person a valid
•Individual completes the online HQL
Handgun Qualification License
application and pays the $50 processing fee.
(HQL) issued by DSP. •DSP conducts a full criminal background check
and, if "not disapproved," issues an HQL
within 30 days of receiving an application.
State law requires HQL
applicants to be fingerprinted,
submit to an initial criminal
2. Firearm Registration
background check by DSP, and
complete an approved firearm •Individual and dealer complete the online
safety training course. Certain firearm registration application, the individual
pays the $10 processing fee, and the
individuals, such as former
application is submitted electronically to DSP.
police officers, are exempt from
•DSP personnel conducts a full criminal
the HQL requirement. background check.
•DSP notifies dealer/individual of disposition
within seven days.
The HQL application and
•Firearm information for "not disapproved"
firearm registration processes
registrations is entered into automated records.
are treated as two separate
events. Consequently, after an
HQL is obtained (or is exempt
3 A regulated firearm as defined by Section 5-101(r) of the of the Public Safety Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland is a handgun or a firearm that is any of a list of specific assault
weapons or their copies, regardless of which company produced and manufactured the weapon.
Examples of specific named assault weapons included are AK-47 in all forms; Colt AR-15,
CAR-15, and all imitations except Colt AR-15 Sporter H-BAR rifle; and UZI 9mm carbine or
rifle. We will refer to regulated firearms as “firearms” throughout our report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
as noted above), the individual and dealer complete an online firearm registration
application. This application is forwarded to DSP for evaluation, including
another criminal background check. If the application is not disapproved4 by
DSP, the firearm can be transferred.
DSP uses certain automated systems and databases to track and process HQL and
firearm registration activity.
 MyLicense is a web-based system DSP uses to receive and process HQL
applications and document the status of the related criminal background
checks.
 Licensing Portal is a web-based system used by applicants and dealers to
complete and submit firearm registration applications. DSP uses the
Licensing Portal to process and track firearm registration applications and
the status of the related criminal background checks.
 Maryland Automated Firearms Services System (MAFSS) is the
official record of regulated firearm transactions in the State, and records
firearms information and data from the registration applications. MAFSS
is also used for a variety of law enforcement purposes, such as to assist in
investigating crimes. The Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services (DPSCS) is responsible for the maintenance and security of
MAFSS.5
According to MAFSS, as of June 29, 2022, there were approximately 1.6 million
firearms registered to approximately 596,000 individuals in Maryland (including
both pre and post October 1, 2013 registrations). According to DSP records, DSP
received approximately 48,000 HQL applications and 118,000 firearm registration
applications during calendar year 2022. According to the State’s accounting
records, HQL and firearm registration application fee collections during calendar
year 2022 totaled $2 million and $1.1 million, respectively.
4 “Not disapproved” is the terminology used by DSP for approved.
5 Per DSP, MAFSS was the official record of regulated firearm transactions in the State through
2022. On January 1, 2023, the official record of regulated firearm transactions moved to the
Licensing Portal.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 1
DSP did not ensure that a sufficient number of quality control (QC) reviews
of HQLs and firearm registrations were conducted, the reviews were
independent and timely, and the results were properly tracked.
Analysis
DSP did not ensure that a sufficient number of QC reviews of HQLs and firearm
registrations were conducted, and that all related results were properly tracked. In
addition, the reviews performed were often not timely or the HQL reviews were
not always completed by individuals independent of the licensing process.
Specifically, DSP did not perform all the firearm registration QC reviews required
by its policy. Also, DSP’s policy for HQL QC reviews did not require a sufficient
number of HQL reviews to be performed, yet DSP could not readily document
that they had completed the required number of HQL reviews. In addition,
certain HQL QC reviews were conducted by employees who processed the related
HQL. The majority of QC reviews were also not completed timely, in accordance
with DSP’s written policies, which require these independent QC reviews to be
performed each month. QC reviews are necessary because HQLs and firearm
registrations are generally processed by employees without any independent
review and approval.
DSP did not perform a sufficient number of QC reviews for firearm registration
applications, as required by its policy. For example, DSP conducted QC reviews
for 3.1 percent of the 372,277 firearm registration applications approved from
May 2018 through May 2022, instead of 10 percent as required by DSP policy.
Of the firearm registration QC reviews performed, 15 percent identified errors,
such as background check discrepancies or data entry errors.
In our opinion, DSP policy does not require a sufficient number of HQL QC
reviews to be performed. Specifically, we found that in December 2021 DSP
modified its policy and reduced the required number of QC reviews for HQL
applications from 10 percent to 1 percent. DSP management advised us that this
policy change was due to a lack of staff to process a significantly increasing
number of HQL applications. DSP could not readily provide us with the number
of HQL QC reviews actually performed during our audit period nor the
percentage of past errors for HQL applications. While we acknowledge the
increasing number of applications, we question the appropriateness of reducing
the required number of QC reviews for HQL applications by 90 percent. Due to
the lack of adequate recordkeeping, we were not readily able to determine the
outcome of the HQL QC reviews performed, but as noted above, similar QC
reviews for firearm registration applications have routinely identified issues with
applications.
11

--- Page 14 ---
The QC reviews were also not completed timely. DSP policy require HQL and
firearm registration QC reviews to be performed monthly. Our test of QC reviews
for 10 HQL applications disclosed that 7 of these reviews were performed from
63 to 227 days after processing. In addition, according to DSP records as of
September 2022, the 11,554 QC reviews performed for firearm registrations
during the period from May 2018 through May 2022 were conducted an average
of 230 days (up to 514 days) after the application was processed, hence the vast
majority were untimely (see Figure 4).
Figure 4
Timeliness of QC Reviews Conducted
for Firearm Registration Applications
Processed May 2018 through May 2022
Number of Days Count of
After Application QC Reviews
Was Processed Conducted
0-60 912
61-99 688
100-199 3,759
200-299 3,158
300-399 1,724
400-499 1,297
500+ 16
Total 11,554
Note: Shaded QC reviews were untimely
Source: DSP records
Finally, HQL QC reviews were not always performed by independent personnel.
Our test of 10 HQL QC reviews noted that 2 reviews were completed by the same
individual that initially processed the HQL application.
A similar condition related to untimely QC reviews of firearm registration
applications was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its response
to our prior audit, DSP indicated it had reviewed and cleared all outstanding QC
reviews while OLA was performing the prior audit and it was continuing to
perform monthly reviews. However, during our current audit, DSP asserted it
was behind on processing QC reviews due to an increase in applications and
insufficient staffing.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that it performs the required number of QC reviews of approved
firearm registration applications;
b. identify means or options for increasing the required number of HQL
applications subject to QC reviews and retain documentation of the QC
reviews to allow for verification and calculation of error rates;
c. complete QC reviews of selected HQL and firearm registration
applications timely, in accordance with its written policies (repeat); and
d. ensure that QC reviews for approved HQL applications are performed by
personnel independent from the initial approval of the applications being
reviewed.
Finding 2
DSP did not have a comprehensive process to ensure the accuracy of all
critical firearm registration data and the timely recordation of this data in
MAFSS.
Analysis
DSP did not have a comprehensive process in place to ensure the accuracy of all
critical firearm registration data in its automated record of regulated firearms
(MAFSS) and that the data was entered timely. According to DSP records, during
the period from May 2018 through May 2022, DSP approved approximately
372,300 firearm registration applications.
DSP did not have a comprehensive process to ensure that all critical firearm
registration data (including name of registrant, gun make, and serial number) was
accurately entered into MAFSS, which is used for a variety of law enforcement
purposes, including assisting in criminal investigations. Firearm registration
applications are submitted electronically through DSP’s Licensing Portal and if
approved, the related firearm data are manually entered into MAFSS by DSP
employees. Our review disclosed that DSP did not perform a comparison
between the Licensing Portal and MAFSS to identify discrepancies between the
firearm data in the two systems. While DSP may verify certain data for accuracy
when performing their limited QC reviews and dealer audits noted in Findings 1
and 3, respectively, our comparison of data in the Portal and MAFSS found
certain issues that led us to conclude that DSP’s verification process was not
necessarily effective.
Specifically, our comparison of data from the approximately 372,300 applications
recorded in the Licensing Portal during our audit period with the related data in
13

--- Page 16 ---
MAFSS disclosed approximately 600 instances in which the firearm serial
numbers in the Licensing Portal and MAFSS were different. Additionally, the
data related to approximately 15,100 firearms, which were transferred to the
applicant prior to June 2022, had not been entered into MAFSS as of September
2022. DSP personnel informed us that this backlog was because of a significant
increase in firearm registrations and certain personnel shortages.
A similar condition relating to DSP not having a comprehensive process to ensure
the accuracy of all critical firearm registration data was commented on in our
prior audit report. In response to our prior report, DSP advised that it was
working with DPSCS on an upgrade to MAFSS that would remove the need for
manual recordings in MAFSS and eliminate data entry errors. No estimate was
provided for the implementation of the upgrade. DSP advised us in December
2023 that the automated data transfer process will no longer be included in the
upgrade to MAFSS and they are exploring other options to eliminate the manual
data entry process.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DSP
a. establish a comprehensive process to ensure that critical firearm data,
such as serial numbers, are accurately recorded in MAFSS, and resolve
the above noted discrepancies (repeat); and
b. ensure that the firearm registration data is recorded in MAFSS in a
timely manner.
Firearm Dealer Audits
Finding 3
DSP firearm dealer audits were not supported.
Analysis
DSP firearm dealer audits were not supported. According to DSP records, there
were approximately 500 active firearm dealers during our audit period. Our test
of 11 firearm dealer audits conducted during the period from March 2021 through
June 2022 disclosed that the audit files did not include documentation of what
was reviewed by the auditor, such as schedules of the firearms and transactions
examined.
For example, one dealer audit file was limited to the statement that “Twelve
regulated firearms were inventoried. All regulated firearms were properly stored
and properly listed in the Acquisitions and Dispositions book.” No details were
14

--- Page 17 ---
provided specifying which 12 were reviewed or how or where the firearms were
stored. As a result, we were unable to determine whether the scope of the dealer
audits was adequate and related conclusions were supported. In addition, the lack
of documentation raises questions regarding how the supervisor who reviewed the
audits was able to determine that the work performed was proper.
State law requires DSP to inspect the inventory and records of licensed firearm
dealers at least once every two years to ensure that the firearm dealers licensed by
DSP are meeting the recordkeeping and inventory requirements established in
State law and regulations, such as receipts, sales, and other dispositions of
firearms.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DSP maintain adequate supporting documentation for
firearm dealer audits, including the specific documents and transactions
reviewed.
Information Systems Security and Control
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control section,
including Findings 4 through 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related
recommendations, along with DSP’s responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Cash Receipts
Finding 8
DSP had not established adequate controls over its cash collections and the
related accounts receivables.
Analysis
DSP had not established adequate controls over its collections and the related
accounts receivables. According to the State’s records, in fiscal year 2022
collections received and deposited by DSP’s headquarters totaled approximately
$3.1 million.
 Checks were not always recorded immediately upon receipt. Instead, the
checks were restrictively endorsed and placed into the safe for processing on
the next business day. In addition, DSP did not have a documented
independent verification that all collections were subsequently deposited.
 Four employees could process adjustments to the receivable records without
independent approval, including one employee who also had access to the
related collections. According to the State’s accounting records, these four
employees processed adjustments totaling approximately $40,000 during the
audit period. DSP processed adjustments totaling approximately $146.2
million during our audit period including one adjustment of $122 million to
reclassify a receivable due from the Maryland Department of Health which
was independently approved.
Similar conditions regarding not immediately recording collections and the lack
of an independent review and approval of adjustments to the accounts receivable
records were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports dating back to
2015. Furthermore, a similar condition regarding the lack of adequate segregation
of duties between the accounts receivable and cash receipt functions was
commented upon in our preceding audit report. In response to that audit report,
DSP indicated that it had corrected each of these issues. However, during our
current audit, DSP management stated that the prior recommendations were not
implemented due to insufficient training. We did note that DSP had taken actions
to reduce cash collections since last audit, which had totaled $13.2 million in
fiscal year 2017, by requesting State agencies to transfer funds via journal entries
rather than using a check.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DSP ensure that
a. all collections are recorded immediately upon receipt (repeat),
b. a documented independent verification of initial receipts to deposit is
performed,
c. adjustments to accounts receivable are subject to independent review and
approval (repeat), and
d. accounts receivable and cash receipts functions are properly segregated
(repeat).
17

--- Page 20 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of State Police
(DSP) for the period beginning May 21, 2018 and ending May 31, 2022. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DSP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included firearm registration, payroll, cash receipts,
accounts receivable, procurements and disbursements, information systems, and
equipment inventories. We also determined the status of the findings contained in
our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over compliance with
federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance programs (such as the
Homeland Security Grant Program) and an assessment of DSP’s compliance with
those laws and regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent
accounting firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies,
including DSP.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 21, 2018 to May 31, 2022, but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DSP’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
18

--- Page 21 ---
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from these sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from DSP’s Maryland Automated Firearms Services
System, handgun qualification licensing system (MyLicense) and firearm
registration system (Licensing Portal) for the purpose of testing certain areas such
as quality control reviews. We also extracted data from DSP’s inventory system
for the purpose of testing physical inventories of equipment. We performed
various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
DSP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations, including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DSP, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DSP’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DSP that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to DSP and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
DSP’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise DSP regarding the results of our review of its
response.
20

--- Page 23 ---
APPENDIX
STATE OF MARYLAND
MARYLAND STATE POLICE
1201 REISTERSTOWN ROAD
PIKESVILLE, MARYLAND 21208-3899
410-486-3101
TOLL FREE: 1-800-525-5555
TDD: 410-486-0677
WES MOORE COLONEL
GOVERNOR ROLAND L. BUTLER, JR.
SUPERINTENDENT
ARUNA MILLER
LT. GOVERNOR February 20, 2024
Mr. Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
Please allow this correspondence to serve as a response to the final Office of
Legislative Audits (OLA) Triennial Fiscal Compliance Report, which was received on
February 5, 2024. This audit comprised several areas of performance, from May 21, 2018
through May 31, 2022, and disclosed a number of areas requiring corrective actions from the
Maryland Department of State Police (MDSP). The Department's response to the findings and
recommendations are included with this letter.
The MDSP appreciates the time and effort put forth by the OLA. The Department will
continue to work with the OLA in all matters of mutual concern. Should you need additional
information regarding our responses, please do not hesitate to contact Mr. John Wilhelm, Chief
Financial Officer of our Strategic Planning Command. Mr. Wilhelm may be reached by
telephone at 410-653-8230 or by email john.wiU1elm@maryland.go .
Thank you again for the opportunity to respond to this performance audit.
Sincerely,
�&¥.1:f�
Superintendent
RLB:jsb
cc: Mr. John Wilhelm, Chief Financial Officer, Strategic Planning Command
Attachment
"Maryland's Finest"

--- Page 24 ---
Department of State Police
Agency Response Form
Firearm Licensing and Registration
Finding 1
DSP did not ensure that a sufficient number of quality control (QC) reviews of HQLs and
firearm registrations were conducted, the reviews were independent and timely, and the
results were properly tracked.
We recommend that DSP
a. ensure that it performs the required number of QC reviews of approved firearm
registration applications;
b. identify means or options for increasing the required number of HQL applications
subject to QC reviews and retain documentation of the QC reviews to allow for
verification and calculation of error rates;
c. complete QC reviews of selected HQL and firearm registration applications timely, in
accordance with its written policies (repeat); and
d. ensure that QC reviews for approved HQL applications are performed by personnel
independent from the initial approval of the applications being reviewed.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide A review of the HQL and FRU Desktop Procedures for QC did not
additional comments as reveal a 30-day requirement to complete the QC review. Prior to the
deemed necessary. surge of applications in 2020, the FRU intentionally did not QC
applications before 30 days in order to allow time for the transfer of the
firearm to take place. This delay could be up to 90 days. Having the
firearm transfer take place prior to the QC of the application assures that
the entire QC of the application and the transfer of the firearm into
MAFSS is accurate. The Licensing Portal is programmed to randomly
select 10 percent of the previous month's firearm applications for QC.
Recommendation 1a Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of The Licensing Portal programmatically returns the required number of
corrective action or firearm applications for QC (10%); however, the DSP is admittedly
explain the behind in the second review QC process. The firearms registration QC
disagreement.
process returns an overall 10% of applications from the previous month.
These applications are then placed in initial review QC or second review
QC. Initial review QC refers to applications that have been investigated
and “Not Disapproved” by a single employee. Second review QC refers
to applications that have been reviewed and assigned a final disposition
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 25 ---
Department of State Police
Agency Response Form
by at least two employees. The DSP is currently in the initial review QC
process and backlogged in the second review QC process. The DSP has
identified four firearms registration supervisors and developed a plan to
eliminate the second review QC backlog by the end of the 2024 calendar
year.
Recommendation 1b Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2023
Please provide details of OLA is correct that in December 2021, the percentage of QC reviews
corrective action or were decreased from 10 percent overall to 1 percent of each employee
explain the (civilian and sworn) conducting HQL applications in the previous
disagreement.
month. The change resulted from significant increases (140 percent) in
HQL application volume beginning in Q2 of 2020 with no increase in
permanent HQL supervisory personnel to accommodate the increased
QC workload. It was also argued that the previous 10 percent was of the
overall number of applications and that this change would aid the HQL
supervision in detecting individual deficiencies since the new standard
would provide a sample of each employee’s work. In May 2023, the
DSP amended the QC request to include a random 10 percent of the
applications for each employee who processed HQL applications in the
previous month for QC review. The HQL QC report will be copied and
processed on a shared Google sheet, which will capture additional notes
and statistical data. The HQL QC Desktop Procedure was amended to
reflect this change.
Recommendation 1c Agree Estimated Completion Date: December
2024
Please provide details of The DSP could not locate a current policy or practice that requires the
corrective action or QC of HQL or 77R applications to be completed within 30 days. DSP is
explain the aware of the importance of completing these tasks in a timely manner
disagreement. and will do so to the best of our ability with the current supervisory
staffing. While legislative-mandated processes (7 days for 77R and 30
days for HQL apps) must continue to take precedence, the DSP has
formulated a plan and will designate supervisory personnel to address
the backlogged 77R QC reviews. Considering the current average
number of 77R applications the DSP is receiving per month, the DSP is
anticipating that the second review QC process will be current by the
end of the calendar year 2024. The initial review QC process is current
and is being maintained monthly.
Recommendation 1d Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2023
Please provide details of The current HQL Application Review & Quality Assurance Process
corrective action or Desktop Procedure (HQLAR&QAPDP) guides HQL supervisors in the
explain the Quality Control (QC) of HQL applications. At the beginning of every
disagreement.
month, the HQL civilian supervisor submits a web helpdesk ticket to the
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 26 ---
Department of State Police
Agency Response Form
DSP ITD requesting the QC report. Once received, the civilian
supervisor provides a copy of the report to the HQL section supervisor,
who disseminates this report to the HQL Corporal. As per
HQLAR&QAPDP, the civilian supervisor is responsible for the QC of
the civilian employee’s applications processed and the HQL sworn
supervisors are responsible for the QC of the sworn employees. Sworn
supervisors will QC each other’s applications processed. The established
policy and procedures forbid a QC reviewer from QC reviewing an HQL
application that the QC reviewers themselves processed.
Finding 2
DSP did not have a comprehensive process to ensure the accuracy of all critical firearm
registration data and the timely recordation of this data in MAFSS.
We recommend that DSP
a. establish a comprehensive process to ensure that critical firearm data, such as serial
numbers, are accurately recorded in MAFSS, and resolve the above-noted
discrepancies (repeat); and
b. ensure that the firearm registration data is recorded in MAFSS in a timely manner.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2024
Please provide details of The OLA identified 372,300 77R applications processed during the audit
corrective action or period, with approximately 600 instances where data entry errors were
explain the identified in MAFSS as compared to the Licensing Portal. This equates
disagreement.
to a 0.16% error rate, and therefore meets the data entry industry
standard error rate of 1% and is well below the established 4%
acceptable error rate as documented in the AS I MS-22. The DSP
continues to work with the Department of Public Safety and Corrections
(DPSCS) to upgrade MAFSS. Despite numerous setbacks and changes
in programming and managerial personnel within the DPSCS MAFSS
project team, a significant amount of work has been completed and the
system is now in the testing phase. The goal of the MAFSS update is to
remove MAFSS from the DPSCS mainframe and convert it into a
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 27 ---
Department of State Police
Agency Response Form
modernized platform. Realizing that the DPSCS is not developing the
new MAFSS with data transfer abilities, the DSP has decided to
discontinue MAFSS as the system of record and establish the Licensing
Portal as such. MAFSS will continue as a legacy system and will
continue to be updated when issues are found. The new goal is to create
a pointer system within the Licensing Portal that will query both the data
in the Licensing Portal and MAFSS to generate a complete firearm
history without the need to manually query both systems. Firearm
transfer data in MAFSS will be accurate through December 2022. All
firearm transfer data beginning January 2023 will be located in the
Licensing Portal. This policy shift eliminates the need to manually
transfer data from one system to another, thereby eliminating the
possibility of human data entry errors by DSP personnel.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: January 2024
Please provide details of The DSP is current with firearm transfer data entered into MAFSS
corrective action or through December 2022. Firearm transfer data after January 1, 2023, is
explain the accessible in the Licensing Portal.
disagreement.
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 28 ---
Department of State Police
Agency Response Form
Firearm Dealer Audits
Finding 3
DSP firearm dealer audits were not supported.
We recommend that DSP maintain adequate supporting documentation for firearm dealer
audits, including the specific documents and transactions reviewed.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 3 Agree Estimated Completion Date: February
2022
Please provide details of The Dealer Inspection and Compliance Unit (ICU) of the DSP Licensing
corrective action or Division implemented several new methods in 2022 to ensure the correct
explain disagreement. information is being reviewed by auditors when reviewing regulated
firearms dealer’s (RFD) records and to ensure better tracking of the audit
due dates. The ICU’s Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) was
reviewed in its entirety and re-written to accommodate for technology
changes (paper 77R Applications vs electronic application via the
Licensing Portal), accurate review of RFD records, information and data,
more focused review of RFD records and transactions, and overall, more
effective and efficient auditing methods. Laptops and cell phones have
been provided to auditors to ensure the new methods are implemented,
and auditors have access to the Licensing Portal when conducting
audits. The information collected on the MSP Form 29-89 Compliance
Inspection Report is more detailed to reflect the specific application
numbers and firearm serial numbers reviewed. The Compliance
Inspection Report, coupled with the ICU SOP, forms the procedures for
how and what the auditors inspect. Additionally, the ICU has expanded
from two auditors and a supervisor to a current roster of four auditors,
one Admin Specialist, one support staff employee, and two sworn
supervisors. This staffing enhances complete and timely audits as well
as additional targeted and follow-up audits to ensure compliance after
deficiencies are identified.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 29 ---
Department of State Police
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security
and Control section, including Findings 4 through 7 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings,
including the analysis, related recommendations, along with DSP’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy, DSP’s responses indicated agreement with the findings and
related recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 7
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 30 ---
Department of State Police
Agency Response Form
Cash Receipts
Finding 8
DSP had not established adequate controls over its cash collections and the related
accounts receivables.
We recommend that DSP ensure that
a. all collections are recorded immediately upon receipt (repeat),
b. a documented independent verification of initial receipts to deposit is performed,
c. adjustments to accounts receivable are subject to independent review and approval
(repeat), and
d. accounts receivable and cash receipts functions are properly segregated (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2023
Please provide details of Finance Division personnel immediately endorse and record cash
corrective action or receipts upon receiving them.
explain the
disagreement.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2023
Please provide details of Finance Division has established a workflow to ensure independent
corrective action or verification of receipts is performed.
explain the
disagreement.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2023
Please provide details of Finance Division has established procedures to ensure independent
corrective action or review and approval of adjustments is performed.
explain the
disagreement.
Recommendation 8d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 1/1/2023
Please provide details of Finance Division has established the necessary segregation of duties
corrective action or related to accounts receivable and cash receipts.
explain the
disagreement.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 31 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Jammie A. Brown
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Jacob M. Kasten
Chau D. Mai
Jennifer N. Sayre, CFE
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus
Charles O. Price
Adam J. Steiner
Information Systems Staff Auditors