Title: Maryland Environmental Service
Date: 10/14/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0fcc9d7245606743f2
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:41:19.660979
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Environmental Service
April 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Financial Statement Audits 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
State Projects
Finding 1 – Documentation Was Not Available to Support the Full 5
Amount Of Certain Project Advances
Finding 2 – (Policy Issue) A Board of Public Works’ Policy May No 7
Longer Be Appropriate For Establishing the Contractual
Relationship Between MES and the Applicable State Agencies
Cash Receipts and Accounts Receivable
Finding 3 – Proper Controls Had Not Been Established Over Collections 8
and Accounts Receivable
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4 – Proper Controls Had Not Been Established Over Payroll and 10
Personnel Transactions
Financial Management System Access
Finding 5 – MES Had Not Established Adequate Controls to Ensure the 11
Propriety of Access Capabilities Assigned to System Users
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 12
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Environmental Service (MES) was created as an instrumentality of
the State and a public corporation to provide water supply, wastewater treatment,
and waste management services to public and private entities. MES constructs,
operates, and maintains various water, sewer, and solid waste plant facilities
under contracts with the State of Maryland, its political subdivisions, and private
enterprises. Additional services offered include sludge and dredged materials
management. As of February 2, 2015, MES administered 762 projects, of which
261 projects were operated at State-owned facilities. According to its fiscal year
2015 audited financial statements, MES’s operating expenditures (including
salaries, wages, and fringe benefits) totaled approximately $139.3 million and
MES received revenue totaling approximately $141.1 million, of which
approximately $133.4 million was received from State and local government
entities.
MES is governed by a nine-member Board of Directors, including the Director,
Deputy Director, Secretary, and Treasurer of MES. The remaining five members
are appointed to the Board by the Governor with the advice and consent of the
Maryland Senate.
Financial Statement Audits
In accordance with the Natural Resources Article, Section 3-126 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, MES engaged an independent accounting firm to audit its
financial statements annually. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the
financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position
of MES as of June 30, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015, and the changes in its
financial position and its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
State Projects
Background
Maryland Environmental Service (MES) performs project services (such as
environmental cleanup and recycling program management) for State agencies.
Some of the projects are for a short duration, such as scrap tire clean-up. MES
enters into a contract with each agency for these projects. During fiscal year
2014, expenditures related to 172 State-related contractual projects totaled
approximately $49.2 million. As provided for in the contracts, MES may require
advance payments from agencies to cover project expenditures. Any interest
earned on the advances is credited to the individual projects to offset
expenditures. According to MES, the necessity and amount of an advance are
based on the duration and size of the project. As of June 30, 2014, there were 22
advances outstanding for State contractual projects totaling $28.8 million.
Other MES projects represent long-term operational commitments by MES,
which are administered in accordance with an Executive Order issued in 1971 that
directs MES to operate and maintain all State-owned water, wastewater, and solid
waste management facilities. The funding for these State reimbursable projects is
established through the State budgetary process, during which annual estimates of
costs for the projects are submitted by MES to the Department of Budget and
Management for inclusion in the annual budget request. MES is reimbursed by
State agencies on a monthly basis for a portion of that annual estimate. At year-
end, adjustments are made to ensure agencies’ payments equal MES’s actual
costs. During fiscal year 2014, MES collected approximately $19 million from
State agencies related to 74 reimbursable projects.
Finding 1
MES did not maintain documentation to support the need for the full
amount of funding advances received for certain State projects.
Analysis
MES did not maintain documentation to support certain outstanding project
advances, including the justification for the dollar amount and the duration of the
individual advances that were outstanding. Our test of 10 judgmentally-selected
advances received from State agencies totaling $21.8 million as of February 28,
2015, disclosed that MES could not substantiate the need for the full amount of
advances received totaling $21.4 million for 7 projects. Consequently, the
potential exists for some of these funds to be returned to the applicable State
agency.
5

--- Page 8 ---
 MES could not justify why it needed advances totaling $20.9 million for five
Maryland Port Administration (MPA) projects with original budgeted costs of
approximately $196.3 million, of which $80.3 million was unexpended as of
February 28, 2015. From May 2013 through October 2014, MES requested
and received significant project advances, which according to the contracts
were supposed to be based on the project tasks authorized and that efforts
would be made to ensure that advances were to be outstanding no more than
three months. However, a correlation between the cost of tasks and the
advances was not always documented, and the advances received by MES
have exceeded what has been needed to fund the projects for three months.
For example, in May 2013, MES received $5.5 million from MPA that
increased the advance for one of the aforementioned projects to $16.7 million.
However, during the period from May 2013 to April 2015, the monthly billed
expenditures for this project averaged $442,000 and ranged from
approximately $80,000 to $1.2 million. Therefore, the advance amount was
well beyond the amount actually needed to fund expenditures for any three-
month period; at the most, only $3.6 million was needed as an advance during
that two-year period. MES could not provide documentation to justify the
advance amount or to justify the extended period of time the advance
remained outstanding. We were advised that the advance was needed to fund
upcoming large projects and project delays had been experienced for various
reasons.
 MES did not provide adequate documentation to support the continuing need
for advances totaling approximately $356,000 and $98,000 for two MPA
projects, respectively. These advances were paid to MES prior to 1993 for
expenditures related to a groundwater treatment facility and a hazardous waste
landfill, which are no longer active. When questioned about whether these
advances had been approved to be outstanding for this amount of time, MPA
management stated it was unaware that MES was retaining funds related to
these projects.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MES
a. prepare and retain documentation supporting the need for advance
amounts and duration; and
b. periodically evaluate advances received and return to State agencies
funds in excess of the needs established in the contracts, including the
appropriate portion of the advances for the aforementioned seven
projects.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
A 1979 Board of Public Works (BPW) policy, which addresses the services
provided by MES to State agencies for reimbursable projects, may no longer
be the appropriate mechanism for establishing the contractual relationships
between those parties.
Analysis
MES did not establish separate contractual agreements with State agencies for the
operation of each reimbursable project; rather, MES officials advised that its
relationship with State agencies for such projects is primarily reliant on the
aforementioned 1971 Executive Order. Subsequently, a policy statement was
approved by the BPW in 1979 to provide more clarity for those contractual
arrangements. Although there is no indication the policy has been rescinded,
when we contacted a BPW official, the official questioned whether the policy is
an appropriate mechanism for establishing the contractual relationship between
MES and State agencies. Furthermore, we noted that MES was not adhering to
certain provisions of the policy statement.
Specifically, when we inquired about the policy statement, the BPW official was
unaware of its existence and opined that current members of BPW were similarly
unacquainted with the statement. Consequently, the official had no knowledge
that the policy statement had been rescinded. However, the BPW official
questioned if such a policy statement is the appropriate mechanism for
establishing the current relationship between MES and State agencies. The
official indicated that, subsequent to the issuance of this policy statement, the
General Assembly directed that such policies be handled through the regulatory
process. The official also was uncertain whether BPW now has jurisdiction over
this matter. Therefore, the official believes the appropriate course of action would
be to consult with the Office of the Attorney General to resolve the matter.
We also noted that MES was routinely not adhering to a provision in the policy
which may, in part, suggest that the policy statement is outdated. We were
advised by MES that the required detailed working agreement and description
pertaining to the scope of responsibility assigned to each party is not included in
any documentation prepared by either MES or the State agency. Furthermore,
MES does not consistently prepare intergovernmental agreements or similar
contractual documents to describe processes for various aspects of the facility
management, such as emergency repairs and sub-contractors. Although we were
advised that comprehensive intergovernmental agreements are prepared for
county agencies receiving similar services, MES stated that it believed the
agreements are unnecessary for State projects, but would prepare them if
requested by a State agency.
7

--- Page 10 ---
In view of the age of the policy statement, and current questions about the
appropriateness of the policy and usefulness in its current form, we believe legal
advice should be sought to determine if such a policy is the appropriate
mechanism for establishing the contractual relationship between MES and State
agencies. In addition, existing contractual requirements should be reassessed and
updated as appropriate to sufficiently define responsibilities and protect the
interests of each party.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MES
a. consult with legal counsel and obtain formal advice regarding the
appropriateness of the existing BPW policy statement or whether the
contractual arrangements between MES and state agencies should be
handled in a different manner, such as through regulation; and
b. reassess existing contractual requirements with State agencies and ensure
they are sufficient.
Cash Receipts and Accounts Receivable
Finding 3
Internal controls over collections were not adequate and cash receipts and
account receivable duties were not adequately separated.
Analysis
Controls over collections processed using the remote deposit system, a process
that scans the images of checks and electronically transmits those images to the
bank for deposit, were not adequate. In addition, duties related to cash receipts
and accounts receivable were not properly segregated. Checks received in
February 2015 totaled $3.8 million, and as of February 28, 2015, the outstanding
accounts receivable balance was $21.3 million.
 MES did not record and restrictively endorse checks prior to scanning the
checks in the remote deposit system, which electronically endorses the
scanned image of the checks. Also, two employees shared one username and
password to routinely access the bank’s remote deposit system. Finally,
deposited checks appeared to be retained for an excessive period. We were
advised by MES management that the checks were retained for approximately
three months (or two months longer than required) prior to being destroyed.
8

--- Page 11 ---
 MES did not adequately separate the cash receipts and accounts receivable
functions. Two employees responsible for handling and scanning checks in
the remote deposit system were also assigned access capabilities in the
automated financial management system to adjust the related accounts
receivable records. Furthermore, the supervisor responsible for reviewing and
approving the adjustments to the accounts receivable records also had access
capabilities that allowed the supervisor to initiate adjustments. In addition,
two employees (one of whom also had access to checks) could initiate and
approve non-cash credits in the accounts receivable records without
independent supervisory approval. Non-cash credit transactions totaled
approximately $3.4 million in fiscal year 2014.
As a result of the above conditions, checks could be misappropriated without
detection. The Office of the State Treasurer’s Policy on the Use of Remote
Deposit Services by Maryland State Agencies requires that checks be restrictively
endorsed and logged in upon receipt, remote deposit system users be assigned
individual user IDs, passwords not be shared among users, and scanned and
transmitted checks should be stored no longer than 30 days before they are
destroyed. The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
requires the establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections,
including adequate separation of cash receipt processing duties, independent
verification of collections to deposit, and initial accountability over collections
received.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MES
a. restrictively endorse and record all checks immediately upon receipt,
b. assign unique usernames and passwords to employees with access to the
bank’s remote deposit system,
c. ensure proper segregation of duties over cash receipts and accounts
receivable functions,
d. ensure that checks processed through the bank’s remote deposit system
are destroyed in a timely manner, and
e. ensure that accounting adjustments and non-cash credits are approved
by independent supervisory personnel.
We advised MES on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4
Human resources and payroll system user capabilities were not adequately
restricted. In addition, independent documented reviews of personnel and
payroll transactions were not performed.
Analysis
MES had not established adequate controls over its personnel and payroll
processing. According to State records, MES employed approximately 700
employees as of June 30, 2014, and payroll expenditures totaled approximately
$42 million.
 Critical human resources (HR) and payroll system access capabilities, such as
those allowing the changing of employee salary and direct deposit information
and the recordation, review, and approval of payroll-related information, were
not adequately restricted. Our review of the five individuals with HR and
payroll responsibilities disclosed that the duties that could be performed by
three of these employees were not adequately segregated as the employees
could unilaterally perform all critical personnel and payroll transactions in
MES’s HR and payroll system. As a result, these employees could process
improper payroll payments without detection.
 There was no independent review to ensure that processed employee
personnel and payroll transactions were correct and appropriate.
Transactions, such as adding or deleting employees and editing the bi-weekly
time and payroll reports, were manually approved prior to being recorded in
the system, but there was no independent verification performed to ensure that
the information actually posted in the system was proper. As a result, there is
an increased risk of improper transactions being processed.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MES
a. establish a proper separation of duties over human resources and payroll
duties; and
b. perform a documented independent supervisory review of critical
personnel and payroll transactions processed, at least on a test basis.
We advised MES on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Financial Management System Access
Finding 5
MES had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of access
capabilities assigned to users of its automated financial management system.
Analysis
MES did not perform periodic reviews of user access capabilities for its
automated financial management system, which is used for all aspects of the
agency’s operations, including payroll and human resources, cash receipts and
accounts receivable, and disbursements and procurement functions. As of April
2015, MES had granted 327 users access to this system. While access to the
system is originally requested and approved by an employee’s direct supervisor,
no subsequent reviews are performed to ensure access assigned continues to be
appropriate. During the course of the audit, we noted instances where individuals
had incompatible or inappropriate system capabilities, such as access to both cash
receipt and accounts receivable records (Finding 3) and the ability to perform
critical personnel and payroll transactions without supervisory review and
approval (Finding 4).
Furthermore, our review disclosed 10 unnecessary active system administrator
profiles assigned to certain third parties that allowed unrestricted access to the
system, such as editing system settings, establishing system user accounts and
security. We were advised by MES management that these profiles were assigned
to former consultants and were not required, and MES subsequently deactivated
the profiles.
The State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy, requires agencies to monitor
the security controls over its information systems at least annually and states that
each agency must establish an authorization process which specifically grants
access to information ensuring that access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it
supports the concepts of “least possible privileges” and “need-to-know.”
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MES
a. perform a periodic documented review of user access capabilities for the
financial management system and ensure users are assigned only those
capabilities needed to perform job duties, and
b. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform
incompatible duties.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Environmental
Service (MES) for the period beginning December 9, 2011 and ending March 23,
2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine MES’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included accounts receivable, cash receipts, procurements
and disbursements, payment advances from project participants, and project cost
accounting.
MES engaged an independent accounting firm to audit its financial statements
annually. In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements
presented fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of MES as of June
30, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015, and the respective changes in financial position
and, where applicable, cash flows thereof for the years then ended in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage of certain aspects of MES’s operations (such as, internal controls and
testing for debt financing and certain accounts receivable activities). Our audit
procedures in these areas were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
MES operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
12

--- Page 15 ---
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the MES’s
financial management system (such as revenue and expenditure data). We
determined that the data extracted from these various sources were sufficiently
reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
MES’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect MES’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to MES that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The response from MES to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MES regarding the
results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 1
MES did not maintain documentation to support the need for the full amount of funding
advances received for certain State projects.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MES
a. prepare and retain documentation supporting the need for advance amounts and
duration; and
b. periodically evaluate advances received and return to State agencies funds in excess of
the needs established in the contracts, including the appropriate portion of the advances
for the aforementioned seven projects.
MES concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and has implemented steps to respond
accordingly:
a) As of August 24, 2015, MES is preparing and retaining increased documentation to
support how each advance amount is determined. This includes calculations, client
discussions and direction or other appropriate documentation that substantiate
advance funding requests.
b) As of August 24, 2015 MES has been working with State agency clients to identify
and execute the best methods to resolve excess advance funding balances that may
exist. Methods thus far include reducing planned project funding to draw down
advance funding balances, amendments to current contracts that update contractual
language regarding advances, and an increase in project activities that had been
previously delayed.
Finding 2 (Policy Issue)
A 1979 Board of Public Works (BPW) policy, which addresses the services provided by
MES to State agencies for reimbursable projects, may no longer be the appropriate
mechanism for establishing the contractual relationships between those parties.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MES
a. consult with legal counsel and obtain formal advice regarding the appropriateness of
the existing BPW policy statement or whether the contractual arrangements between
MES and state agencies should be handled in a different manner, such as through
regulation; and
b. reassess existing contractual requirements with State agencies and ensure they are
sufficient.
MES utilizes the Governor’s Executive Order, the BPW Policy Statement, the MES Act,
and permits issued by MDE to define the administration, operations and maintenance of

--- Page 18 ---
State-owned water, wastewater, and solid waste management facilities. MES believes these
documents have proven to be more than adequate to define the relationship between MES
and other State agencies, and are the basis for the successful approach to properly and
consistently managing these facilities and ensures environmental protection is a priority.
MES also believes that certain documents prepared by MES, such as detailed budget plans
and Annual Reports, fulfill the requirements for documentation in the Policy.
MES agrees to:
a) By May 31, 2016 consult with legal counsel and obtain formal advice regarding the
appropriateness of the existing BPW policy statement or whether the contractual
arrangements between MES and State agencies should be handled in a different
manner,
b) By June 30, 2016 reassess existing contractual requirements with State agencies and
ensure they are sufficient.
Finding 3
Internal controls over collections were not adequate and cash receipts and account
receivable duties were not adequately separated.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MES
a. restrictively endorse and record all checks immediately upon receipt,
b. assign unique usernames and passwords to employees with access to the bank’s remote
deposit system,
c. ensure proper segregation of duties over cash receipts and accounts receivable
functions,
d. ensure that checks processed through the bank’s remote deposit system are destroyed
in a timely manner, and
e. ensure that accounting adjustments and non-cash credits are approved by independent
supervisory personnel.
We advised MES on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
MES concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and has implemented steps to respond
accordingly:
a. Effective July 19, 2015 checks are restrictively endorsed immediately on receipt.
b. As of July 21, 2015 staff members are utilizing unique user names and passwords
for the bank’s remote deposit system.

--- Page 19 ---
c. On August 3, 2015 MES implemented changes to the E1 security for the three
positions noted with inappropriate adjustment authority.
d. Effective July 22, 2015 scanned checks are destroyed in a rolling 30 days period.
e. On August 3, 2015 MES implemented changes to the E1 security for the two
positions noted, who are now unable to initiate non-cash credits, and will perform
the posting and review functions.
Finding 4
Human resources and payroll system user capabilities were not adequately restricted. In
addition, independent documented reviews of personnel and payroll transactions were not
performed.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MES
a. establish a proper separation of duties over human resources and payroll duties; and
b. perform a documented independent supervisory review of critical personnel and
payroll transactions processed, at least on a test basis.
We advised MES on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
MES concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and has implemented steps to respond
accordingly:
a) On May 18, 2015 the security for the Basic Compensation application was changed
for the 3 named positions to prohibit them from entering changes. The security for
the Payroll supervisor, who will be confirming payroll changes made by the Payroll
Specialist, has been changed in E1 effective August 3, 2015 prohibiting her from
making PDBA History changes.
b) For HR transactions, effective August 3, 2015 an HR Generalist verifies the
transactions entered by the HRIS Specialist. Effective July 22, 2015 the Deputy CFO
verifies the Time and Pay Exception Report, and the payroll register both before
and after the payroll is processed.
Finding 5
MES had not established adequate controls to ensure the propriety of access capabilities
assigned to users of its automated financial management system.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MES

--- Page 20 ---
a. perform a periodic documented review of user access capabilities for the financial
management system and ensure users are assigned only those capabilities needed to
perform job duties, and
b. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform incompatible
duties.
MES concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and has implemented steps to respond
accordingly:
a. On April 15, 2015, MES IT prepared and distributed documentation of the user
access capabilities for review and approval by management. All grids were
reviewed and all approvals and/or requests for changes were completed by August
3, 2015. The review will be done annually.
b. Role responsibilities will be reviewed by management in the same cycle as user
access capabilities.

--- Page 21 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Senior Auditor
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditor