Title: Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court - Caroline County
Date: 08/03/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0ccc9d724560674300
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:12:07.155461
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Office of the Clerk of Circuit Court
Caroline County, Maryland
September 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Office performs a variety of functions for the public such as filing, docketing,
and maintaining various legal records; recording documents involving title to real
estate; collecting the related fees, commissions, and taxes; and issuing certain
licenses. In performing these functions, the Office collects funds on behalf of the
State, Caroline County and its incorporated municipalities, and others, and
subsequently distributes the funds collected to the applicable entities.
Financial Information
According to the State’s accounting records, the Office’s fiscal year 2014
revenues totaled $1,453,762. These revenues were distributed in the following
manner:
 $406,759 was distributed to Caroline County and its incorporated
municipalities,
 $8,495 was distributed to others, and
 $1,038,508 (the remaining amount) represented revenues available to the State
for purposes specified in various provisions of State law.
The Office’s fiscal year 2014 operating expenses, which were paid primarily from
a general fund appropriation, totaled $790,115.
The Office also maintained custody of certain trust funds that, according to its
records, had a balance totaling $49,780 as of April 26, 2015.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 30, 2012. We determined that these
findings were not satisfactorily addressed and both are repeated in this report.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
The Office lacked accountability and control over its cash receipts.
Analysis
The Office lacked sufficient accountability and control over its cash receipts,
which totaled approximately $1.5 million during fiscal year 2014. As a result,
cash receipts could be misappropriated without detection.
 Cashiers who processed land transfer transactions had excessive control over
the related collections. Specifically, these employees collected cash and
voided transactions recorded on the cash register. Although the cashiers
documented the reasons for the voided transactions, there was no independent
documented review and approval of the transactions. The daily cash register
closeout procedures were also performed by a cashier, rather than by an
independent supervisor. According to the Office’s record, these cashiers
processed collections totaling $1.3 million in fiscal year 2014 of which $1.2
million related to land transactions and approximately $100,000 related to
other transactions such as, marriage licenses.
 Daily collections were not properly safeguarded prior to deposit. Collections
were placed in a locked bank bag and cabinet each day; however, the related
keys were accessible to all employees.
 The employee who verified that recorded collections were deposited was not
independent because this employee also prepared the deposit and had access
to the cash receipts. Furthermore, these verifications were not documented.
Our test of collections for 15 days, totaling approximately $370,000, disclosed
that recorded collections were properly deposited.
According to the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual,
voided transactions shall be reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel and
cash receipts should be adequately stored and safeguarded until deposited. In
addition, independent verifications of validated deposit slips to recorded
collections are to be performed. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Office
a. remove the land transaction cashiers’ ability to void transactions and
perform independent documented reviews of all voids (repeat),
b. ensure assigned cashiers are denied the capability to close out the cash
register (repeat),
c. safeguard collections by restricting access to the bank bag and cabinet
keys to only those employees who require access (repeat), and
d. ensure that an employee independent of the collection and deposit
functions verifies that all recorded collections were deposited and that
these reviews are documented (repeat).
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Land Transfers
Finding 2
Land transfer transactions were not subject to independent review.
Analysis
The Office lacked adequate procedures to verify that land transfer transactions
were properly processed, and to ensure that the proper taxes (that is, transfer
taxes, recordation taxes, and nonresident withholding taxes) and fees were
collected. Specifically, land record clerks had sole responsibility for processing
land transactions, for determining the taxes and fees due, and for processing the
related collections on the automated court system. In addition, for those cases
that are exempt from taxes (such as, transfers between family members) or are
subject to a reduced tax (such as, first time homeowners), the land record clerks
are responsible for reviewing the documentation to ensure that the individuals are
qualified for the related tax exemption or reduction. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
According to the Office’s records, land transfer collections totaled approximately
$1.2 million for fiscal year 2014.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Office perform an independent documented review,
at least on a test basis, of land transfer transactions to ensure the
transactions were processed correctly and that the proper amounts of taxes
and fees were collected (repeat).
5

--- Page 8 ---
Trust Fund Disbursements
Finding 3
Internal controls over trust fund disbursements were not sufficient.
Analysis
Internal controls over disbursements from the Office’s trust fund account were not
sufficient. Specifically, the two authorized check signers on the account had the
capability to record disbursements in the automated system and had unrestricted
access to the check stock. In addition, the monthly bank reconciliations, which
were prepared by another individual, were not reviewed and approved by
independent supervisory personnel.
As a result, errors or improprieties could occur without timely detection.
According to Office banking records, disbursements from the trust fund account
during fiscal year 2014 totaled approximately $256,000.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that
a. authorized check signers not have access to the related check stock and
not have the capability to record disbursements in the automated system,
and
b. the monthly bank reconciliations are reviewed and approved by
independent supervisory personnel.
We advised the Office on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties
using existing personnel.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Office of the Clerk of Circuit
Court for Caroline County, Maryland for the period beginning March 28, 2012
and ending April 26, 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Office’s
6

--- Page 9 ---
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts (including taxes and fees collected
for real estate transactions) and bank accounts. We also determined the status of
the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
Our audit did not include a review of certain support services provided to the
Office by the Administrative Office of the Courts. These support services (such
as payroll and invoice processing and maintenance of budgetary accounting
records) are included within the scope of our audits of the Judiciary.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Office’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. We also performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Office’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
7

--- Page 10 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Office’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. These findings are also regarded as significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The Judiciary’s response, on behalf of the Office, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Judiciary regarding the results of our review and its response.
8

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
Senior Auditor