Title: Department of Business and Economic Development
Date: 02/07/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d72456067437e
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:20:20.415281
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Business and Economic Development
February 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
One Maryland Tax Credit
Finding 1 – DBED Did Not Require One Maryland Tax Credit Applicants 5
to Submit Documentation to Support All Project and Start-up Costs
Financing Programs
Finding 2 – DBED Did Not Take Action to Recover a $250,000 Investment 6
in an International Company After the Company Moved Out of Maryland
Finding 3 – The Capabilities of System Users on DBED’s Financing 7
Programs Monitoring System Were Not Adequately Restricted
Grant Monitoring
* Finding 4 – Required Expenditure and Performance Reports Were Not 8
Received From Certain Grantees
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Business and Economic Development (DBED) is a principal
department of State government and operates in accordance with the Economic
Development Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. DBED’s mission is to
stimulate and strengthen the Maryland economy by developing policies and
implementing programs to help generate new jobs and retain existing jobs. It also
develops policies and implements programs to help generate investment by
attracting businesses to the State, by facilitating the expansion and retention of
existing companies, and by promoting Maryland’s strategic assets. According to
the State’s records, during fiscal year 2011, DBED’s operating expenditures
totaled $85.7 million, which included $30.7 million for grants and $21.8 million
for loans.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 11 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated November 10, 2008. We determined that DBED
satisfactorily addressed 10 of the findings. The remaining finding is repeated in
this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
One Maryland Tax Credit
Finding 1
The Department of Business and Economic Development (DBED) did not
require applicants of the One Maryland Tax Credit program to submit
supporting documentation for all project and start-up costs.
Analysis
DBED did not require applicants for the One Maryland Tax Credit to document
all of the related project costs, which serve as the basis for the tax credit amounts.
According to State law, a qualified business entity may receive the One Maryland
Tax Credit after creating a specified number of new jobs. Specifically, DBED
issues a tax credit certificate after it verifies a qualified business has created and
filled the required number of positions during the specified period. The amount
of the tax credit is based, dollar-for dollar, on the project and start-up costs
incurred by the qualified business entity to expand or establish a new facility in
the State (that is, costs to acquire, construct, rehabilitate, install, and equip an
eligible project). A tax credit cannot exceed $5 million for project costs and
$500,000 for start-up costs. Certified businesses are allowed by State law to carry
over project and start-up tax credits for up to 14 years after the applicable project
was placed in service if the amount of the tax credit exceeds the amount of State
tax on the applicant’s income.
DBED did not require all applicants to document these project costs. Our test of
10 applicants, certified by DBED as eligible for One Maryland Tax Credits
totaling $42 million during fiscal years 2008 through 2010, disclosed that 8
applicants, which were certified for project and start-up tax credits totaling $34
million, did not provide any documentation to support these reported project and
start-up costs. The remaining 2 applicants submitted documentation to support
these costs. Our review of Comptroller of Maryland (COM) records disclosed
that four of the eight applicants had taken One Maryland Tax Credits totaling
$11.7 million from calendar years 2006 to 2009.
DBED is responsible for certifying applicants as eligible for the credit and the
COM is responsible for verifying that only DBED-certified applicants
subsequently take the credit. According to DBED’s records, during fiscal years
2008 through 2010, DBED certified 17 applicants for the One Maryland Tax
Credit, which reportedly created approximately 1,400 jobs and had certified costs
totaling approximately $65.8 million, representing the maximum amount of
credits these applicants may be able to claim.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DBED obtain adequate supporting documentation for
project and start-up costs prior to certifying applicants for the One
Maryland Tax Credit.
Financing Programs
Finding 2
DBED did not take action to recover its $250,000 investment in an
international company after the company moved its principal place of
business out of Maryland.
Analysis
Our review of three Maryland Venture Fund (MVF) investments made during
fiscal years 2008 through 2010, totaling $450,000, disclosed that DBED did not
take action to recover its investment in one company that moved its principal
place of business out of Maryland. Specifically, in June 2008, DBED invested
$250,000 from the MVF’s Enterprise Investment Fund (EIF) in an international
technology company. In accordance with State regulations, DBED’s investment
agreement with the company contained a mandatory repurchase provision
allowing DBED to recover its original investment, plus interest at 10 percent per
year, in the event the company were to move its principal place of business out of
Maryland within five years from the date of the investment’s closing. In March
2009—less than one year after the investment—the company closed its Maryland
operations and, as of June 6, 2011, DBED had not taken action to collect its
original investment plus interest, which we estimated to total $325,000. Recovery
of this investment would allow these funds to be used for future investments in
Maryland technology firms.
We were advised by DBED management that no action was taken to recover the
investment because the company’s website still listed Maryland as its address and
because the company’s president has indicated to DBED that the company intends
to return to Maryland once economic conditions improve. After we provided our
findings to DBED, it issued a demand letter to the company’s president for
repayment of the investment plus interest.
The EIF is a State-sponsored venture capital fund that makes direct equity
investments in emerging technology companies that agree to maintain their
principal place of business in Maryland for five years. According to DBED’s
records, the EIF made nine investments totaling $921,000 during fiscal year 2010.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DBED continue its efforts to recover its investment with
the aforementioned company, and in the future, take timely action to recover
its investments when companies fail to comply with requirements of the
investment agreements.
Finding 3
The capabilities of system users on DBED’s financing programs monitoring
system were not adequately restricted.
Analysis
The capabilities of system users on DBED’s automated financing programs
monitoring system were not adequately restricted, and assigned user capabilities
were not always timely removed once access was no longer needed. DBED uses
the system to track approval and settlement processes and critical financial
activities, including account billings and payments, for all of DBED’s financing
programs. According to system records, as of June 30, 2011, more than 560
active financial instruments (such as, loans, grants, guarantees, investments)
totaling approximately $686.3 million were being tracked.
Our review of all 41 active system users disclosed that 3 system users did not
need certain assigned system capabilities to perform their duties. For example,
two of these users had the capability to initiate bills and post payments even
though such capabilities were not required for these employees to perform their
normal job duties. In addition, as of May 6, 2011, five other users had system
capabilities that were no longer needed. Specifically, these employees either had
transferred to another division within DBED or had terminated employment with
DBED 11 to 20 months earlier.
The Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy
requires each agency to use access rules that use a “least privilege” security
strategy that gives users only the access needed to perform assigned tasks. The
Policy also requires agencies to immediately disable access upon a change in
employment status, where appropriate.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DBED comply with the requirements specified in the
DoIT Information Security Policy to ensure financing programs monitoring
system access is adequately restricted and timely removed when no longer
needed.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Grant Monitoring
Finding 4
Required expenditure and performance reports were not received from
certain grantees.
Analysis
DBED did not ensure that required expenditure and performance reports were
received from certain grantees. Specifically, we tested three grants to one entity,
totaling $17.1 million, that were issued during fiscal years 2007 through 2009
from the Rural Broadband Assistance Fund (RBAF) and one $300,000 grant from
the Office of Tourism Development. Our test disclosed that DBED did not
generally obtain required grant expenditure and performance reports from these
grantees. For example, for the three RBAF grants, DBED did not obtain required
quarterly reports detailing actual expenditures supported by appropriate
documentation and performance reports specifying the grantee’s accomplishments
in comparison to the description of the project.
Without such reports, DBED could not adequately monitor the grantees to ensure
use of the funds was consistent with the purpose of the grants. According to the
State’s records, during fiscal year 2009, grant payments from the RBAF and the
Office of Tourism Development totaled approximately $8.7 million. Through the
RBAF, DBED provides funds to entities to provide broadband access to rural and
underserved areas in the State. The Office of Tourism Development serves as the
State’s official travel agency, and provides grants to entities that promote
Maryland attractions, accommodations, and services. Similar conditions
regarding reporting requirements for grants were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DBED ensure that all grant reporting requirements are
met by grant recipients (repeat).
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Business and Economic Development
(DBED) for the period beginning October 1, 2007 and ending November 2, 2010.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DBED’s financial
transactions, records, and internal controls, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included financing programs, tax incentive programs, grant
programs, contracts, disbursements, and payroll. Our audit procedures included
inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and
observations of DBED’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives.
Data provided in this report for background or informational purposes were
deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
DBED’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
9

--- Page 12 ---
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DBED’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to DBED that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
DBED’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DBED regarding the
results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 15 ---
Attachment A
Department of Business and Economic Development’s
Response to the Legislative Auditor’s Draft Report
ONE MARYLAND TAX CREDIT
Finding #1
The Department of Business and Economic Development (DBED) did not require applicants
of the One Maryland Tax Credit Program to submit supporting documentation for all projects
and start up costs
RESPONSE TO 1:
DBED agrees with the auditors’ recommendation.
ACTION PLAN: DBED will immediately amend the preliminary and final tax credit
applications to include an accounting of start-up and project costs.
FINANCING PROGRAMS
Finding #2
DBED did not take action to recover its $250,000 investment in an international company
after the company moved its principal place of business out of Maryland.
RESPONSE TO 2:
DBED agrees with the auditors’ recommendation that DBED should take action to recover the
investment as well as any other obligation when the recipient fails to comply with the
requirements of an agreement. The Office of Finance Programs focuses significant attention on
the collection of funds due from the portfolio of transactions and, within the constraints of
staffing and prioritization, takes all reasonable actions. During the period of fiscal years 2008
through 2011, aggregate collection of funds from the portfolio exceeded $54 million.
1

--- Page 16 ---
ACTION PLAN: DBED has sent a demand letter to the company informing them that the
company is in breach of contract and that DBED is exercising its right to recover the investment
under the terms of the agreement. DBED will continue to pursue all avenues to recover the
investment.
Finding #3
The capabilities of system users on DBED’s financing programs monitoring system were not
adequately restricted.
RESPONSE TO 3:
We agree with the recommendation that DBED should comply with DoIT’s Information Security
Policy, which requires a “least privilege” security strategy. DBED took immediate action during
the audit as soon as the discrepancy was brought to our attention and corrected the security
permissions and access rules.
ACTION PLAN: DBED has coordinated with ITM and taken the following actions to ensure
appropriate access: (1) reviewed all user permissions to ensure permission levels comply with
policy; and (2) going forward coordinate quarterly with ITM to review user permissions and to
monitor for continued compliance.
GRANT MONITORING
Finding #4
Required expenditure and performance reports were not received from certain grantees.
RESPONSE TO 4:
DBED agrees with the recommendation and will ensure that all grant reporting requirements are
met in the future.
Office of Tourism Development – Babe Ruth Birthplace /Sports Legend Museum
The grant agreement with the Babe Ruth Birthplace Foundation, Inc. required reporting is as
follows:
2

--- Page 17 ---
“ the Grantee shall provide the Board with reports and information concerning the
Grant and the operations and finances of the Grantee in form and substance acceptable
to the Board, as the Board may from time to time require.”
The Board did make a request for the final report and the documentation (with a cover letter
dated September 29, 2011) was received and turned over to the auditors at the October 20, 2011
meeting.
We agree with the recommendation and will continue to monitor grant reports received to ensure
that grant recipients meet reporting requirements. OTD will, within 45-days of the end of the
fiscal year, prepare a report of current fiscal year grant recipients’ submission of requisite
reports. Letters will be sent from the Fiscal Officer to recipient agent requesting certified
financial report if not received within 90 days of fiscal year end. Organizations not fulfilling this
requirement will be referred after 90 days to the Assistant Attorney General.
Office of Contracts and Procurement – Rural Broadband Assistance Fund
We agree with this finding. We realize the importance of monitoring the use of grant funds to
ensure use of the funds was consistent with the purpose of the grants. DBED agrees with the
audit recommendation and will ensure that all grant reporting requirements are met by grant
recipients in the future.”
3

--- Page 18 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Karen J. Howes
Senior Auditor
Michael D. Cheese
Alexander M. Prodey
Timothy S. Rice
A’knea K. Smith
Staff Auditors