Title: Department of Information Technology
Date: 08/01/2013
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d12cc9d724560674476
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:59:18.529106
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Information Technology
March 2024
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
March 29, 2024
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) for the period beginning May 7, 2018 and ending December
31, 2022. DoIT is responsible for the State’s information technology policies,
provides information technology technical assistance, and oversees the
implementation of major information technology development projects (MITDPs)
for the State’s Executive Branch agencies. DoIT also manages the State’s
information technology network (known as networkMaryland). DoIT also
provides Enterprise Technology Support Services (ETSS) for certain Executive
Branch agencies, which supports fundamental daily agency information
technology activities including internet and statewide intranet access, email,
computer server operations, and file sharing.
Our audit disclosed deficiencies with DoIT’s oversight of the implementation of
MITDPs, the monitoring of its vendor for networkMaryland, the monitoring of
information systems security and control, and agreements with agencies for
ETSS. However, in response to MITDP related findings in this audit report, DoIT
advised us that it believes it lacks clear statutory authority to implement and
enforce its oversight and implement certain recommendations contained in this
audit report. Consequently, DoIT management advised us it will seek necessary
legislation to enhance its formal authority and oversight. Although we believe the
necessary authority already exists, without statutory changes, DoIT believes
implementing the related recommendations set forth in this audit report will
continue to be a challenge.
MITDPs
As of July 2022, DoIT was responsible for overseeing the State’s 53 MITDPs
valued at $2.9 billion. Our audit disclosed that DoIT delegated significant
MITDP responsibilities to State agencies without ensuring the agencies had
sufficient resources and qualified personnel. Additionally, DoIT did not ensure

--- Page 4 ---
the projects had sufficient oversight to ensure the related projects were completed
on time and on budget. For example, DoIT did not assist with the selection of
agency project managers or contractors procured by State agencies to design,
develop, and implement MITDPs and did not review and approve contract
modifications. We also noted that DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to
ensure that changes to the scope and cost were appropriate. For example, DoIT
did not obtain explanations for significant cost increases of MITDPs and did not
ensure monthly health assessments provided by State agencies contained accurate
information. DoIT could not explain projected cost increases for two MITDPs
that increased a combined $1.03 billion (271 percent) between 2018 and 2022.
DoIT also did not have an effective process to independently evaluate the
performance of the vendor-supplied oversight project managers who were tasked
with overseeing the projects. Furthermore, DoIT could not support cost data
included in annual reports submitted to the Governor, Department of Budget and
Management, and the budget committees of the Maryland General Assembly and
did not always include changes in schedule, cost, and other identified problems.
For example, the fiscal year 2022 annual report for one project Maryland Total
Human Services Integrated Network (MD THINK) stated there were “no project
risks to report” even though we determined that DoIT already knew there were
major issues with the project.
DoIT did not provide sufficient oversight for one project (MD THINK).
Specifically, DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the increase and delays
on the system implementation. As of fiscal year ending 2022, the MD THINK
estimated cost-to-complete totaled $588.8 million, which is an increase of $422.4
million from the original contract amounts of $166.4 million. As of fiscal year
ending 2023, all of the components of the system have been deployed with the
exception of one module that is expected to be deployed statewide in quarter three
of fiscal year 2024. Although deployed, the components still require further
design, development, and implementation efforts. Additionally, DoIT did not
take significant action to ensure critical findings identified as part of their
oversight process for two projects (MD THINK and eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage) were resolved timely.
networkMaryland
Our audit disclosed that DoIT used its networkMaryland vendor for staff
augmentation and cybersecurity remediation services without consideration of a
competitive procurement, did not adequately monitor the contract, and did not
ensure the sufficiency of cybersecurity remediation work performed. For
example, the bid proposal, evaluation, and Board of Public Works approval all
focused on networkMaryland and there was no reference or evaluation of the staff
2

--- Page 5 ---
augmentation or cybersecurity remediation services. Additionally, DoIT did not
adequately monitor work orders for staff augmentation services at other agencies
and DoIT did not ensure the sufficiency of cybersecurity remediation work.
We received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that DoIT
did not request or obtain adequate support for labor charges billed under the
networkMaryland contract. Based on our review, we were able to substantiate the
concerns raised in the allegations (see Finding 10).
DoIT issued a stop work order effective on May 31, 2023 after approximately
$11.5 million was expended for cybersecurity remediation work. As of January
31, 2023, under the networkMaryland contract, DoIT awarded $51.2 million in
work orders including $25 million for cybersecurity remediation, $17.3 million
for staff augmentation, and only $8.9 million (17 percent) was to manage and
operate networkMaryland.
Information Systems Security and Control
Our audit disclosed certain deficiencies relating to information systems security
and control. However, in accordance with the State Government Article, Section
2-1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from
this audit report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits
to redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best
practices before the report is made available to the public. The term
“cybersecurity” is defined in the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section
3.5-301(b), and using our professional judgment we have determined that the
redacted findings fall under the referenced definition. The specifics of the
cybersecurity findings were previously communicated to those parties responsible
for acting on our recommendations.
ETSS
Our audit disclosed that DoIT lacked formal written agreements with 57 of 130
government entities to clarify responsibilities for services it provides to them
through the ETSS Initiative and did not recover $4.8 million from nine entities for
services provided.
Finally, our audit included a review to determine the status of the 10 findings
contained in our preceding audit report of DoIT dated May 1, 2020. For the non-
cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that DoIT satisfactorily addressed 4
of those 7 findings. The remaining 3 findings are repeated as 4 findings in this
report. Additionally, we determined the status of the 5 findings contained in our
preceding audit report of DoIT as a Service Provider dated March 21, 2019.
However, since these are cybersecurity-related findings, the current status of these
3

--- Page 6 ---
findings has been redacted. We also determined the status of 8 of the 12 findings
contained in our August 3, 2018 performance audit report of DoIT and Selected
State Agencies Telecommunication Resource Sharing Agreements and concluded
that DoIT satisfactorily addressed these findings.
We determined that DoIT’s accountability and compliance level was
unsatisfactory in accordance with the rating system we established in conformity
with State law. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory rating were
the significance of our audit findings, the number of repeat findings, and the
number of findings across all areas of DoIT’s operations.
DoIT’s response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. In
accordance with State law, we have reviewed the response and while DoIT agrees
with most of the recommendations in this report, we identified several significant
instances in which statements in the response conflict with or disagree with the
report findings. In each instance, we reviewed and reassessed our audit
documentation, and reaffirmed the validity of our finding. In accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards, we have included “auditor’s
comments” within DoIT’s response to explain our position. Furthermore, for the
remaining findings and recommendations we have concluded that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address those concerns. Finally, consistent with
State law, we have redacted the elements of DoIT’s response related to the
cybersecurity audit findings.
We would like to point out that DoIT’s response indicates that State agencies are
responsible for ensuring an MITDP’s successful delivery against cost and time
schedule baselines and have sufficient resources for providing project
management. However, we continue to believe that current law provides
sufficient authority for DoIT to exercise its oversight responsibilities including
taking the necessary steps to ensure State agencies can successfully implement an
MITDP.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
DoIT.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
4

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 8
Agency Responsibilities 8
Law Change 10
Resource Sharing Agreements 10
Forensic Audit of the Maryland Total Human Services Integrated 11
Network (MD THINK) Project
Referrals to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline 12
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports 13
Findings and Recommendations 16
Major Information Technology Development Projects (MITDPs)
Finding 1 (Policy Issue) – The Department of Information Technology 17
(DoIT) should assume greater oversight responsibility to ensure that
MITDPs were completed on time and on budget.
* Finding 2 – DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they 19
were on budget and on schedule and that changes to the scope and
cost of the project were appropriate.
Finding 3 – DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate oversight 21
project managers hired through vendors to oversee MITDPs.
* Finding 4 – DoIT could not support cost data and conclusions included 23
in its annual report submitted to the Governor, the Department of
Budget and Management, and the General Assembly; and did not
always include changes in schedule, cost, and other identified
problems with MITDPs, as required by State law.
MD THINK
Finding 5 – DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the increase in 25
MD THINK costs from the initial $166.4 million to $588.8 million
and delays in the system implementation, which as of November 2023
was estimated to be approximately three years behind the initial
project completion date.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Finding 6 – DoIT did not ensure that Independent Verification and 27
Validation assessments findings were resolved timely by the
Department of Human Services and the MD THINK Executive
Committee.
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA)
Finding 7 – DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the 30
development and implementation of eMMA resulting in significant
delays and changes to the cost and scope of the project.
networkMaryland
Finding 8 (Policy Issue) – DoIT used the networkMaryland contract to 34
award significant work unrelated to networkMaryland without
considering a competitive procurement process.
Finding 9 – DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for agency 36
staff augmentation services under the networkMaryland contract and
documentation of certain work orders could not be provided.
Finding 10 – DoIT issued work orders to the networkMaryland vendor 38
for cybersecurity remediation services totaling approximately $25
million that were not sufficiently detailed and did not adequately
ensure that all $11.5 million invoiced by the vendor was related to
work performed on behalf of DoIT work orders.
Information Systems Security and Control and Enterprise Services
Finding 11 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 41
Finding 12 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 41
Finding 13 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 41
Finding 14 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding 41
Enterprise Technology Support Services (ETSS)
* Finding 15 – DoIT did not have formal written agreements with 57 of 41
the 130 State and local entities receiving ETSS and did not recover
$4.8 million from nine entities with agreements for services
provided.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
6

--- Page 9 ---
Equipment
* Finding 16 – DoIT did not adequately control its equipment inventory 43
and did not maintain accurate detail records.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 45
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
7

--- Page 10 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) is responsible for the State’s
information technology policies, procedures, and standards, and for overseeing
the implementation of major information technology projects for the State’s
Executive Branch agencies and commissions.1 DoIT also provides technical
assistance, advice, and recommendations concerning information technology to
these agencies and commissions. Additionally, DoIT develops the Statewide
Information Technology Master Plan; manages the Major Information
Technology Development Project Fund (MITDP Fund); and coordinates,
purchases, and manages information technology and telecommunications services
to State agencies. The MITDP Fund helps to support many of the State’s major
information technology development projects.
DoIT also maintains and supports three critical communication infrastructure
systems: (1) the construction of telecommunication towers, (2) the maintenance
and expansion of the State’s communications fiber optic data network for public
sector use called networkMaryland, and (3) the Statewide Public Safety
Communication System for first responders known as Maryland FiRST. DoIT’s
goal for these communication infrastructure systems is to improve broadband
access for State agencies and critical local community institutions (such as
schools, libraries, hospitals, and public safety agencies).
Finally, DoIT provides Enterprise Technology Support Services (ETSS) for
fundamental day-to-day information technology operations, including internet and
statewide intranet access, email, computer server operations, and file sharing for
Executive Branch agencies authorized in law who have chosen to participate as
well as local government entities. During fiscal year 2022, DoIT was providing
ETSS to 130 government entities (state and local agencies).
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2022, DoIT’s expenditures
totaled approximately $251.4 million, including $84.2 million for MITDPs (see
Figure 1 on the following page). These expenditures were funded by
reimbursable funds totaling $135.3 million, State general funds totaling $99.6
1 According to State law, DoIT does not have authority or responsibility for the University System
of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College, the Maryland Port Administration,
and the Maryland Stadium Authority. Chapter 732, Laws of Maryland 2021, added Baltimore
City Community College, and Chapter 242, Laws of Maryland 2022, added the Office of the
Attorney General, the Comptroller, and the State Treasurer to the list of entities excluded from
DoIT authority and responsibility.
8

--- Page 11 ---
million, and special funds totaling $11.7 million, and federal funds totaling $4.8
million. Finally, according to the Department of Budget and Management’s fiscal
year 2022 Capital Budget White Book, DoIT had authorized capital improvement
projects with budgeted funds totaling approximately $56.3 million during the
period from July 2018 to June 2021 related to Maryland FiRST. These funds
were to continue construction on Maryland FiRST projects which began in fiscal
year 2009. According to the State’s records, during fiscal years 2021 and 2022,
capital expenditures totaled approximately $3.7 million.
Figure 1
DoIT Positions, Expenditures, and Funding Sources
Full-Time Equivalent Positions as of June 30, 2022
Positions Percent
Filled 168 90.8%
Frozen2 1 0.6%
Vacant 16 8.6%
Total 185
Fiscal Year 2022 Expenditures
Expenditures Percent
Salaries, Wages, and Fringe Benefits $ 22,717,836 9.0%
Technical and Special Fees 203,705 0.1%
Operating Expenses 228,493,557 90.9%
Total $251,415,098
Fiscal Year 2022 Funding Sources
Funding Percent
General Fund $ 99,626,674 39.6%
Special Fund 11,743,810 4.7%
Federal Fund 4,796,804 1.9%
Reimbursable Fund 135,247,810 53.8%
Total $251,415,098
Source: State financial and personnel records
2 Prior to December 1, 2021, a hiring freeze resulted in certain positions being frozen. Frozen
positions were unauthorized to be filled according to budgetary instructions from the Department
of Budget and Management. Any position that is currently marked as frozen has not been filled
since the freeze was lifted; however, these positions now are available to be filled.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Law Change
Chapter 586, Laws of Maryland 2020, effective July 1, 2020 transferred the
responsibility for administrating the Universal Service Trust Fund (USTF) and the
Telecommunications Access of Maryland (TAM) program from DoIT to the
Maryland Department of Disabilities (DOD). The TAM program is supported by
the USTF and provides telecommunication relay service for Marylanders who are
deaf. The TAM program had expenditures totaling $3.6 million in fiscal year
2020. Beginning July 1, 2020, the procedures and controls over USTF and the
TAM program are subject to audit during our audit of DOD. The procedures and
controls over USTF and the TAM program from the beginning of our audit
period, May 7, 2018, through June 30, 2020 were subject to review during our
current DoIT audit.
Resource Sharing Agreements (RSAs)
On August 3, 2018, we issued a performance audit report on Telecommunication
Resource Sharing Agreements. The audit report included a number of findings
related to selected agencies, but emphasized the need for DoIT to exercise greater
oversight of the RSAs entered into by State agencies in general. The performance
audit included the following select findings related to DoIT’s oversight of the
RSAs:
 DoIT had not established comprehensive policies to guide State agencies on
the proper execution, control, and monitoring of RSAs;
 DoIT did not maintain comprehensive records of RSAs and inventories of
State-owned telecommunication towers and fiber optic cables for potential
resource sharing;
 DoIT did not verify that all monetary compensation was received;
 DoIT did not monitor State agencies to ensure resource sharing monetary
compensation was deposited into the MITDP Fund, as required by State law;
 DoIT did not have a strategic plan for marketing resource sharing
opportunities to generate revenues and to help achieve statewide
telecommunication infrastructure goals;
 DoIT did not monitor existing RSAs with a nonprofit organization to ensure it
was providing broadband networks in rural and underserved areas, and had
not made any attempts since 2013 to negotiate additional RSAs to further
expand the broadband in other rural areas; and
 DoIT executed and renewed resource sharing agreements without proper
approvals.
10

--- Page 13 ---
DoIT agreed with a majority of the findings and recommendations in the August
2018 report. During our current audit, we reviewed DoIT’s actions in response to
that report and noted that it generally complied with the recommendations.
Forensic Audit of the Maryland Total Human Services Integrated
Network (MD THINK) Project
On April 19, 2023, the Maryland Department of Human Services (DHS)
contracted with an independent accounting firm to conduct a forensic audit of the
MD THINK project, which is intended to modernize and integrate several State
health and human services information systems. Specifically, the firm was asked
to perform a fraud assessment and analyze the management, processes, and
procedures undertaken by departments responsible for oversight, operation and
financial management of MD THINK during the period from July 1, 2016 to
March 17, 2023. On September 22, 2023, the firm issued its forensic audit report
which included numerous detailed observations and findings of MD THINK,
including the following:
 MD THINK was not developed effectively, leading to issues with overall
functionality and the need for ongoing re-work. The project’s agile resource
staffing requirements did not require specific experience in the industry or
with the complex Eligibility & Enrollment system. Consequently, the firm
concluded that many of the complex MD THINK calculations and rules have
not been developed correctly and are not being fixed effectively, resulting in
prolonged deployment of programs with bugs.
 DHS did not maintain a complete and accurate record of service contracts
procured for MD THINK. The firm found that MD THINK maintained an
Acquisition Summary Report, but 168 executed work orders, task orders, and
modifications were not included in the report. In addition, supporting
documentation describing the purpose and key attributes did not exist for 175
work orders and modifications that were included in the Acquisition Summary
Report. Finally, the firm identified some work orders, task orders, and
modification agreements that were missing execution signatures.
 Although the expenditures tested (for hardware, software, and general
expenses) by the firm were determined to be for IT related costs, there was no
indication in the documentation provided to the firm to identify how these
expenditures specifically related to MD THINK.
 Reporting was not sufficiently detailed to provide for effective oversight. For
example, while the periodic Portfolio, Steering, and Independent Verification
11

--- Page 14 ---
and Validation (IV&V) meetings were presented to those responsible for
project oversight contained specific and significant issues with the program’s
development and operation, the firm determined that the formal reports
provided to the Governor at the end of fiscal years 2021 and 2022 were
limited to two summary reports. These summary reports focused primarily on
positive aspects of the program and did not provide commentary or insight
into any of the reporting, oversight, or risk issues that were identified in the
various project oversight presentations.
 The firm concluded that IV&V reports routinely identified risks across
multiple programs and periods, but that these risks did not seem to have been
fully addressed or resolved timely even when they globally impacted the MD
THINK platform. Additionally, the firm was not provided with any
documentation to support whether IV&V observations and issues negatively
impacting the project were tracked prior to January 2020. Finally, once
tracking started after January 2020, the firm reported that necessary corrective
actions for such issues were not addressed consistently or timely.
 Documentation was not always available for the 336 individuals employed
under MD THINK contracts to support their eligibility to work on the
project. For example, the firm identified 58 individuals who lacked evidence
that a background check was performed, and background checks for 3 other
individuals disclosed issues that the firm concluded should have precluded
their involvement on the project.
The forensic report observations and findings were generally focused on the roles
of DHS, Maryland Department of Health, and the MD THINK vendor(s).
However, we believe the firm’s report highlights the need for more direct
oversight by an agency with sufficient information technology expertise and/or
knowledge, such as DoIT. We further believe that such a conclusion is further
supported be several of the findings in this audit report.
Referrals to Our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline
We received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that DoIT
did not request or obtain adequate support for labor charges billed under the
networkMaryland contract. Specifically, the allegations stated that timesheets
submitted by the vendor included vague descriptions of the work completed by its
employees and could not be verified to the labor hours billed to DoIT. Based on
our determination of the associated risk, we reviewed DoIT’s processes for
monitoring work performed by the vendor and reviewed certain of the related
work orders and invoices. We also conducted interviews of certain vendor
12

--- Page 15 ---
personnel. Based on our review, we concluded that DoIT did not request or
obtain appropriate support from the vendor when reviewing and approving the
invoices which substantiated the concerns raised in the allegations (see Finding
10).
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Reports
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the 10 findings contained in
our preceding audit report, dated May 1, 2020. As disclosed in Figure 2 on the
following page, for the non-cybersecurity-related findings, we determined that
DoIT satisfactorily addressed 4 of those 7 findings. The remaining 3 findings are
repeated as 4 findings in this report. We also determined the status of the 5
findings contained in our March 21, 2019 audit report of DoIT as a Service
Provider. However, since these are cybersecurity-related findings, the current
status of these findings has been redacted.
Additionally, we determined the status of 8 of the 12 findings contained in our
August 3, 2018 performance audit report of DoIT and Selected State Agencies
Telecommunications Resource Sharing Agreements. We concluded that DoIT
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
DoIT
DoIT lacked sufficient documentation that it effectively
Repeated
monitored Major Information Technology Projects
Finding 1 (Current Finding 2
(MITDPs), and did not always accurately report estimated
and 4)
project costs as required.
DoIT had not established a process to independently evaluate
Finding 2 oversight project managers hired through a vendor to oversee Not repeated
MITDPs.
DoIT did not ensure that the Maryland FiRST vendor met
certain contractual requirements related to radio coverage nor
Finding 3 Not repeated
ensure contract milestones regarding radio coverage were
completed prior to payment.
DoIT did not adequately monitor the construction of a tower
Finding 4 and ensure that the related payments totaling $1.4 million Not repeated
were proper.
Intrusion detection and prevention system coverage did not
Finding 5 exist for a substantial amount of untrusted network traffic Status Redacted3
flowing into DoIT’s internal network.
DoIT lacked assurance that adequate information technology
security and operational controls existed over its managed
Finding 6 Status Redacted3
cloud collaboration and eGovernment software systems that
were hosted, operated, and maintained by service providers.
Personally identifiable information was not adequately
Finding 7 restricted in the State’s Financial Management Information Status Redacted3
System and was visible to 5,204 employees Statewide.
DoIT did not adequately monitor task order payments and did
not obtain support for the related invoices from its
Finding 8 Not Repeated
networkMaryland vendor for which payments totaled $56.8
million.
DoIT lacked formal written agreements with the 29
Repeated
participating State agencies to clarify responsibilities of
Finding 9 (Current Finding
technology support services performed by DoIT and the
15)
reimbursement of related costs.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 2
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
Repeated
DoIT did not adequately control its equipment inventory and
Finding 10 (Current Finding
did not maintain accurate detail records.
16)
DoIT as a Service Provider
DoIT had not updated the State of Maryland Information
Security Policy applicable to Executive Branch and
Finding 1 Status Redacted4
independent State agencies for almost six years despite new
and increasing IT security risks.
DoIT did not have an information technology disaster
recovery plan for its third-party operated enterprise services
Finding 2 Status Redacted4
hosting data center to aid in the recovery of related
information systems operations.
DoIT lacked assurance that adequate information technology
security and operational controls existed over its State
Finding 3 Status Redacted4
enterprise services operations hosted by its third-party data
center hosting service provider.
Operating system software updates were not applied to
Finding 4 network devices in use on DoIT-managed customer agencies’ Status Redacted4
networks and on DoIT-only networks.
DoIT’s enterprise services operation lacked procedures for
maintaining malware protection controls on customer
Status Redacted4
Finding 5 agencies’ workstations relative to workstation administrative
rights assignment and updating certain vulnerable application
software products.
4 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity–related finding has been redacted
from the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1224(i) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Major Information Technology Development Projects (MITDPs)
Background
State law provides the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) with the
responsibility for overseeing the development and implementation of MITDPs.
MITDPs (also referred to in this report as “projects”) are defined as any
information technology development project that meets one or more of the
following conditions:
 The project’s estimated total cost is at least $1 million.
 The project supports a critical business function associated with the public
health, education, safety, or financial well-being of the citizens of Maryland.
 The DoIT Secretary determines the project requires special attention.
State law requires DoIT to approve funding for MITDPs only when projects are
supported by an approved system development life cycle (SDLC) methodology.5
The SDLC defines actions, functions, or activities to be performed for the critical
stages of the project, such as planning, implementation, and operation. DoIT
contracts with three vendors to hire oversight project managers (OPMs) but still
retains ultimate responsibility for overseeing the MITDPs. DoIT’s oversight
responsibilities, in conjunction with its OPMs, generally include the following:
 maintain a clear understanding of project objectives, funding, risks,
milestones and successes to ensure they are well managed and on track;
 provide guidance regarding adherence to the State’s SDLC methodology;
 advise agency on proposed project timelines and assessments on project
resource needs and approve changes to project scope, schedule, and cost;
 create and update templates, work instructions, guidance, and samples for
agencies to use in procurements and SDLC activities;
 review agency project monthly health assessments and periodically meet
with the agency; and
 determine the necessity of Independent Verification and Validation
(IV&V) assessments with the agency.
5 Since 2016, DoIT requires State agencies to adopt an SDLC which adheres to agile values and
principles such as cross-agency collaboration, frequent, incremental delivery of modular
solutions, and modern development over outdated approaches. According to DoIT’s Agile SDLC
Policy, the agile method intends to deliver more value in less time by breaking work down into
loosely-coupled components or services, and delivering the project incrementally in rapid
learning cycles.
16

--- Page 19 ---
According to DoIT’s records, as of June 2022, there were 53 MITDPs with an
estimated cost at completion of approximately $2.9 billion. Ninety-two percent of
the value of these projects was for agencies responsible for providing services in
the health, education, financial, transportation, and public safety sectors of State
government. MITDPs are funded from multiple sources including the State’s
MITDP Fund, which DoIT administers. According to DoIT’s records, Fund
expenditures totaled approximately $23.7 million during fiscal year 2022,
including $163,000 for project oversight.
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
DoIT should assume greater oversight responsibility to ensure that MITDPs
were completed on time and on budget.
Analysis
DoIT should assume greater oversight responsibility to ensure that MITDPs were
completed on time and on budget. DoIT delegated significant MITDP
responsibilities to State agencies without ensuring the agencies had sufficient
resources, qualified personnel, and oversight to ensure the related projects were
completed on time and on budget. Although DoIT’s MITDP Standards Manual
permitted delegation of MITDP responsibilities, we noted the following areas of
delegation were potentially detrimental to the successful implementation of
MITDPs and contrary to DoIT’s overall responsibility and purpose. Additional
findings in the audit report describe examples of specific MITDP problems, which
in our opinion resulted from this practice.
 DoIT did not evaluate State agencies to ensure they had sufficient and
qualified personnel with technical knowledge to adequately monitor the
MITDPs. For example, although DoIT had some involvement with the
Maryland Total Human Services Integrated Network (MD THINK) project, it
delegated primary responsibility to the Department of Human Services (DHS)
for procuring and monitoring of MD THINK despite the project involving
components related to other departments and agencies. Rather than
coordinating the procurement and monitoring of the project itself, DoIT
delegated these key responsibilities to DHS without formally ensuring that
DHS had sufficient and qualified technical personnel to ensure the project was
implemented timely and on budget. As further discussed in Finding 5, the
MD THINK project costs and implementation timeline has increased
significantly from original estimates.
 DoIT did not assist with the selection of agency project managers or the
contractors procured by State agencies to design, develop, and implement
MITDPs. DoIT management advised us that it was not involved with
17

--- Page 20 ---
developing the request for proposals (RFPs) to ensure the RFPs included
appropriate and sufficient evaluation criteria, such as the contractor’s
technical expertise and approach, experience with similar projects, and key
staff qualifications. Additionally, DoIT did not evaluate proposals received
by State agencies from contractors to ensure the most qualified contractor was
selected, and it did not ensure the contract contained clearly stated
deliverables, milestone acceptance criteria, and penalties for failing to meet
the terms of the contract.
 DoIT did not review and approve contract modifications for MITDPs initiated
by State agencies and was not always familiar with the nature and scope of the
modifications. Rather, DoIT management advised us that it relied on State
agencies to ensure contract modifications were appropriate.
 DoIT did not review and approve contractor invoices for MITDPs, at least on
a test basis, to ensure State agencies were properly reviewing the invoices.
DoIT management advised us that it relied on State agencies to review and
approve invoices since the agencies have the budgetary appropriation for the
MITDP, including verifying if deliverables were received, milestones were
met, and determining if penalties should be assessed.
The Statewide Information Technology Master Plan provides that DoIT is to
oversee, consult, and guide covered units in the development of major
information technology systems, and directly assume project management
responsibilities for new or failing MITDPs. The plan also provides that DoIT can
re-direct or terminate MITDPs that are not delivering the value or outcomes
expected. Although we believe that the plan provides DoIT with the necessary
authority, DoIT management disagreed and advised that it believes it lacks clear
statutory authority to implement and enforce the oversight intended by the plan
and implement recommendations in this and several findings contained in this
audit report. Consequently, DoIT management advised us it will seek necessary
legislation to enhance its formal authority and oversight.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DoIT take the necessary steps to establish adequate
safeguards to ensure the successful implementation of MITDPs, especially
when delegating key aspects of MITDP oversight. For example, DoIT should
verify that State agencies have appropriate qualified personnel with
sufficient technical knowledge, assist with MITDP contract procurements
and subsequent contract modifications, and periodically review MITDP
expenditures for compliance with contract terms.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 2
DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they were on budget and
on schedule and that changes to the scope and cost of the project were
appropriate.
Analysis
DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they were on budget and on
schedule and that changes to the scope and cost of the project were appropriate.
Our test of certain aspects of three MITDPs (MD THINK, eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage – eMMA, and the Medicaid Management Information
System II – MMIS II) with an estimated cost to complete totaling approximately
$1.47 billion disclosed the following.
Information Technology Project Requests (ITPRs)
DoIT did not always document its review and approval of annual agency project
status reports, known as ITPRs, prior to submitting them to the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM) and the Department of Legislative Services
(DLS) for budget analysis purposes.6 DoIT also did not review the methodology
of key estimates, such as cost and schedule, included in the ITPR, and did not
obtain an explanation for significant changes (such as increases in estimated
project costs).
We were advised by DoIT management that in response to our prior DoIT report
they implemented a review of ITPRs in fiscal year 2021. However, our test of
nine ITPRs for the aforementioned three projects during fiscal years 2021 through
2023 disclosed that four were not reviewed until after being submitted to DBM
and an ITPR for MD THINK was never prepared. Additionally, we found that the
schedules in certain ITPRs were not accurate. For example, the schedule for
eMMA ITPRs submitted in August 2020 for fiscal year 2022 projections, the
ITPR reported the project would be completed in November 2021, but also
reported budget estimates through fiscal year 2023. DoIT advised us that its
limited staffing impacts its ability to review ITPRs timely.
DoIT also did not obtain an explanation for significant increases in the costs of
MITDPs. For example, although DoIT was aware that the estimated cost of
completion for the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) MMIS II project
6 An ITPR generally includes a summary of the project, the needs addressed, potential risks,
possible alternatives, estimated costs, and funding sources, and describes how the project meets
the goals of the Statewide Information Technology Master Plan. For all approved projects, State
law requires an initial ITPR submission to DoIT, and DoIT requires agencies to submit
subsequent ITPRs on an annual basis through the MITDP’s life cycle. DoIT is required by law
to review and approve the ITPR to ensure the accuracy of the cost data and projected spending.
19

--- Page 22 ---
increased by approximately $177.5 million from the preceding year’s (fiscal year
2023) ITPR, it did not request an explanation from MDH for the increase. In
response to our inquiry DoIT could not provide an explanation for the increase
and advised us that it was MDH’s responsibility to ensure estimates are
reasonable.
Monthly Health Assessments
DoIT did not ensure the OPMs verified the accuracy of information in MITDP
monthly health assessments provided by State agencies, as required. The health
assessments are prepared monthly by the applicable State agency’s project
manager, reviewed by the OPM, and shared with DoIT leadership to ensure that
risks and issues are identified and mitigated timely. For example, our test of
health assessments for MD THINK for 24 months disclosed 14 health
assessments had not been prepared as required, and while the remaining 10 health
assessments were completed and contained medium and high risk ratings,
justifications were not provided to indicate if information was verified for
accuracy. We were advised by DoIT management that medium and high risk
ratings should have justifications.
Changes in Scope, Cost, and Schedule
DoIT did not always review and approve changes in the MITDP scope, cost, and
schedule. DoIT policy required State agencies to describe in detail the portions of
the original scope, cost, and schedule that changed, prior to the approval of any
changes; such as a side-by-side comparison of the previously approved budget
versus the proposed updated budget. The policy further states that any agency
found not to be implementing this policy for their MITDPs will be in danger of
having the MITDP suspended or terminated. Our review disclosed that DoIT did
not always formally review and approve these changes. For example, DoIT did
not approve the increase in estimated cost to complete for MD THINK and MMIS
II as required by its policy and was unable to explain the projected cost increases
for these two MITPDs that increased by a combined $1.03 billion (271 percent)
between 2018 and 2022.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of sufficient documentation of project
monitoring efforts have been commented upon in our four preceding audit reports
of DoIT dating back to November 10, 2009. In its response to our preceding audit
report, DoIT stated that it disagreed with the finding and recommendation as it did
not believe it needed to provide such a level of documentation. Through our
Office’s efforts to obtain clarification from DoIT on its response to our preceding
audit report, DoIT eventually agreed that it has oversight responsibilities for
MITDPs and that it would reevaluate its oversight process. However, as noted
20

--- Page 23 ---
above, DoIT did not implement the corrective actions, in part, because it did not
believe it had the necessary authority as addressed in Finding 1.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure annual ITPRs are submitted by State agencies, and that DoIT
reviews and approves them prior to submitting it to DBM and DLS for
budget analysis purposes (repeat);
b. review the methodology and basis for estimated costs and schedules on
ITPRs to ensure these estimates appear reasonable and are supported;
c. obtain and review explanations for significant changes, such as increases
in project costs;
d. require the OPMs to ensure monthly health assessments are provided by
State agencies, verify the accuracy of information reported, and provide
justifications for the risk ratings (repeat); and
e. review and approve changes in scope, cost, and schedule, as required by
its policy.
Finding 3
DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate oversight project
managers (OPMs) hired through vendors to oversee MITDPs.
Analysis
DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate OPMs hired through vendors
to assist with monitoring MITDPs. The purpose of an OPM is to assist DoIT in
ensuring project scope, costs, and implementation schedules remain on target and
achieve a successful result. Consequently, OPMs have numerous responsibilities
including reviewing and assessing MITDP documentation (such as ITPRs),
determining the need for IV&V assessments, and reviewing monthly health
assessments prepared by the related State agencies. During calendar years 2019
through 2022 expenditures to the three vendors totaled $12.5 million.
In accordance with a standard provision in the OPM contracts, DoIT established a
performance evaluation process. Specifically, DoIT allowed the OPMs to
perform a quarterly self-assessment evaluation addressing seven areas:
Attendance, Productivity, Work Quality, Teamwork, Communication, Customer
Service, and Initiative.
Our review disclosed that the performance evaluation process did not clearly
demonstrate OPMs were satisfactorily performing their job duties and meeting
expectations. Additionally, the performance evaluations lacked clearly defined
21

--- Page 24 ---
criteria for performance areas and the three rating categories (Satisfactory, Needs
Improvement, Unsatisfactory) were not a thorough evaluation of performance
since critical job duties necessary to monitor the overall health of assigned
MITDPs were not defined. Consequently, assurance was lacking that OPMs were
satisfactorily performing their duties, meeting expectations, and effectively
monitoring the development and implementation of 53 MITDPs7 valued at $2.9
billion as of June 30, 2022.
Our review also disclosed that DoIT did not critically review these self-
assessments and the evaluations did not consider the OPMs compliance with
specific job duties and responsibilities necessary to ensure the health of MITDPs.
For example, the evaluations did not consider specific job duties (such as
assessing the need for an IV&V) to determine OPM success, resulting in the
assessments not being an effective tool to monitor OPMs in an observable,
measurable, and objective manner. Effective performance evaluations are also
important since unsatisfactory OPM performance could allow DoIT to require
corrective actions or request replacement OPM personnel.
Our test of 34 quarterly self-assessment evaluations for 5 OPMs disclosed that 28
evaluations reflected “satisfactory” for each performance area and DoIT also
always indicated satisfactory ratings without specific justification. Specifically,
15 of the 28 evaluations did not include any comments from DoIT and a written
justification for satisfactory ratings were not required. When evaluations
contained comments, they were not specific or comprehensive. For example, one
evaluation stated the OPM “strives to consistently improve in all areas.” Finally,
for the remaining 6 evaluations, DoIT advised us that it could not locate them due
to data loss. Therefore, we could not determine if evaluations were actually
completed.
In response to our prior report for DoIT, DoIT implemented a performance
evaluation process. However, our review determined that the evaluations did not
document that OPMs were satisfactorily meeting expectations to help ensure
MITPDs were effectively monitored. In our opinion, due to the critical nature of
the OPMs responsibilities, we believe that it would be appropriate to apply
evaluation standards similar to those used with State employees. According to the
DBM Performance Planning and Evaluation Program Guidelines used to
evaluate State employees, a key to a successful evaluation process is written
position specific performance standards that are observable, measurable, and
objective. Position specific performance standards should place the employee on
notice as to what is required to be rated outstanding, satisfactory, or
7 One of the 53 MITDPs was not overseen by an OPM. Instead, it was overseen by DoIT
personnel directly. In addition, 2 of the 53 MITDPs had not yet been assigned an OPM.
22

--- Page 25 ---
unsatisfactory. DBM’s performance evaluations contain ratings in two areas:
performance of specific job duties and behavioral elements similar to the
performance areas. Furthermore, DBMs Guidelines generally require comments
supporting why the specific performance ratings are warranted.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure performance evaluations adequately demonstrate that OPMs were
satisfactorily performing their job duties (such as including specific
comments that justify the ratings) and meeting expectations;
b. develop written definitions and criteria, similar to DBM Guidelines noted
above, that define each performance area and rating category to ensure
evaluations are an effective tool to monitor the OPMs in an observable,
measurable, and objective manner; and
c. retain the performance evaluations and take corrective action when
OPMs performance is unsatisfactory.
Finding 4
DoIT could not support cost data and conclusions included in its annual
report submitted to the Governor, DBM, and General Assembly; and did not
always include changes in schedule, cost, and other identified problems with
MITDPs, as required by State law.
Analysis
DoIT could not support cost data and conclusions included in its fiscal year 2022
annual report dated November 1, 2022, and did not always include changes in
schedule, cost, and problems with MITDPs. State law requires DoIT to submit an
annual report to the Governor, DBM, and the budget committees of the Maryland
General Assembly. For each MITDP, the report is to include (1) the status of the
project; (2) a comparison of the estimated and actual costs of the project; (3) any
known or anticipated changes in scope or costs of the project; (4) an evaluation of
whether the project is using best practices; and (5) a summary of any monitoring
and oversight of the project from outside the agency in which the project is being
developed, including a description of any problems identified by an external
review and any corrective actions taken.
Our review disclosed that DoIT could not provide documentation to support the
cost-to-date and estimated cost-to-complete figures included in the annual report.
Additionally, DoIT did not always accurately report known or anticipated changes
in schedule, cost, and scope, as required by State law. For example, for one
project (MMIS II), the fiscal year 2022 annual report stated there were no known
23

--- Page 26 ---
or anticipated cost changes. However, we noted that the reported estimated cost
to complete increased by $108.8 million from the preceding year’s annual report.
In addition, DoIT did not always provide a summary of problems identified from
an external review, as required by State law. For example, the fiscal year 2022
annual report for the MD THINK project stated there were “no project risks to
report” even though DoIT knew, prior to submitting the report, there were major
issues with the project. Specifically, the July 2022 IV&V received by DoIT on
September 1, 2022, reported high risks related to scope and time management,
and medium risk with cost management and testing and validation. This IV&V
was received by DoIT two months before the annual report was issued, so DoIT
knew that the annual report presented an over-optimistic and inaccurate depiction
of the current status of the MD THINK implementation.
A similar condition regarding inaccurate information being reported was noted in
our preceding audit report for DoIT. DoIT disagreed with the prior
recommendation to ensure that the annual report includes accurate costs data.
Specifically, DoIT management indicated that it performs limited reviews of
information submitted by other State units used in the report based on available
information and that a more detailed review is outside the scope of its statutory
responsibility and available resources. We continue to believe that since DoIT is
required by law to prepare and submit the annual report, it should ensure that
information reported is complete, accurate, and adequately supported.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure that its annual reports include accurate estimated costs to
complete (repeat) and retain documentation to support the amounts
reported; and
b. accurately report known or anticipated changes in schedule, cost, and
scope and provide a summary of problems identified by an external
review, as required by State law.
MD THINK
Background
The MD THINK project was initiated in fiscal year 2017 to modernize and
integrate several State health and human services information systems. MD
THINK is a shared data repository for storage and retrieval of consumer data and
a one-stop location for determining eligibility and enrollment in various health
and human services programs, including the Child, Juvenile, and Adult
24

--- Page 27 ---
Management Application (CJAMS) and the Child Support Management System
(CSMS).8 The shared platform is intended to avoid duplication of data collection
and improve the experience for program participants.
The MD THINK project plan was submitted to the federal Department of Health
& Human Services and the Department of Agriculture to obtain federal funding
for the project. The plan established a State agency steering committee to oversee
the project consisting of the DHS, DoIT, Department of Juvenile Services, the
Maryland Department of Labor, the MDH, the Maryland Health Benefit
Exchange, DBM, and the Governor’s Office.
Governor Executive Orders effective July 29, 2021 and April 20, 2022,
established an MD THINK Executive Committee to “set policy, objectives, and
priorities and govern MD THINK and its data and information and platform
technology assets.” The Executive Committee was also required to “promote the
appropriate sharing of information among units of State government” and “be
responsible for the protection, privacy, and appropriate use of shared data and
personal information on the platform.” Finally, an Executive Director position
was established to manage MD THINK.
Between April 2017 and May 2018, the Board of Public Works (BPW) approved
four contracts totaling $166.4 million for the MD THINK project, which
originally had an estimated completion date of May 2021. These contracts
included development of the MD THINK platform and applications, cloud
hosting services, IV&V services, and a building lease to provide office space for
personnel to work on the development of MD THINK. Approximately 77 percent
of the MD THINK project has been funded with federal funds.
Finding 5
DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the increase in MD THINK
costs from the initial $166.4 million to $588.8 million and delays in the system
implementation, which as of November 2023 was estimated to be
approximately three years behind the initial project completion date.
Analysis
DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the significant cost and
implementation delays with MD THINK. Rather, DoIT referred us to DHS, and
by extension, the Executive Committee to obtain the requested information.
8 CJAMS replaces legacy systems supporting the Social Services Administration and DJS. With
CJAMS, caseworkers will be able to take mobile devices and tablets in the field reducing data
entry and allowing case notes to be entered in real time. CSMS will replace the legacy Child
Support Enforcement System and improve automation in case management.
25

--- Page 28 ---
However, as noted below there were several contract extensions (in both funding
and time) that neither DHS nor DoIT could readily justify. As of October of
2022, there were 17 contract modifications (see Figure 3) to the MD THINK
project that included scope changes and time extensions, including adding
additional agency applications and extended cloud services. The modifications
extended the contract completion dates from an original estimated completion
date May 2021 to the end of fiscal year 2023.
Figure 3
MD THINK Contract Modifications as of October 2022
(amounts in millions)
17 Contract Modifications
Original Time Revised
Contract Contract Scope Extensions Contract
Total
Amount Changes or Amount
Renewals
Platform Infrastructure, Applications, and
$113.3 $195.9 $36.0 $231.9 $345.2
Related Agile Development Services
Cloud Hosting Platform and Related Services 50.0 83.9 16.0 99.9 149.9
IV&V Services 1.0 - 3.8 3.8 4.8
Building Lease 2.1 $1.4 - 1.4 3.5
Total $166.4 $281.2 $55.8 $337.0 $503.4
83% 17%
Source: Board of Public Works approved contract modifications
Even with the aforementioned contract modifications, the estimated MD THINK
costs totaled $588.8 million as of June 30, 2022. This represents an increase of
$422.4 million from the original contract amounts of $166.4 million. In the
January 2022 and June 2022 re-baseline requests to DoIT, DHS attributes the
additional time needed and increased project costs to issues identified with the
eligibility and enrollment component during field testing and the changes needed
by the federal Department of Agriculture. In addition, issues were identified
during the pilot phase for the child support management system application
component requiring system workflows needing to be redesigned. Finally, gaps
in system functionality were identified in the juvenile services module of CJAMS.
According to DoIT’s fiscal year 2023 annual report of MITDP’s dated November
2023, all components of MD THINK have been deployed with the exception of
the juvenile services module of CJAMS, which is still being developed and is
expected to be deployed statewide in quarter three of fiscal year 2024. In
addition, use and analysis of the deployed components have revealed functionality
gaps that require further design, development, and implementation work. In our
26

--- Page 29 ---
opinion, as the State agency responsible for major IT development projects, DoIT
should have been actively monitoring the development of MD THINK and
providing necessary expertise with the goal of ensuring the project was delivered
on budget and on time.
Various concerns regarding the development and management of MD THINK
were identified in both the forensic audit noted on page 9 and the IV&V noted in
Finding 6. As a member of the MD THINK Executive Committee, DoIT had a
critical role in actively monitoring MD THINK. See Finding 2 for examples of a
lack of specific DoIT monitoring and the impact on project management and
development. However, as noted in Finding 1, DoIT believed it lacked the
necessary authority to request and obtain the necessary documentation even
though it was a key member of the MD THINK Executive Committee.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DoIT, in accordance with State law, and in conjunction
with the MD THINK Executive Committee,
a. monitor the project to ensure that costs, functionality, and delivery dates
are consistent with the terms of the contracts or adequately justified if
significant variances are necessary; and
b. ensure the project is fully implemented or take immediate corrective
actions.
Finding 6
DoIT did not ensure that Independent Verification and Validation
assessments (IV&V) findings were resolved timely by DHS and the MD
THINK Executive Committee.
Analysis
DoIT did not ensure that IV&V findings were resolved timely by DHS and the
MD THINK Executive Committee. To assist in project oversight, DoIT
contracted with an independent public accounting firm in May 2018 to provide
IV&V services of the project’s progress and identify areas that need improvement
for the project to be successful. The IV&V contractor provided periodic reports
to DoIT and the other State agencies on the MD THINK Executive Committee
that detail issues that impact the progress of the project.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Our review of IV&V reports issued from January 2020 through May 2022
identified 251 issues with low (178), medium (44), or high (29) risk.9 As of May
2022, 33 of 251 issues were considered open, including 15 high-risk issues.
Although high-risk issues require immediate action, 14 of the 15 high-risk issues
had remained open from 3 to 27 months. These open issues included the
following critical aspects of the project management.
 The system design for one component did not meet the requirements of the
State agency that would be primarily using it, which could lead to this
component not being fully adopted.
 Project leaders did not develop plans with sufficient detail to determine
feasible completion dates resulting in slippage of reported completion
dates.
 Project reporting does not properly delineate the difference between the
number of hours consumed versus the actual completion of the work
resulting in the misrepresentation of the actual progress.
 Project leaders had not updated the project completion timeline since June
of 2020 and had not assessed the financial impact of changes in project
scope resulting in inaccurate reporting and State leaders being
misinformed on the project’s status.
 Project leadership did not ensure the system complied with all State and
federal policies during user acceptance testing, which may result in the
system not passing certification by its federal partners.
 Project leaders had not established readiness criteria with specific metrics
and completion goals to determine if the system phase was completed and
ready to be implemented in additional jurisdictions. This could lead to
delays in implementation as well as additional costs.
DoIT’s Enterprise Program Management Office MITDP Standards Manual
stipulates that “agreed upon determinations communicated in IV&V reporting
will be used by agency project management to implement efficient and effective
processes, pursue risk reduction and enable project success.” Not addressing
critical issues identified by the IV&V timely can lead to a project not being fully
functional, not meeting schedule goals, or exceeding budgets. Notwithstanding
the aforementioned Manual, as noted in Finding 1, DoIT believed it lacked the
9 The IV&V findings were categorized as either low, medium, or high risk. The IV&V report
defined low risk as an area that did not have significant risk in the near term and current
processes were sufficient to mitigate the issue over the next 30 days. A medium risk needed to
be resolved as inefficiencies existed, however the current processes could be used with some
refinements. High risks were critical issues that may impact the project, most likely resulting in
either the inability to achieve the scope, timeline, or budget that requires immediate action.
28

--- Page 31 ---
necessary authority to ensure critical findings from assessment reports are
appropriately resolved and corrected.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DoIT ensure critical findings from IV&V project
assessment reports for MD THINK are resolved timely, including those
noted above.
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
Background
The Department of General Services (DGS), DBM, and DoIT worked together to
draft a solicitation for the procurement and maintenance of a new eProcurement
system that was issued in March 2018. DGS, in participation with the Office of
the Comptroller and the State Treasurer’s Office, evaluated vendor proposals and
on March 6, 2019 BPW approved a 10-year contract totaling approximately $38.2
million. The new eProcurement system is called eMaryland Marketplace
Advantage (eMMA) and includes several enhancements over the prior eMaryland
Marketplace (eMM) system including an interface with the State’s Financial
Management Information System (FMIS), document management, and search and
reporting capabilities.
The new system was intended to address existing operational inefficiencies with
eMM. The integration with FMIS was a feature included in the original eMM
contract and was intended to address concerns noted in the 2007 Governor’s
Transition Report; however, eMM’s implementation stalled early in development
and it was never interfaced with FMIS. As a result, employees were required to
enter information manually and redundantly into both eMM and FMIS. eMM also
lacked document management capabilities; and, therefore, vendors were required
to upload the same documents for every procurement action. Additionally, eMM
lacked robust search and reporting capabilities which limited comprehensive
monitoring of statewide purchasing activity and strategic sourcing efforts.
The current contract contains fixed-price and indefinite-quantity components.
The fixed price components include eMMA development and implementation,
software licensing, and optional features, while the indefinite-quantity
components include hourly rates for labor categories used under work orders.
The total contract value was comprised of $7.8 million for development and
implementation during the first 2 years of the project, $14.9 million for operation
and maintenance for the 10-year base period, and $15.5 million for value-added
modules to perform other work associated with the implementation based on
29

--- Page 32 ---
approved work orders (see Figure 4). An example of a value-added module,
which was not specifically included in the scope of the original contract, was a
DGS issued work order for the vendor to add invoicing capabilities to eMMA.
State laws and regulations generally provide that eMMA is to be used by State
agencies, counties, municipalities, public institutions of higher education, local
public school systems, and other certain entities to publish awards greater than
$50,000. In addition, registered vendors may utilize eMMA to receive notices of
bid opportunities and securely submit bids to the aforementioned entities.
Figure 4
eMMA Contract Award
Development and Operation and Value-Added
Implementation Maintenance Modules*
Year 1 $6,385,563 $1,431,800 -
Year 2 1,459,687 1,491,000 -
Year 3 - 1,491,000 -
Year 4 - 1,491,000 -
Year 5-10 - 8,946,000 -
Value-added modules - - $15,470,021
Subtotals $7,845,250 $14,850,800 $15,470,021
Total Contract Award: $38,166,071
*Value-Added Modules were included in the vendor's proposal, in addition to the core functionality used as the
basis for the bid evaluation.
Finding 7
DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the development and
implementation of eMMA resulting in significant delays and changes to the
cost and scope of the project.
Analysis
DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the development and
implementation of eMMA resulting in significant delays and changes to the cost
and scope of the project. Specifically, DoIT did not adequately ensure the eMMA
project was properly planned and monitored. For example, eMMA did not have
an overall integrated schedule for project tasks and there was no standard method
for tracking percentage of completion for the project. Additionally, even though
eMMA has a significant impact on the State’s procurement processes, DoIT did
not treat the procurement as a statewide system, which would have been guided
30

--- Page 33 ---
by an executive steering committee. Although a steering committee was
ultimately created, it was almost a year after the contract award.
According to the vendor’s approved proposal, the date for the final phase of
system implementation of eMMA was March 2020, but in DoIT’s December 2019
monthly health assessment, it was revealed there were significant issues with the
project plan for integrating data from all State agency systems into eMMA. An
IV&V began in October 2020 and a final report was issued in February 2021
disclosing that the eMMA project had issues with project management,
communication, and governance. For example, the report noted a lack of an
overall integrated schedule for project tasks, as noted above, as well as a lack of
sufficient dedicated staff and critical differences of opinions on how best to
integrate eMMA data. We noted no formal action was taken by DoIT to resolve
the project issues noted in the monthly health assessments or the open items from
the IV&V report.
DGS submitted a request to DoIT which included an expansion to track Minority
Business Enterprise procurement participation goals, and a procure-to-pay
function with a new estimated completion date of December 2023 for the
integration of FMIS feature. According to the request, an estimated $11 million
in additional funding would be necessary to complete all phases of the eMMA
project. The request was approved by DoIT on August 26, 2022.
According to DoIT’s fiscal year 2023 annual report of MITDP’s dated November
2023, eMMA is estimated to be completed in fiscal year 2026 with a cost totaling
$70.9 million, an increase of $32.7 million over the original contract cost. As
noted in Finding 1, DoIT believed it lacked the necessary authority to enforce
implementation of oversight recommendations.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DoIT provide significant oversight and direction over
eMMA. In particular, DoIT should ensure
a. eMMA is completed in accordance with the most recently approved
schedule and budget;
b. issues identified by the monthly health assessments and the IV&Vs are
resolved, including developing an overall project schedule with defined
tasks and a standardized method of tracking percentage of completion is
used; and
c. based on its own IT project expertise, proactively identify other actions
intended to encourage vendor resolution of the current eMMA issues and
ensure DGS complies with the terms of its contract.
31

--- Page 34 ---
networkMaryland
Background
networkMaryland is the State’s high-speed data network for public sector use that
allows agencies and other government entities to host and share common
applications. In July 2022, DoIT awarded a new $74.7 million, seven-year
contract, to the incumbent vendor, to maintain networkMaryland. The prior
contract award and subsequent modifications totaled $104 million for the period
of April 1, 2015 through December 31, 2022. The vendor is to provide
management and operations services relating to data networks and support;
security; network engineering; fiber optic construction, design, engineering, and
repair for networkMaryland. In addition, other State agencies may use the
networkMaryland vendor for specific staff resources in order to augment current
agency staff, on either an hourly or annualized basis.
Agencies who need services submit a written request to DoIT that specifies the
requirements of the desired work. DoIT, in conjunction with the
networkMaryland vendor, approves the personnel resources, labor rates, and
establishes a work order for the services. Invoices are received and paid by DoIT
and reimbursed by the agencies through billings for networkMaryland services.
According to DoIT’s records as of January 31, 2023, it awarded work orders to
the vendor under the current contract valued at $51.2 million; consisting of $25
million for cybersecurity remediation, $17.3 million for DoIT staff augmentation,
and $8.9 million to specifically manage and operate networkMaryland (see Figure
5). The awarded work orders as of January 31, 2023 (approximately seven
months into the contract term) represented a majority of the initial seven-year,
not-to-exceed contract amount of $74.7 million. Additionally, a majority of the
work orders were for periods of twelve months or less with expected end dates on
or before June 30, 2023.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Figure 5
networkMaryland Approved Work Orders
as of January 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
Staff
Augmentation
$17.3
Cybersecurity
34%
Remediation
$25
49%
networkMaryland
Support
$8.9
17%
Source: DoIT records
According to State records, as of April 11, 2023, DoIT had paid $19.1 million to
the vendor, which includes payments for services provided to other State agencies
and entities.
We received referrals to our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline alleging that DoIT
did not request or obtain adequate support for labor charges billed under the
networkMaryland contract. Specifically, the allegations stated that timesheets
submitted by the vendor included vague descriptions of the work completed by its
employees and could not be verified to the labor hours billed to DoIT. As a
result, we reviewed DoIT’s processes for monitoring work performed by the
vendor and reviewed certain of the related work orders and invoices. We also
conducted interviews of certain vendor personnel. Based on our review, we
concluded that DoIT did not request or obtain appropriate support from the
vendor when reviewing and approving the invoices which substantiated the
concerns raised in the allegations (see Finding 10).
33

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 8 (Policy Issue)
DoIT used the networkMaryland contract to award significant work
unrelated to networkMaryland without considering a competitive
procurement process.
Analysis
DoIT used the networkMaryland contract for staff augmentation and significant
cybersecurity remediation10 services without a formal consideration of a
competitive procurement. In addition, the technical proposal, evaluation, and
BPW approval all focused on networkMaryland support work with no reference
or evaluation of the staff augmentation or cybersecurity remediation services.
Staff Augmentation
DoIT’s use of the networkMaryland vendor for staff augmentation (both for DoIT
and other State agencies) circumvented competitive procurement and control
agency oversight for these services. Specifically, DoIT effectively sole sourced
14 work orders for staff augmentation totaling $16.8 million as of January 2023,
to the networkMaryland vendor, and therefore bypassed the need for BPW
approval (which is required for contracts valued over $200,000). While the
contract did allow for other State agencies to request staff to augment their current
staffing level, we question whether the provision anticipated the significant extent
of its use by DoIT itself.
We questioned why DoIT would limit staff augmentation work orders to only the
networkMaryland vendor, instead of utilizing its existing Consulting and
Technical Services (CATS+) master contract to procure these services. The
purpose of the CATS+ master contract is to enable State agencies to procure
information technology staff quickly, efficiently, and cost effectively through a
secondary competitive process amongst over 400 pre-approved contractors. DoIT
management advised us that it had used the CATS+ master contract for staff
augmentation work in the past but that BPW approval would be required for work
orders greater than $200,000 in accordance with State procurement regulations,
which would have resulted in additional time delays before the work could
proceed.
10 According to the National Institute of Standards and Technology, cybersecurity remediation is
the act of mitigating a vulnerability or threat by preventing damage, protecting, and restoring
computers and electronic communications systems and services, including the information
within these systems.
34

--- Page 37 ---
Cybersecurity Remediation
DoIT also used the networkMaryland contract for cybersecurity remediation
services (the process of identifying and fixing information technology security
threats), which may not have been the preferred method for completing this work.
Specifically in November 2022, DoIT management requested its legal counsel to
review the work orders, due to concerns about using the networkMaryland
contract for cybersecurity remediation services. DoIT’s counsel advised them
that the work is within the scope of the contract but only because of the general
language about providing management and operations services in support of the
agency’s operational responsibilities. DoIT’s counsel further stated that the
contract documents clearly identify work related to networkMaryland as the
primary focus, and that if consulted prior to the event, counsel would have
recommended that DoIT use another contract vehicle. DoIT also advised us that
it had concerns regarding a perceived low BPW approval rate for emergency
procurements generally, so it decided not to use this available procurement
method for these services.
In addition, DoIT also used staff augmentation services in order to complete
cybersecurity remediation work which we also contend was not within the scope
of the contract. DoIT management personnel contended that staff augmentation
may be used for cybersecurity remediation services and therefore was within the
scope of the contract. However, the request for proposal (RFP) only included two
sentences related to staff augmentation. Specifically:
_________________________________________________________________
DoIT also anticipates furnishing services under this TORFP11 to Other
Requesting Agencies via Work Orders issued by DoIT. DoIT anticipates that
Work Orders issued on behalf of Requesting Agencies will primarily be managed
as defined scope projects, however requests could also be made for specific staff
resources to augment current agency staff, either on an hourly or annualized
basis.
__________________________________________________________________
Given these minimal statements in the RFP on staff augmentation and no mention
of cybersecurity remediation OLA continues to believe these services were not
within the scope of the contract; and had they been, much more robust language
should have been included in the RFP detailing the scope of these services.
11 Task Order Request For Proposal (TORFP) is a solicitation document containing a description
by the State of the individual projects for which proposals will be solicited under a master
contract.
35

--- Page 38 ---
As of January 2023, DoIT has approved the use of 11 cybersecurity remediation
work orders totaling $25 million. DoIT management advised us that it used the
networkMaryland contract for these services because the cybersecurity
remediation work was urgent. However, State procurement regulations provide
for an emergency procurement method for immediate and serious needs that
cannot be met through normal procurement methods.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DoIT
a. modify the networkMaryland contract to clearly define the scope and
extent of all services provided;
b. obtain retroactive approval from BPW for the current staff augmentation
and cybersecurity remediation work orders; and
c. for any additional work and in the spirit of its counsel’s legal advice,
solicit secondary competition amongst approved CATS+ contractors for
staff augmentation and cybersecurity remediation services to maximize
competition and help ensure it receives the most advantageous contract
terms.
Finding 9
DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for agency staff augmentation
services under the networkMaryland contract and documentation of certain
work orders could not be provided.
Analysis
DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for staff augmentation services at
other agencies under the networkMaryland contract and could not provide
documentation of certain work orders. Our review of 12 work orders totaling
$35.9 million (including 4 staff augmentation, 3 cybersecurity remediation, and 5
networkMaryland support) authorized under both the prior and current
networkMaryland contract, disclosed the following conditions.
 DoIT did not adequately verify amounts paid from 3 work orders totaling $9.1
million for staff augmentation at the Maryland Department of Health (MDH).
Specifically, DoIT paid the vendor invoice based on timesheets submitted
with the invoice without verifying with MDH that the work was completed
and hours billed were reasonable. In this regard, one payment totaling
$467,000 included charges for 40 hours of “training” which was not
authorized under the work order.
36

--- Page 39 ---
 DoIT did not maintain accurate records of work orders authorized under the
current contract. Specifically, our test of 6 work orders under the new
contract totaling $25.5 million disclosed that 3 work orders totaling $21.1
million had inaccurate work order amounts or expenditure information. For
example, one work order was recorded in DoIT’s records as having a contract
amount of $3.4 million less than the actual work order.
 DoIT was unable to provide any documentation for 4 work orders under the
prior contract, totaling $3 million. As a result, we were unable to determine if
the work orders were properly approved, the scope of work was defined and
appeared reasonable, or if expenditures were in accordance with the work
order. According to DoIT management, these records could not be located
due to employee turnover.
 DoIT did not have a record of all subcontractors and approved work orders
without identifying the subcontractor(s), as required by the contract. For
example, DoIT approved a $1.7 million work order to augment staff at MDH.
According to MDH, the work was completed by a subcontractor for the
networkMaryland vendor that was not included in the contract documents or
specified on the work order.
 DoIT did not approve certain work orders as required. Specifically, 2 work
orders totaling $2.7 million were not approved until we requested copies of
the work orders approximately 10 months after work had begun. DoIT paid
the vendor $2.3 million prior to approving these work orders and advised us
that the untimely approval was an oversight.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure labor hours billed for staff augmentation work orders for other
State agencies are accurate prior to approving invoices for payment,
b. ensure approved work order documentation is maintained, and
c. ensure subcontractors are approved and qualified.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Finding 10
DoIT issued work orders to the networkMaryland vendor for cybersecurity
remediation services totaling approximately $25 million that were not
sufficiently detailed and did not adequately ensure that all $11.5 million
invoiced by the vendor was related to work performed on behalf of DoIT
work orders.
Analysis
DoIT issued work orders to the networkMaryland vendor for cybersecurity
remediation services that were not sufficiently detailed and did not ensure that the
amounts invoiced by the vendor were related to work performed on behalf of
DoIT work orders. Beginning in April 2022, DoIT issued a series of work orders
to the networkMaryland vendor to enhance system security.12 As of January
2023, DoIT had awarded 11 work orders to the vendor totaling $25 million for
cybersecurity remediation services and payments on these work orders totaled
approximately $11.5 million as of May 2023.
The Composition of DoIT Work Orders Precluded Effective Oversight and
Monitoring of Costs
DoIT work orders did not correlate estimated costs to specific deliverables or
progress to improve the level of DoIT’s cybersecurity, and many deliverables
were not clearly defined. Consequently, we concluded that DoIT was unable to
monitor vendor billed costs to the specific work performed. DoIT management
advised us that this lack of correlation resulted in changes in the scope of work
and likely cost inefficiencies. For example, one work order was initially approved
for $4.3 million and DoIT approved scope changes to increase the cost to $12.7
million without clearly defining the additional work to be performed related to the
$8.4 million cost increase. The lack of comprehensive work orders contributed to
the conditions noted in the allegations.
Similar concerns were noted in an independent assessment of these cybersecurity
remediation efforts issued by a third-party DoIT contractor in February 2023,
which concluded that for certain vendor work, the resources were estimated for
implementation activities without a clear understanding by DoIT and the vendor
of the scope of work. The assessment also noted there was a lack of clarity on the
reasonableness of the cost without having defined implementation activities.
12 In the fall of 2021, a DoIT contractor conducted a cybersecurity assessment of DoIT’s system
security and issued an assessment report containing more than 100 recommendations to help
DoIT improve its system security. DoIT used its networkMaryland contractor to address these
concerns.
38

--- Page 41 ---
DoIT Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Labor Hours Billed by the Vendor
DoIT did not ensure labor hours billed were accurate, the related work was
completed, or that the hours billed were proper and supported. Specifically, the
DoIT employee responsible for overseeing a significant portion of the
cybersecurity remediation work was not involved in reviewing and approving the
vendor’s invoices.
There Was a Lack of Support That Hours Billed Were for DoIT Related Activities
DoIT could not readily provide sufficient documentation that the work performed
in relation to the hours billed adequately supported the propriety of amounts
invoiced and were for DoIT related activities. We found that the vendor invoiced
for hours worked by numerous employees, but DoIT personnel could not provide
any support for the nature of the work performed for the invoiced hours other than
employee timesheets, which DoIT routinely received from the vendor.
Our targeted review of electronic vendor timesheet records provided to DoIT that
supported labor hours billed for 6 months (from June to November 2022) totaling
approximately $2 million identified instances of unspecified work performed
(such as “attending meetings”), which DoIT could not adequately support.
For example, we requested support for the work performed for 20 non-descriptive
timesheet entries from the aforementioned timesheets on hand. DoIT personnel
could not provide documentation to support these entries and agreed that some of
the time descriptions contained insufficient detail to show relevance to the work
order or appropriate effort relative to the time charged. For the 20 non-descriptive
timesheet entries, the vendor billed 601 hours, totaling approximately $100,000.
Since the vendor employees may work on multiple contracts, we could not
determine if the hours charged were for DoIT related activities.
In response to our inquiries, the vendor advised us that this situation was due in
part to some DoIT project managers requesting general time descriptions for the
work performed instead of having specific time descriptions. For example, for
one time entry tested, we found that the vendor discussed the insufficient
description with DoIT, and DoIT agreed the item could be charged because it was
aware of the work performed by the vendor’s employee for that day. The vendor
proactively removed other time charges during this same period, that were not
sufficiently detailed. Finally, the vendor advised us that it changed the review
process in May 2023 to require approval by relevant project managers for all time
charged.
39

--- Page 42 ---
DoIT Issued a Stop Work Order for the Cybersecurity Remediation Work
DoIT issued a stop work order effective May 31, 2023 after approximately $11.5
million was expended for cybersecurity remediation work. DoIT management
advised us it issued the stop order after receipt of the independent assessment and
its realization that the work orders needed clearer deliverables. Consequently,
DoIT thought it prudent and appropriate to pause and assess DoIT’s cybersecurity
level before reissuing work orders with clearer specification and defined
deliverables that appropriately match the costs to be billed.
Concerns Raised in the Allegations Were Substantiated
The combination of the lack of comprehensive work orders and DoIT not
obtaining appropriate detailed support for the labor hours invoiced substantiates
the concerns raised in the allegations. Subsequent to the completion of our
fieldwork and draft report issuance, DoIT advised us that it requested and
obtained support from the vendor for past labor hours invoiced, which we did not
review. As a result, based on our discussion with the Office of the Attorney
General’s Criminal Division, we did not refer the matter to the Criminal Division
as of the date of this report.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure all future cybersecurity remediation work orders and deliverables
are clearly defined and estimated costs correlate to deliverables;
b. ensure labor hours billed are accurate for work completed and properly
supported; and
c. in conjunction with legal counsel, consider the recovery of funds
previously paid for inadequate work product, to the extent practicable.
Information Systems Security and Control and Enterprise
Services
We determined that the Information Systems Security and Control and Enterprise
Services section, including Findings 11 through 14 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the following findings, including the
analysis, related recommendations, along with DoIT’s responses, have been
redacted from this report copy.
40

--- Page 43 ---
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Finding 14
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Enterprise Technology Support Services (ETSS)
Finding 15
DoIT did not have formal written agreements with 57 of the 130 State and
local entities receiving ETSS and did not recover $4.8 million from nine
entities with agreements for services provided.
Analysis
DoIT did not enter into a formal written memorandum of understanding (MOU)
with 57 (46 state agencies and 11 local government entities) of the 130 entities
participating in the ETSS program and did not recover $4.8 million from nine
entities for services provided. The ETSS program covers fundamental day-to-day
information technology operations, including internet and statewide intranet
access, email, computer server operations, and file sharing for Executive Branch
agencies authorized in law who have chosen to participate, as well as local
government entities.
During fiscal year 2020, DoIT developed a standard MOU template for
participating entities that stipulates the responsibilities of participating entities and
DoIT. For example, the entity agrees to use one or more recurring services
offered by DoIT in its service catalogue and submit all service and support
requests in accordance with DoIT’s standard process.13 The MOU also provides
13 DoIT utilizes a web-based application that can be accessed by participating agencies that details
service rates, service measures, and the calculation of amounts due.
41

--- Page 44 ---
that the cost for the services are detailed on the projected remittance request
submitted to the entity each year and are incorporated into the budgetary process
to be paid with reimbursable funds.
 As of July 2022, 57 of the entities that received services totaling $30.6 million
during fiscal year 2022 had not signed an MOU. According to DoIT records,
during fiscal year 2022 software upgrades and equipment totaling $61.4
million was purchased on behalf of the 130 participating entities.
 DoIT did not recover $4.8 million from nine entities for purchases made on
their behalf, which had been outstanding for periods ranging from 6 to 18
months. Seven of the nine entities had entered into MOUs with DoIT which
included terms for calculating and billing service rates. According to DoIT
management, the agencies had questions regarding how these services are
measured and DoIT had offered to meet with them to resolve their concerns.
A similar condition on the failure to enter into comprehensive MOUs with ETSS
program participants was commented upon in our preceding DoIT audit report. In
response to that report, DoIT stated that it had developed a standard MOU and
was working with the agencies to get the documents executed. However, during
the current audit, DoIT advised it was unsure why State agencies had yet to enter
into MOUs, but that it did not believe that local governments had to have an
MOU.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that DoIT
a. enter into formal MOUs with all agencies for which it provides ETSS.
The MOU should clarify DoIT and agency responsibilities, specific
services to be provided by each, and a mechanism to provide for the cost
of these services (repeat); and
b. ensure amounts due from agencies are timely recovered, including those
noted above.
42

--- Page 45 ---
Equipment
Finding 16
DoIT did not adequately control its equipment inventory and did not
maintain accurate detail records.
Analysis
DoIT did not have adequate procedures and controls over its equipment inventory
and did not maintain accurate records. DoIT reported equipment (primarily
information technology hardware) valued at $60.6 million to the DGS as of June
30, 2021.
 DoIT did not conduct annual physical inventories of its sensitive equipment as
required. Specifically, as of August 2022, DoIT had not conducted a
complete physical inventory of equipment during the audit period.
 DoIT did not accurately report equipment additions and disposal activity to
DGS. Specifically, DoIT reported equipment additions of $3.4 million on the
DGS annual report of fixed assets when their financial records indicated
equipment purchases of $6.2 million during fiscal year 2021 (a difference of
$2.8 million). DoIT management advised us that the majority of this
difference was likely due to equipment purchases made on behalf of other
State agencies, which were never physically in DoIT’s possession. However,
DoIT could not provide us with support of their assertions.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires State agencies to accurately report
and safeguard equipment, maintain comprehensive detail records and an
independent control account, and conduct a physical inventory of sensitive
equipment at least once a year and a complete physical inventory of all equipment
at least once every three years, including investigating discrepancies.
Similar conditions were noted in our preceding DoIT audit report. In response to
that report DoIT indicated that by June 2020 it would ensure independent and
documented annual physical inventories are conducted and work with DGS to
identify the requirements to accurately report inventory to DGS, per their current
asset management policies. However, as noted above, the stated corrective
actions were not implemented.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that DoIT comply with the requirements of the DGS
Inventory Control Manual by
a. conducting annual independent physical inventories (repeat), and
43

--- Page 46 ---
b. ensuring property is properly reported to DGS on the annual report of
fixed assets and investigating the aforementioned difference and
submitting a corrected annual report to DGS.
44

--- Page 47 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) for the period beginning May 7, 2018 and ending December
31, 2022. The majority of our fieldwork, including the review of information
technology security, was conducted from August 5, 2021 to July 15, 2022.
However, certain significant concerns were identified during the audit, resulting
in additional fieldwork related to DoIT’s oversight of major information
technology development projects and networkMaryland projects being conducted
from March 13, 2023 to June 26, 2023. The audit was conducted in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DoIT’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included monitoring of major information technology
development projects, as well as monitoring of other projects, information
systems security and controls, enterprise technology support services,
procurement and monitoring of networkMaryland, disbursements, and equipment.
Furthermore, we reviewed DoIT’s processes for monitoring work performed by
the networkMaryland vendor and reviewed certain of the related work orders and
invoices based on referrals received on our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. We
also determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit reports
of DoIT and DoIT as a Service Provider as well as 8 of the 12 findings contained
in our performance audit report on telecommunication resource sharing
agreements dated August 3, 2018.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of May 7, 2018 to December 31, 2022, but may include transactions before
or after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
45

--- Page 48 ---
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of DoIT’s operations. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or the significance
of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter of course, we do
not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise specifically indicated,
neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to select the
transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically indicated in a
finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us cannot be used to
project those results to the entire population from which the test items were
selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from other systems maintained by DoIT or its contractors
for the purpose of testing. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
DoIT’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to DoIT, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
46

--- Page 49 ---
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect DoIT’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Finally, this report
includes two findings, which are identified as a “Policy Issue”. Such findings
represent significant operational or financial-related issues for which formal
criteria may not necessarily exist, and for which management has significant
discretion in addressing, but the recommendation represents prudent and/or
practical actions, which we believe should be implemented by the agency to
improve outcomes. Other less significant findings were communicated to DoIT
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
47

--- Page 50 ---
communicated to DoIT and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that DoIT’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
rating were the number and significance of our audit findings, including the
number of findings repeated from our preceding audit reports. Our rating
conclusion has been made solely pursuant to the aforementioned law and rating
guidelines approved by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee. The rating
process is not a practice prescribed by professional auditing standards.
DoIT’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise DoIT regarding the results of our review of its
response.
48

--- Page 51 ---
APPENDIX
March 27, 2024
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Hook:
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) has received the fiscal compliance audit for
the period beginning May 7, 2018 and ending December 31, 2022.
DoIT acknowledges the efforts of the legislative auditors during this audit. Responses to the
audit findings are attached to this cover letter.
Sincerely,
Katherine M. Savage
Secretary
Department of Information Technology

--- Page 52 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Major Information Technology Development Projects (MITDPs)
Finding 1 (Policy Issue)
DoIT should assume greater oversight responsibility to ensure that MITDPs were
completed on time and on budget.
We recommend that DoIT take the necessary steps to establish adequate safeguards to
ensure the successful implementation of MITDPs, especially when delegating key aspects of
MITDP oversight. For example, DoIT should verify that State agencies have appropriate
qualified personnel with sufficient technical knowledge, assist with MITDP contract
procurements and subsequent contract modifications, and periodically review MITDP
expenditures for compliance with contract terms.
Agency Response
Analysis Additional Comment
Please provide DoIT is responsible for project oversight, which includes monitoring the
additional comments as status of MITDP projects and identifying risks and issues; however,
deemed necessary. State agency actions (or inactions) determine the outcome of the project.
State agencies are responsible for ensuring a project’s successful
delivery against cost and time schedule baselines, as well as that they
have sufficient resources and qualified personnel providing project
management.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DoIT does agree that adequate safeguards should be implemented to
corrective action or ensure the successful implementation of MITDPs. DoIT has submitted
explain disagreement. changes to Maryland statute, to be considered as part of the 2024
legislative sessions, that clarifies both DoIT and the agency’s role in
MITDP oversight and approval.
Specifically, DoIT would like more authority to assess agencies’
capacity and resourcing to develop, implement and oversee major IT
development projects. DoIT is not currently empowered nor resourced to
validate the technical skill set of personnel within agencies. This is a
change we are seeking in legislation.
Page 1 of 23

--- Page 53 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
DoIT did not effectively monitor MITDPs to ensure they were on budget and on schedule
and that changes to the scope and cost of the project were appropriate.
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure annual ITPRs are submitted by State agencies, and that DoIT reviews and
approves them prior to submitting it to DBM and DLS for budget analysis purposes
(repeat);
b. review the methodology and basis for estimated costs and schedules on ITPRs to ensure
these estimates appear reasonable and are supported;
c. obtain and review explanations for significant changes, such as increases in project
costs;
d. require the OPMs to ensure monthly health assessments are provided by State agencies,
verify the accuracy of information reported, and provide justifications for the risk
ratings (repeat); and
e. review and approve changes in scope, cost, and schedule, as required by its policy.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide DoIT asserts that this finding is factually inaccurate. DoIT requires that
additional comments as all MITDP projects submit an updated spend plan and project schedule
deemed necessary. on a monthly basis as part of the Health Assessment process. If DoIT
disagrees with the updates provided by the agency, DoIT documents
those findings and informs the agency. If the budget and/or schedule
materially changes from what was submitted as part of the annual ITPR
process, DoIT requires the agency to submit a project rebaseline. All
project rebaselines are reviewed by the EPMO and ultimately approved
or denied by the DoIT Secretary.
While we do monitor MITDPs, DoIT has no authority to 1) restrict or
deny funding when an agency’s project goes over timeline or budget; 2)
force an agency to implement recommendations consistent with our
monthly health assessment recommendations; 3) take over when an
agency’s project is failing.
Auditor’s Comment: DoIT’s response asserts that this finding is factually inaccurate.
DoIT states that it does not have the statutory authority to deny funding, enforce health
assessment recommendations, and take over failing projects. We continue to believe the
Page 2 of 23

--- Page 54 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
MITDP statute provides DoIT with the necessary authority as the oversight agency.
Nevertheless, DoIT has agreed to implement our recommendations and is seeking
changes to statute during the 2024 legislative session.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DoIT agrees with this recommendation. The DoIT EPMO current
corrective action or process is to review and approve agencies’ annual information
explain disagreement. technology project requests (ITPRs) prior to submitting it to DBM and
DLS for budget analysis purposes. This is evidenced by the approval
workflow in the PRISM system.
The analysis identified four ITPRs that were not reviewed until after
being submitted to DBM, and one ITPR (for MD THINK) that was never
prepared. Despite repeated requests for the ITPRs from the appropriate
agencies, three of the ITPRs were submitted after requests from DBM,
not allowing for timely review, and the MD THINK ITPR was never
submitted. Under current statute and processes, DoIT does not have the
authority to take any further actions when such situations occur.
As mentioned in response to finding 1, DoIT is seeking legislative
changes as well as working with agencies to effect changes to current
practice and process. These changes will provide DoIT with additional
authority to enforce policy and ensure effective oversight. Along with
these changes, DoIT is seeking additional funding to ensure we have
adequate staff to fulfill oversight responsibilities to ensure successful
MITDPs. It is hoped that these changes will be effective by 6/30/2024
.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DoIT agrees with this recommendation. The DoIT EPMO will enhance
corrective action or current practices to review the methodology and basis for estimated
explain disagreement. costs and schedules on ITPRs to ensure these estimates appear
reasonable and are supported. This will be evidenced by the approval
workflow in the PRISM system.
Recommendation 2c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DoIT agrees with this recommendation. As part of current processes,
corrective action or DoIT EPMO obtains and reviews explanations for significant changes
explain disagreement. such as increases in project costs as part of the monthly Health
Assessment and project rebaselining processes. Unfortunately, DoIT is
only able to approve increases in estimated costs that are reported to
DoIT or transparent in FMIS. DoIT also is limited in that justification
for project cost increases must come from the agency. Current practice
does not provide any additional actions by DoIT to enforce that agencies
Page 3 of 23

--- Page 55 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
comply with current procedure and policy that requires agencies to
submit explanations for significant cost changes.
See specific comments in response to recommendation 2e related to MD
THINK MITDP that was noted in the auditor analysis.
Recommendation 2d Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DoIT agrees with this recommendation. As part of established processes,
corrective action or the DoIT EPMO reviews the accuracy of information in the monthly
explain disagreement. health reports (using available information, e.g., FMIS reports) as part
of the monthly Health Assessment process.
DoIT agrees to implement certain enhancements to this process, as
recommended by OLA. Specifically, the EPMO will provide a rating
(such as green, yellow, red) for each category and will include a
justification for rating when there is a disagreement with the rating the
agency provided.
The auditor analysis identified instances where the monthly health
assessment had not been prepared. While DoIT requests these health
assessments, they must be provided by the agency. DoIT has no
authority to take additional actions when monthly health assessments
are not submitted.
Recommendation 2e Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DoIT agrees with this recommendation. As part of the current process,
corrective action or the DoIT EPMO reviews and approves changes in scope, cost, and
explain disagreement. schedule, as part of the monthly Health Assessment and project
rebaselining processes.
Specific to MDTHINK, “DoIT did not approve the increase in estimated
cost to complete for MDTHINK and MMIS II as required by its policy
and was unable to explain the projected cost increases for these two
MITPDs that increased by a combined $1.04 billion (271%) between
2018 and 2022.” In these instances, the projected cost increases were
not able to be explained because they did not go through the appropriate
approval process, were not transparent in FMIS, and not reported to
DoIT at year-end close (hence the forensic audit).
Page 4 of 23

--- Page 56 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
DoIT did not have an effective process to evaluate oversight project managers (OPMs)
hired through vendors to oversee MITDPs.
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure performance evaluations adequately demonstrate that OPMs were satisfactorily
performing their job duties (such as including specific comments that justify the
ratings) and meeting expectations;
b. develop written definitions and criteria, similar to DBM Guidelines noted above, that
define each performance area and rating category to ensure evaluations are an effective
tool to monitor the OPMs in an observable, measurable, and objective manner; and
c. retain the performance evaluations and take corrective action when OPMs
performance is unsatisfactory.
Agency Response
Analysis Additional Comment
Please provide OLA’s assessment on whether the Performance Evaluation Form (PEF)
additional comments as process is an effective process is subjective. While OLA has pointed out
deemed necessary. areas where the PEF process could be improved, there is no evidence to
indicate that the process has not been effective in evaluating OPM
performance.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2024
Please provide details of DoIT agrees to enhance the PEF process to include adding critical job
corrective action or duties necessary to monitor the overall health of assigned MITDPs.
explain disagreement. These enhancements to the PEF process were made and will be effective
4/1/2024
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 4/1/2024
Please provide details of DoIT agrees to add specific criteria that defines performance areas and
corrective action or rating categories to monitor OPMs in an observable, measurable and
explain disagreement. objective manner. These enhancements to the PEF process were made
and will be effective 4/1/2024
Recommendation 3c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of DoIT agrees that performance evaluations should be retained and that
corrective action or corrective action should be taken when an OPMs performance is
explain disagreement. unsatisfactory. DoIT EPMO currently has a process in place to retain
the performance evaluations and take corrective action when necessary.
Page 5 of 23

--- Page 57 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Finding 4
DoIT could not support cost data included in its annual report submitted to the Governor,
DBM, and General Assembly; and did not always include changes in schedule, cost, and
other identified problems with MITDPs, as required by State law.
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure that its annual reports include accurate estimated costs to complete (repeat) and
retain documentation to support the amounts reported; and
b. accurately report known or anticipated changes in schedule, cost, and scope and
provide a summary of problems identified by an external review, as required by State
law.
Agency Response
Analysis Additional Comment
Please provide The cost data that DoIT includes in its annual reports is supported by
additional comments as the cost information provided by other agencies, as well as the FMIS
deemed necessary. reports DoIT has access to. These reports do represent a point in time
and any changes that occur after report submission will not be captured
until the next reporting cycle. For example, if an agency is applying
expenditures to a prior fiscal year after year-end-close the expenses will
not tie to the annual report from that fiscal year..
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of DoIT agrees the annual reports submitted by DoIT should include
corrective action or accurate estimated costs, as of the date submitted, to complete projects,
explain disagreement. and that DoIT should retain documentation to support the amounts
reported. DoIT already has a process in place that accomplishes this.
DoIT reports estimated cost to complete submitted by the agencies
through the annual ITPR process, monthly spend plan submissions and
the project rebaselining process. DoIT currently retains the
documentation to support amounts reported, including FMIS reports
provided by the applicable agencies.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of DoIT agrees that reports should be accurate and report known or
corrective action or anticipated changes in schedule, cost, and scope and should provide a
explain disagreement. summary of problems identified by an external review. DoIT already
has a process in place that accomplishes this. DoIT submits known and
anticipated changes in schedule, cost, and scope as part of the annual
ITPR process and mid and end of year reporting processes.
Page 6 of 23

--- Page 58 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: While DoIT agrees with our recommendations, its response
indicates that it already has processes in place to accomplish our recommendations.
However, at the time of our review, the processes were not effective.
Page 7 of 23

--- Page 59 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
MD THINK
Finding 5
DoIT could not adequately explain or justify the increase in MD THINK costs from the
initial $166.4 million to $588.8 million and delays in the system implementation, which as of
November 2023 was estimated to be approximately three years behind the initial project
completion date.
We recommend that DoIT, in accordance with State law, and in conjunction with the MD
THINK Executive Committee,
a. monitor the project to ensure that costs, functionality, and delivery dates are consistent
with the terms of the contracts or adequately justified if significant variances are
necessary; and
b. ensure the project is fully implemented or take immediate corrective actions.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide DoIT has consistently and repeatedly requested justification for cost
additional comments as overruns and schedule delays from MDThink. DoIT has documented
deemed necessary. these requests as well as the escalations to the MDThink Executive
Steering Committee. DoIT cannot provide information to OLA which it
did not receive.
Recommendation 5a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of DoIT disagrees with this recommendation. The role of DoIT oversight is
corrective action or to track spending relative to the ITPRs submitted to DBM. Individual
explain disagreement. agencies are responsible for contract compliance.
Recommendation 5b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of DoIT disagrees with this recommendation as DoIT is not responsible for
corrective action or the implementation of the MDThink MITDP. As stated in response to
explain disagreement. Finding #1, DoIT is not empowered to assess the capacity of an agency
to oversee a project, though this is a legislative change we are seeking.
DoIT does not manage the resources (human, financial, etc.) deployed to
this project and therefore does not have influence over the day-to-day
operations or project activities. According to the MD THINK Executive
Order, this responsibility lies with the operator, DHS.
Auditor’s Comment: DoIT’s response indicates that it had consistently and repeatedly
requested justification for cost overruns and schedule delays from MD THINK.
Additionally, DoIT disagrees with the recommendations and states that it is not
responsible for the implementation of MD THINK. However, since DoIT is a member of
Page 8 of 23

--- Page 60 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
the MD THINK Steering Committee, in conjunction with its routine oversight
responsibilities for MITDPs, we believe DoIT can implement the recommended
corrective actions for this critical project.
Page 9 of 23

--- Page 61 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Finding 6
DoIT did not ensure that Independent Verification and Validation assessments (IV&V)
findings were resolved timely by DHS and the MD THINK Executive Committee.
We recommend that DoIT ensure critical findings from IV&V project assessment reports
for MD THINK are resolved timely, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide DoIT disagrees with the finding. DoIT’s statutory oversight role
additional comments as requires DoIT to monitor and provide guidance. The agencies are
deemed necessary. ultimately responsible for the project and related project management.
To assist agencies, DoIT has established the IV&V process as part of a
Major IT project. The MITDP Enterprise Program Management Office
Standards Manual provides guidance to agencies, by indicating “It is
expected that the agreed upon determinations communicated in IV&V
reporting will be used by agency project management to implement
efficient and effective processes, pursue risk reduction and enable
project success.” In this instance, there was a Steering Committee,
along with the agency, that was established to manage the MD THINK
project. DoIT would have been responsible for ensuring the IV&V
findings and recommendations, and current status, were properly
communicated with both entities responsible for the project. It was up to
both entities to ensure actions were taken to resolve issues and
implement recommendations. DoIT was available for questions,
assistance and guidance if requested from the responsible entities.
“DoIT did not ensure” is factually inaccurate. DoIT’s statutory
oversight role requires DoIT to monitor and provide guidance.
Consistent with that role, OLA’s analysis indicates that “The IV&V
contractor provided periodic reports to DoIT and the other State
agencies on the MD THINK Executive Committee that detail issues that
impact the progress of the project.” Furthermore, the MITDP
Enterprise Program Management Office Standards Manual indicates “It
is expected that the agreed upon determinations communicated in IV&V
reporting will be used by agency project management to implement
efficient and effective processes, pursue risk reduction and enable
project success.”
DoIT ensured that IV&V was in place, that findings were communicated
and “continuously review[ed] IV&V results and implementation of
recommended actions to assess project changes and continuation” per
policy.
Page 10 of 23

--- Page 62 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 6 Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of DoIT does not have the authority to compel the “agency project
corrective action or management to implement efficient and effective processes, pursue risk
explain disagreement. reduction and enable project success”, it can only set the expectation
that participating agencies comply with the MITDP policy. It is
incumbent on the participating agency to comply as a good steward of
the major IT Development project.
Auditor’s Comment: DoIT disagrees with our finding and recommendation based on its
belief of its statutory oversight role to monitor and provide guidance. However, since
DoIT is a member of the MD THINK Steering Committee, in conjunction with its routine
oversight responsibilities for MITDPs, we believe DoIT can implement the recommended
corrective actions for this critical project. Since DoIT is ultimately responsible for
initiating and overseeing the IV&V process, we believe this includes ensuring IV&V
findings are resolved timely.
Page 11 of 23

--- Page 63 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
eMaryland Marketplace Advantage
Finding 7
DoIT did not provide effective oversight during the development and implementation of
eMMA resulting in significant delays and changes to the cost and scope of the project.
We recommend that DoIT provide significant oversight and direction over eMMA. In
particular, DoIT should ensure
a. eMMA is completed in accordance with the most recently approved schedule and
budget;
b. issues identified by the monthly health assessments and the IV&Vs are resolved,
including developing an overall project schedule with defined tasks and a standardized
method of tracking percentage of completion is used; and
c. based on its own IT project expertise, proactively identify other actions intended to
encourage vendor resolution of the current eMMA issues and ensure DGS complies with
the terms of its contract.
Agency Response
Analysis Not Factually Accurate
Please provide DOIT disagrees with the finding. “DoIT did not provide effective
additional comments as oversight during the development and implementation of eMMA” is
deemed necessary. factually inaccurate.
DoIT provided oversight during the development and implementation of
eMMA, but is not able to force project teams to listen to or implement
oversight recommendations. The team's project management plan
resulted in significant delays and changes to the cost and scope of the
project
Oversight does not have the authority or mandate to provide project
management of major projects, as that responsibility and authority rests
with the agency. The OLA Analysis points to, and leverages,
observations that Oversight itself reported (no overall integrated
schedule, the lack of an Executive Steering Team, etc.). As such, DoIT
asserts that it did effectively monitor and report on the eMMA project.
Oversight does not have the authority to compel other agencies to
comply with MITDP policies or force an agency to form an Executive
Steering Committee.
Recommendation 7a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Page 12 of 23

--- Page 64 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of OLA is requesting that DoIT overstep its oversight role. Oversight does
corrective action or not have the authority or mandate to direct or ensure “eMMA is
explain disagreement. completed in accordance with the most recently approved schedule and
budget”. The oversight function involves monitoring the eMMA project
tasks completed in relation to the most recently approved schedule and
budget, and providing recommendations and suggestions for
improvements as well as to question when tasks are not completed on
time or within budget to help identify and suggest corrective actions for
the responsible agency and its project team.
Furthermore, it is important to identify that schedules and budgets will
have changes as technology products are dynamic and require flexibility
with scope change so that the new and best information is considered
when determining the best path forward for end users, state employees,
and is the best use of taxpayer dollars. In the case of eMMA, we are
currently performing a discovery sprint of the current implementation
and data reversion plans to determine the best path forward to support
the needs of DGS and all state agencies.
Recommendation 7b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of DoIT agrees that an overall project schedule with defined tasks should
corrective action or be maintained with a standardized method of tracking percentage of
explain disagreement. completion. DoIT has a procedure already in place that addresses this
recommendation, as DoIT EPMO already monitors and reports on
whether “an overall project schedule with defined tasks is maintained
and a standardized method of tracking percentage of completion is
used”.
As noted in the response to 7a, OLA’s recommendation is out of scope of
DoIT’s oversight role. While DoIT provides oversight and can monitor
and track scheduled tasks, DoIT does not have the authority to mandate
that another agency take certain actions. It is up to the responsible
agency to ensure that issues identified by the monthly health assessments
and IV&Vs are resolved.
Recommendation 7c Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of Oversight has no authority to directly interact with agency contractual
corrective action or parties (vendors) to resolve current eMMA issues. Oversight,
explain disagreement. specifically IV&V, already monitors, provides recommendations for
solutions and corrective actions to remediate issues, and reports on
compliance with the terms of the contract. DGS is the agency that holds
the contracts related to eMMA and is responsible for contract
management/compliance functions.
Page 13 of 23

--- Page 65 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Auditor’s Comment: DoIT disagrees with our finding and recommendations based on
its belief that it is not able to force project teams to listen to or implement oversight
recommendations. Additionally, DoIT believes that its oversight responsibilities do not
include having the authority to compel State agencies to comply with MITDP policies.
However, as previously noted we believe that current State law provides sufficient
authority for DoIT to implement the recommended corrective actions for this critical
project.
Page 14 of 23

--- Page 66 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
networkMaryland
Finding 8 (Policy Issue)
DoIT used the networkMaryland contract to award significant work unrelated to
networkMaryland without considering a competitive procurement process.
We recommend that DoIT
a. modify the networkMaryland contract to clearly define the scope and extent of all
services provided;
b. obtain retroactive approval from BPW for the current staff augmentation and
cybersecurity remediation work orders; and
c. for any additional work and in the spirit of its counsel’s legal advice, solicit secondary
competition amongst approved CATS+ contractors for staff augmentation and
cybersecurity remediation services to maximize competition and help ensure it receives
the most advantageous contract terms.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Inaccurate
Please provide DoIT finds the analysis related to this finding factually inaccurate. OLA
additional comments as states “DoIT management advised us that had it used the CATS+ master
deemed necessary. contract for staff augmentation work, BPW approval would be required
for work orders greater than $200,000 in accordance with State
procurement regulations which would have resulted in additional time
before the work could proceed.” While the process outlined in that
statement is true, it is not the reason DoIT did not use the CATS+
contract. In fact, due to the critical nature and urgency of the
cybersecurity remediation activities, DoIT relied on existing contracts
that had the expertise required to remediate the cyber assessment
findings. Furthermore, the contracts utilized allowed for the scope
associated with the work orders issued off of the NMS contract. This was
not the case for the cybersecurity assessments, as utilizing this contract
would have created a conflict of interest. It is for that reason that DoIT
issued an emergency contract for the assessments. While the
recommendation by OLA may be to conduct a competitive procurement
(which we are doing for future remediation activities), the use of the
Network Managed Services (NMS) contract was not out of scope.
Recommendation 8a Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of The Network Managed Services contract (“networkMaryland”) clearly
corrective action or defines the scope and extent of all services provided. None of the work
explain disagreement. orders issued off the contract were considered out of scope.
Page 15 of 23

--- Page 67 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 8b Disagree Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Please provide details of Retroactive approval from BPW for the current staff augmentation and
corrective action or cybersecurity remediation work orders issued off of the NMS contract is
explain disagreement. not required by law or BPW regulations, as none of the work orders
issued off the contract were considered out of scope. Furthermore, when
the ceiling modification for the NMS contract was submitted and
approved by the BPW in June 2023, the justification for the ceiling
increase included the cyber remediation and MDH cyber incident
response.
Recommendation 8c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 08/31/2024
Please provide details of DoIT agrees with this recommendation, as we already informed OLA
corrective action or that the related procurement was in process. The Request for Proposal
explain disagreement. (RFP) for both cybersecurity assessments and remediation activities is
currently in evaluation. Anticipated award is July/August 2024.
DoIT will solicit secondary competition amongst approved CATS+
contractors for future staff augmentation needs, unrelated to
cybersecurity services, to maximize competition and help ensure it
receives the most advantageous contract terms.
Auditor’s Comment: DoIT's response states that it disagrees with the factual accuracy of
the finding and two of the three recommendations. DoIT contends the networkMaryland
contract allowed for the use of cybersecurity remediation activities and staff augmentation
services. However, we continue to believe that the contract did not clearly define the
scope and extent of all services provided. Additionally, for transparency purposes, we
continue to believe that obtaining retroactive approval from the Board of Public Works for
the cybersecurity remediation activities and staff augmentation services work orders is
appropriate given that the primary purpose of the contract was to maintain the network.
Page 16 of 23

--- Page 68 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Finding 9
DoIT did not adequately monitor work orders for agency staff augmentation services
under the networkMaryland contract and documentation of certain work orders could not
be provided.
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure labor hours billed for staff augmentation work orders for other State agencies
are accurate prior to approving invoices for payment,
b. ensure approved work order documentation is maintained, and
c. ensure subcontractors are approved and qualified.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 9a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of This responsibility should have been at the agency level, as the agency
corrective action or oversees the contractor’s work and would be aware of the services
explain disagreement. provided and related hours worked. Effective July 1, 2023, all invoices
related to work orders for other State agencies will be reviewed,
approved and processed by the respective agencies. It will be their
responsibility to ensure labor hours billed for staff augmentation are
accurate prior to approving invoices for payment.
Recommendation 9b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/2024
Please provide details of DoIT will put procedures in place to ensure that approved work order
corrective action or documentation is maintained.
explain disagreement.
Recommendation 9c Agree Estimated Completion Date: 03/31/2024
Please provide details of DoIT will put procedures in place that the contract manager will ensure
corrective action or that all subcontractors are approved and qualified per the terms of the
explain disagreement. contract.
Page 17 of 23

--- Page 69 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Finding 10
DoIT issued work orders to the networkMaryland vendor for cybersecurity remediation
services totaling approximately $25 million that were not sufficiently detailed and did not
adequately ensure that all $11.5 million invoiced by the vendor was related to work
performed on behalf of DoIT work orders.
We recommend that DoIT
a. ensure all future cybersecurity remediation work orders and deliverables are clearly
defined and estimated costs correlate to deliverables;
b. ensure labor hours billed are accurate for work completed and properly supported;
and
c. in conjunction with legal counsel, consider the recovery of funds previously paid for
inadequate work product, to the extent practicable.
Agency Response
Analysis Additional Comment
Please provide As noted below in our responses, DoIT recognizes that there may not
additional comments as have been clearly defined specifications in the scope of work or
deemed necessary. deliverables to correlate to costs. The need to quickly implement
remediation efforts is likely the explanation for why the appropriate
details, etc. were not in the original work orders. Additionally, the need
to revise work orders to further define and update solutions as they
evolved over time led to changes in scope and certain inefficiencies.
With recent turnover, an evaluation was performed on remediation
efforts to date and whether to continue with current work orders. The
decision to cancel prior work orders and issue new work orders is
evidence of DoIT’s realization that work orders needed clearer scope
and deliverables and that it would be most appropriate to pause, assess
where DoIT’s cybersecurity level is, and reissue work orders with
clearer and better specifications and defined deliverables that
appropriately match to costs to be billed.
Recommendation 10a Agree Estimated Completion Date: Completed
Please provide details of Effective immediately, all future cybersecurity remediation work orders
corrective action or and deliverables will be clearly defined and DoIT will ensure that
explain disagreement. estimated costs correlate to deliverables.
The Request for Proposal (RFP) for both cybersecurity assessments and
cybersecurity services is currently in evaluation.
Recommendation 10b Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Page 18 of 23

--- Page 70 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of For all future invoices submitted, DoIT will ensure that labor hours
corrective action or billed are accurate for work completed and properly supported.
explain disagreement.
However, as it relates to this finding, DoIT believes the necessary
backup documentation was provided by the NMS vendor to support the
labor hours billed for the invoices audited by OLA. When originally
approving invoices received, DoIT received certain supporting
documentation (such as timesheets) and deliverables (such as status
reports) that were considered sufficient to support amounts billed for
work performed on DoIT work orders. As a result of the concerns
raised by OLA, DoIT requested and received additional documentation
from the NMS vendor to support the work performed that further
supported this conclusion. Many of the vendor’s resources worked full-
time on the specific DoIT Work Orders or were designated as dedicated
staff augmentation for DoIT, working at the direction of and supervised
by DoIT managers.
Additionally, as noted in the OLA analysis, the related work orders may
not have included clearly defined specifications in the scope of work or
deliverables to correlate to costs which may have resulted in what
appears as vague or non-descriptive timesheet entries. Going forward,
as noted in the response to Recommendation 10a, work orders will
include clearly defined specifications and deliverables and DoIT will
require more detailed descriptions of work performed by contractor staff
providing services on our work orders.
Recommendation 10c Agree Estimated Completion Date: Complete
Please provide details of As a general practice, DoIT does, in conjunction with legal counsel,
corrective action or consider recovery of funds previously paid when it is determined that a
explain disagreement. contractor has produced an inadequate work product.
However, there are no further actions to be taken, as DoIT is not aware
of inadequate work products received as related to the work orders
referenced in the auditor’s analysis. As previously mentioned, all
work/deliverables were previously reviewed and approved by DoIT
Executive leadership.
Page 19 of 23

--- Page 71 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Information Systems Security and Control and Enterprise Services
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information Systems Security
and Control and Enterprise Services section, including findings 11 through 14 related to
“cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the publicly
available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although the
specifics of the following findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with
DoIT’s responses, have been redacted from this report copy, DoIT’s responses indicated
agreement with the findings and related recommendations.
Finding 11
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 12
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 13
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 14
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 20 of 23

--- Page 72 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Enterprise Technology Support Services (ETSS)
Finding 15
DoIT did not have formal written agreements with 57 of the 130 State and local entities
receiving ETSS and did not recover $4.8 million from nine entities with agreements for
services provided.
We recommend that DoIT
a. enter into formal MOUs with all agencies for which it provides ETSS. The MOU
should clarify DoIT and agency responsibilities, specific services to be provided by each,
and a mechanism to provide for the cost of these services (repeat); and
b. ensure amounts due from agencies are timely recovered, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 15a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 09/30/2024
Please provide details of As explained to OLA and referenced in the finding analysis, DoIT
corrective action or created a formal MOU in 2020 that clarifies DoIT and agency
explain disagreement. responsibilities, specific services provided by each, and the mechanism
to provide for the cost of these services. This MOU was distributed to all
agencies in 2020 and again in 2021. The outstanding MOUs are due to
refusal to sign. DoIT will continue to work with these agencies to obtain
a signed MOU with all agencies. DoIT will be revising the MOU over
the next six (6) months and working with the new Administration to
ensure formal MOUs are in place for all agencies for which DoIT
provides ETSS.
It is also important to note that the previous finding from 2020 noted
that, as of February 2019, DoIT was providing services to 29 State
agencies. As noted in the current analysis, DoIT is currently providing
enterprise technology support services to 130 State and local entities.
This is a testament to how much DOIT has grown since the last OLA
fiscal audit. DoIT is constantly evaluating the governance structure to
ensure there are sufficient policies and procedures in place to govern
DoIT operations.
Recommendation 15b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 07/31/2024
Page 21 of 23

--- Page 73 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of DoIT Fiscal has implemented policies relating to outstanding accounts
corrective action or receivable to provide for appropriate escalation of past due balances to
explain disagreement. enforce the timely recovery of accounts receivables. To date, DoIT has
$1.4M in outstanding receivables that are over 90 days past due, of
which approximately $800K is from FY22.
DoIT will follow the policies put in place to collect the outstanding
balance by fiscal year end.
Page 22 of 23

--- Page 74 ---
Department of Information Technology
Agency Response Form
Equipment
Finding 16
DoIT did not adequately control its equipment inventory and did not maintain accurate
detail records.
We recommend that DoIT comply with the requirements of the DGS Inventory Control
Manual by
a. conducting annual independent physical inventories (repeat), and
b. ensuring property is properly reported to DGS on the annual report of fixed assets and
investigating the aforementioned difference and submitting a corrected annual report
to DGS.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide
additional comments as
deemed necessary.
Recommendation 16a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DoIT will ensure independent and documented annual physical
corrective action or inventories are conducted as required. The results will be reconciled to
explain disagreement. the related detail records. Any discrepancies will be investigated, and
missing items will be reported to DGS, as appropriate.
Recommendation 16b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 06/30/2024
Please provide details of DoIT will ensure property is properly reported to DGS on the Annual
corrective action or Report of Fixed assets and investigate the aforementioned difference and
explain disagreement. submit a corrected Annual Report to DGS. DoIT will ensure that any
necessary corrected Annual Reports are submitted to DGS for fiscal
years 2022 and 2023 as well.
Page 23 of 23

--- Page 75 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Robert A Wells Jr., CPA
Audit Managers
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Lauren E. Franchak, CPA
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Tari J. Covington
Tyshawna J. Ford
Matthew P. Henry
Jacob M. Kasten
Staff Auditors
Peter W. Chong
Charles O. Price
Information Systems Staff Auditors