Title: Comptroller of Maryland - Compliance Division
Date: 02/11/2011
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d724560674386
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:20:53.224973
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Comptroller of Maryland
Compliance Division
April 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Desehenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director Legislative AudItor
April 10, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit ofthe Comptroller ofMaryland
—
Compliance Division for the period beginning January 9, 2013 and ending March
15, 2016. The Division is primarily responsible for enforcement ofall tax laws
administered by the Comptroller ofMaryland, including those relating to
individual income taxes and business taxes such as corporate income,
withholding, and sales and use taxes. The Division is also responsible for
administering the Uniform Disposition ofUnclaimed Property Act.
Our audit disclosed that the Division did not consistently perform one ofits tax
compliance programs and did not document the reasons or management approval
for the related decisions. At the time ofour review, the program to identify and
pursue certain individuals, such as those who filed extensions but never actually
filed the related income tax returns, was not performed for three ofthe last six tax
years for which data were available. The two most recent tax years for which this
program had been completed resulted in tax assessments totaling approximately
$75 million, although actual collections on assessments are normally less than the
initial assessments.
Our audit also disclosed that tax assessments required when business taxpayers
failed to file required tax returns were not always prepared and recorded timely.
Furthermore, we identified certain internal control deficiencies with respect to
cash receipts and adjustments to taxpayer accounts in the automated tax system.
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
The Comptroller ofMaryland’s response to this audit, on behalfofthe Division,
is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the course ofthis audit by the Division.
Respectfully submitted,
7a
Thomas J. Bamickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Taxpayer Compliance Programs
Finding 1 – The Division did not consistently perform one of its 5
compliance programs to identify and pursue certain
individuals who failed to file required income tax returns.
Business Tax Assessments
* Finding 2 – The Division did not ensure that tax assessments for 6
businesses that failed to file required tax returns were prepared
and recorded timely in accordance with its procedures.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 3 – Controls in the cash office were not sufficient to ensure 7
collections were properly accounted for and deposited.
Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts
Finding 4 – Critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts were not 8
always reviewed and documented as required.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Compliance Division’s primary responsibilities include enforcement of all
tax laws administered by the Comptroller of Maryland, including those relating to
individual income taxes, as well as business taxes such as corporate income,
withholding, and sales and use taxes. Primary functions include conducting
taxpayer audits and investigations, collecting delinquent taxes, and performing
other taxpayer compliance activities. In conjunction with these functions, the
Division levies tax assessments and processes tax appeals. Collection tools used
by the Division include filing tax liens, issuing bank attachments, employing
independent collection agencies, and other steps such as preventing the renewal of
an individual’s driver’s license. The Division uses the Comptroller of Maryland’s
automated State of Maryland Tax (SMART) system to access, retrieve, and record
tax data and other information as necessary. The Division is also responsible for
administering the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act.
According to the Division’s records, as of June 30, 2016, outstanding individual
income taxes (excluding interest and penalties) and business taxes that were
subject to collection by the Division totaled approximately $592 million and $321
million, respectively. According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2016,
the Division’s operating expenditures totaled approximately $33 million, and
collections from its enforcement programs totaled $618 million.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the six findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated January 14, 2014, including one finding
relating to a function that was transferred during our audit period to the
Comptroller of Maryland – Revenue Administration Division. We determined
that the Division satisfactorily addressed four of these findings. The remaining
two findings are repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Taxpayer Compliance Programs
Finding 1
The Compliance Division did not consistently perform one of its annual
compliance programs to identify and pursue certain individuals who failed to
file required income tax returns, and there was a lack of documentation of
the reasons and management’s approval for the related decisions.
Analysis
The Division did not consistently perform one of its annual tax compliance
programs designed to identify and pursue certain individuals who failed to file
required income tax returns. Specifically, our review of six effective tax
compliance programs disclosed that one of the programs targeting certain non-
filers had not been performed for tax years 2008, 2009, and 2011 as of August
2016. In addition, there was no documented explanation or management approval
for not performing this program.
As a result, the Division lacked assurance that individuals specifically targeted by
the program, such as those who filed extensions but had not yet filed the related
income tax returns, eventually complied with the filing requirements and paid any
resulting tax liabilities.
The Division has advised us that its intention is to perform this compliance
program for each tax year; however, the program was not performed for these
three tax years because available resources were allocated to other priorities,
including compliance programs considered to be more successful in generating
collections. Division management advised us that it does not intend to go back
and conduct the program for those three tax years. While we recognize the need
to consider available resources and potential collection results, other
considerations, such as the need to enforce compliance with filing requirements,
are important as well. Therefore, decisions to forgo programs should be formally
justified, including with supporting data analyses, and approved by management.
The Division completed the non-filer program procedures for tax year 2010 in
January 2015, and tax years 2012 and 2013 had been completed as of August
2016. (Data used for its compliance programs are typically not available for up to
two years after the end of a tax year.) The program identified approximately
8,000 non-filers for 2012 and 2013, and resulted in assessments of $75 million for
those two years. During fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015, collections associated
with the program totaled $2.3 million. Collections may be less than assessments
5

--- Page 8 ---
for several reasons, including because the same tax liabilities could have been
collected through other compliance program initiatives.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Division conduct this non-filer program each year
or prepare and maintain adequate documentation containing the Division’s
analysis and reasoning, and management approval, when an established
compliance program is not completed for a particular tax year.
Business Tax Assessments
Finding 2
The Division did not ensure that tax assessments for businesses that failed to
file required tax returns were prepared and recorded timely in accordance
with its procedures.
Analysis
The Division’s business tax collection unit did not ensure that tax assessments
were prepared, recorded in SMART, and billed on a timely basis to businesses
who failed to file required business tax returns, such as for sales and use taxes and
withholding taxes. During fiscal year 2015, assessments against businesses who
failed to file required returns for those two tax types totaled approximately $6.0
million, according to the Division’s records. However, collection efforts cannot
begin until tax assessments are prepared and posted to taxpayer accounts.
The Division’s procedures specify that, when these accounts are identified, a
notice and demand letter for each outstanding return is sent to the taxpayer who is
provided 10 days to respond. If the taxpayer fails to satisfactorily respond to the
demand letter within 10 days, the account is flagged for a tax assessment and,
within 30 days, an assessor should calculate and prepare the assessment, including
penalties and interest, based on historical data for the delinquent business or
industry-wide data for like companies. Subsequently, the tax assessment is
approved by supervisory personnel, which serves as authorization to post the
assessment to the taxpayer’s account in SMART and automatically bill the
taxpayer.
Our test of 16 large dollar assessments totaling approximately $6.4 million and
prepared during fiscal years 2014 through 2016 disclosed that, for 12 assessments
totaling $5.1 million, the assessments were prepared 2 to 16 months after the
notice and demand letters had been sent to the taxpayers. Also, for 7 assessments
totaling $1.6 million, the assessments were not posted to SMART until 47 to 141
6

--- Page 9 ---
days after the assessment calculations were prepared. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Division adequately monitor to ensure that business
tax assessments are prepared and recorded on a timely basis (repeat).
Cash Receipts
Background
In February 2014, the Comptroller of Maryland transferred the responsibility for
operating the Compliance Division’s cash office in Baltimore to the Comptroller’s
Revenue Administration Division (RAD), which has its main office in Annapolis.
Our preceding audit report on the Compliance Division included a finding
regarding certain control weaknesses pertaining to collections received in its cash
office. Although responsibility for the cash office has been transferred to RAD,
we addressed this prior finding during our current audit of the Division.
During calendar 2015, the Baltimore cash office received collections, consisting
primarily of tax receipts, totaling approximately $107 million, of which $104
million was received in the form of checks, and the remainder in cash. Checks
were endorsed, recorded in an automated check log, and then transferred to
RAD’s office in Annapolis for processing and deposit. Cash received was
recorded and deposited directly by the cash office.
Finding 3
Controls in the cash office were not sufficient to ensure collections were
properly accounted for and deposited.
Analysis
Controls over collections received in the cash office located in Baltimore were not
sufficient. We noted the following conditions under which errors or other
discrepancies could occur without timely detection:
• An employee responsible for processing collections, including recording
collections on the automated check log, also had the capability to record
payments in taxpayer accounts. Recording payments to taxpayer accounts
was not this employee’s primary responsibility, but the employee had been
granted this user access capability to assist in posting payments during the tax
season.
7

--- Page 10 ---
• Independent verifications were not performed to ensure that all check
collections were forwarded to RAD’s Annapolis office for deposit or, in the
case of cash, were deposited directly. Although employees at the Annapolis
office provided the cash office employees with documentation confirming
receipt of the checks, that documentation was not compared to the cash
office’s record of checks initially received and forwarded. Similarly, there
was no verification performed of the record of cash received to validated
deposit documentation received from the bank. As of December 31, 2016, the
cash office no longer accepted cash as a form of payment.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report. The
Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires the
establishment of sufficient internal controls over collections, including adequate
separation of cash receipt processing duties and independent verification of
collections to deposit.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Comptroller of Maryland
a. ensure that employees who have access to collections in the Baltimore
cash office do not have the capability to post payments to taxpayer
accounts (repeat); and
b. ensure that an independent employee verifies, through an examination of
appropriate documentation, that all collections recorded in the cash office
were received by RAD’s Annapolis office for deposit (repeat).
Adjustments to Taxpayer Accounts
Finding 4
Critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts were not always reviewed and
documented in accordance with the Division’s procedures.
Analysis
Certain critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts processed by one Division unit
were not reviewed by supervisory personnel in accordance with the Division’s
procedures, and we found that adequate supporting documentation was not always
on file for adjustments made. There were primarily two types of direct
adjustments: adjustments affecting taxpayer collections, such as a change in the
tax year to which a taxpayer’s payment is applied, and adjustments to a taxpayer’s
tax liability to increase or decrease the amount due. As a result, there was a lack
of assurance that these critical adjustments were proper.
8

--- Page 11 ---
The Division’s procedures specify certain parameters, such as dollar thresholds,
as well as other requirements for the supervisory review and documentation of
adjustments processed by the unit in SMART. Although output reports of both
types of adjustments processed were generated for verification purposes, direct
adjustments to a taxpayer’s liability amount were not being reviewed. During the
period from July 2013 through May 2016, adjustments that resulted in increases
and decreases to taxpayer liabilities totaling $2.3 million and $3.4 million,
respectively, were not subject to review.
In addition, the Division did not always have adequate documentation on file,
such as an approved request form or documented supervisory review, to support
both types of adjustments processed by the unit. Our review of 940 adjustments,
processed over 18 days during fiscal years 2014 through 2016, disclosed that the
Division did not have certain supporting documentation for 124 adjustments (13
percent), including 33 adjustments each over $2,500. These 124 adjustments
directly increased and decreased tax liabilities by $760,872 and $1,531,340,
respectively, and increased and decreased collections by $82,679 and $60,148,
respectively. Our review of 17 of the 124 adjustments disclosed the adjustments
appeared to be appropriate based upon explanations provided by the Division as
well as informal notes in SMART.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Division ensure that all adjustments processed by
the aforementioned unit are reviewed and approved in accordance with its
procedures, and that adequate documentation supporting the adjustments
and their review and approval is maintained.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Comptroller of Maryland –
Compliance Division for the period beginning January 9, 2013 and ending March
15, 2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Division’s
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included the identification, assessment, and collection of
individual income taxes and various business taxes; the identification, collection,
and distribution of unclaimed property; and payroll. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report, including one
finding related to certain cash receipt functions that were performed by the
Compliance Division until being transferred to the Comptroller of Maryland –
Revenue Administration Division in February 2014.
Our audit did not include certain support services (such as processing of invoices,
maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided to the
Division by the Comptroller of Maryland – Office of the Comptroller. These
support services are included in the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Comptroller. In addition, our audit did not include certain support services
provided to the Division by the Comptroller of Maryland – Information
Technology Division related to the procurement and monitoring of information
technology equipment and services and the operation of the Annapolis Data
Center. The operation of the Annapolis Data Center includes the development
and maintenance of Division applications and maintenance of the operating
system and security software environment. These support services are included in
the scope of our audits of the Information Technology Division.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
Division’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were
10

--- Page 13 ---
selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data) and the State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the
contractor administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit
card activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit. We also extracted data from the Comptroller’s SMART system, and the
systems used by the Division to account for and monitor unclaimed property and
business tax collections for the purpose of testing certain areas, such as collection
activity and the disposition of unclaimed property. We performed various tests of
the relevant data and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the
purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
The reliability of data used in this report for background or informational
purposes was not assessed.
The Division’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
11

--- Page 14 ---
adversely affect the Division’s ability to maintain reliable financial records,
operate effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Division that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The response from the Comptroller of Maryland, on behalf of the Division, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Comptroller of Maryland regarding the
results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 15 ---
APPENDIX
COMPTROLLER Peter Franchot
7/’MARYLAN D
Sharonne R.
Deputy Comptroller
— kJ Servi.ng the People
April 4, 2017
Mr. Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department ofLegislative Services
Office ofLegislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
Enclosed is the Comptroller’s response to your report on the Compliance Division for the
period beginning January 9, 2013 and ending March 15, 2016.
We have carefully reviewed each finding, and we believe that our responses fully address
each recommendation contained in the report. Should you need additional information or
clarification, please contact Lindsay Welsh, Acting Director, Office ofRisk Management by
email at lwelsh(äcomp.state.md.us or by telephone at 410-260-6156.
The Comptroller appreciates your objective appraisal ofour operations and your
recommendations for continuous improvement, and commends your auditors for their
professionalism and thorough review.
Very truly yours,
aronne R. Bonardi
Deputy Comptroller
Daniel C. Riley, Jr.
Director, Compliance Division
cc: Honorable Peter Franchot, Comptroller
LouisL. GoldsteinTreasuryBuilding 80 Calvert Street P.O. Box466 Annapolis, Maryland21404-0466 410-260-7806
MRS 711 (MD)or 1-800-735-2258 • TTY410-260-7157• sbonardicomp.state.md.us

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 1
The Compliance Division did not consistently perform one of its annual compliance programs to
identify and pursue certain individuals who failed to file required income tax returns, and there
was a lack of documentation of the reasons and management’s approval for the related decisions.
The Division is nationally recognized for its compliance program initiatives. Since Fiscal Year 2009,
these programs have generated more than $440 million dollars in revenue for the state of Maryland. The
Maryland Comptroller’s Office has recaptured more than $5 billion in delinquent taxes over the last ten
years. In comparison, the specific compliance program identified in this finding, the Maryland Extension
Non-Filer project, has generated only $7 million since its implementation. Generally, the resources
necessary to administer this project are greater than other similar projects due to the large number of
phone calls received and correspondence that is generated. It must also be noted that with the existence of
other non-filer projects in the State of Maryland, Maryland Extension non-filers are picked up in the
routine course of the processing of other non-filer cases. The Division notes that with the exception of
the years noted, the Maryland Extension Non-filer project has been run through the 2013 Tax Year.
The Division agrees that every effort should be made to follow up on any taxpayers that may not have
properly filed returns or properly paid Maryland income taxes. However, the Division must be allowed to
determine the best manner in which to allocate resources to address challenges in administering its
projects. In the Compliance Programs Section of the Compliance Division, there are currently thirteen
income tax matching projects, of which there are six projects that address non-filers through various
sources of information.
At any given time, due to the number of projects that the Compliance Programs Section oversees,
management decisions are made concerning when to run projects based on a number of key factors. These
include the number of notices to be sent to taxpayers, statute of limitations, volume of taxpayer calls
expected to be received, volume of correspondence which the Section expects to receive, and the potential
tax revenue that may be collected. Projects for which little or no revenue is generated may be
discontinued. It is the intention of the Division to run all of its projects each year, and based on the
resources available, the Division will continue to work diligently to recover as much unremitted tax
revenue as possible, but Management must have the discretion to determine where to allocate its
resources for the benefit of the State and its taxpaying citizens.
The Compliance Division agrees to OLA’s recommendation to maintain documentation concerning the
Division’s determination and reasoning for the approval for not completing an established compliance
program. This documentation will include factors that ensure that the determination factors in available
resources and other constraints.
1

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 2
The Division did not ensure that tax assessments for businesses that failed to file required tax
returns were prepared and recorded timely in accordance with its procedures.
The Division wants to emphasize that the assessments in question were issued well within the time
required by Maryland law; therefore, there was no loss of revenue to the State of Maryland. The Division
has voluntarily set standards that are greater than those that are statutorily required, and agrees that
estimated tax assessments need to be closely monitored to ensure that tax assessments are prepared and
posted in a manner consistent with established procedures.
It is also important to note that of the 12 large dollar assessments mentioned, only two had not been
processed prior to the start of the audit by OLA, but were resolved prior to the completion of the audit.
All of these assessments were issued in accordance with the standards set forth in state law.
To continue with its commitment to excellence, the Division will ensure that established procedures will
be followed so that estimated tax assessments are prepared and posted timely.
2

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 3
Controls in the cash office were not sufficient to ensure collections were properly accounted for and
deposited.
The Comptroller’s Office is pleased to note that the legislative audit did not identify any evidence of
impropriety, fraud, or abuse on the part of the Revenue Administration Division (RAD) personnel. As
noted by OLA, the responsibility for the administration of the cash office in the Baltimore Complex was
transferred to the RAD in February 2014. The Compliance Division referred this finding to the RAD for a
response.
RAD concurs with Recommendation 3a. Appropriate action has been taken such that employees who
have access to collections do not have the capability to post payments to taxpayer accounts. The
Division has also proactively initiated a management review of employee duties within the cash office
and a segregation of responsibilities so that individual employees do not have the ability to both post
payments to the check register and the ability to post payments to taxpayer accounts in the SMART
system.
RAD has already taken steps to comply with Recommendation 3b. Collections received in the Baltimore
cash office will be remotely deposited within that office and no longer sent to the Revenue Administration
Division's Annapolis office for subsequent deposit. The Revenue Administration Division has instituted
the use of the Trip 21/Fairfax system which allows for remote deposits. The Baltimore cash office
ceased accepting cash payments as of July 1, 2016.
3

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 4
Critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts were not always reviewed and documented in accordance
with the Division’s procedures.
The Division notes that OLA did not find any instances of employee fraud, theft, or impropriety.
The Division found that, in each of the identified cases, the supervisor performing the adjustment review
matched the automated output reports to the source documents, or to case notes in the SMART system
when no physical documentation existed. For adjustment review purposes, supervisors and managers
usually attach a “Collection Section Adjustment Request” sheet to the adjustment printout. However, in
cases where there was no written documentation received, an online review of the adjustment is done
based on the case notes.
The Division will review and revise current procedures to ensure that critical adjustments to taxpayer
accounts are subject to review as recommended by OLA.
The Division will update Personal Income Tax collections procedures relative to supervisory reviews to
ensure that critical adjustments to taxpayer accounts are subject to review as recommended by OLA.
4

--- Page 20 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Joseph J. Burke, III
Anthony V. Calcagno
Steven A. Crocker
Lauren E. McLain, CPA
Staff Auditors
Ashley A. Mensah
Staff Auditor Intern