Title: Department of Budget and Management - Central Collection Unit


NOTE: A separate audit of CCU is no longer conducted. CCU is now audited as part of DBM - Office of the Secretary and Other Units.
Date: 04/13/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0bcc9d7245606742b6
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:43:25.062378
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Budget and Management
Central Collection Unit
April 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 13, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Department of Budget and Management – Central Collection
Unit (CCU) for the period beginning July 1, 2005 and ending February 29, 2008.
CCU is responsible for collecting all delinquent debts due the State, except those
excluded by law (such as taxes and child support).
Our audit disclosed that accountability and control over cash receipts was not
sufficient at the two CCU locations we examined which received $11.8 million of
the $22 million cash collected by CCU during fiscal year 2008. Our audit also
disclosed that certain debt collection procedures, such as wage garnishments,
were not always pursued in a timely manner and that certain debtor accounts were
excluded from collection efforts for extended periods. Additionally, controls over
accounts receivables and information systems security were not sufficient, and
CCU was not adequately monitoring the private collection agency used to help
collect certain accounts.
Ensuring debt collection efforts are consistently applied and establishing adequate
controls over collections is particularly important for CCU since its collections
from all sources totaled over $129 million in fiscal year 2008. As of June 30,
2008, outstanding debts which have been referred to CCU totaled approximately
$1.3 billion.
An Executive Summary of our findings can be found on page 5. The Department
of Budget and Management’s response to this audit, on behalf of CCU, is
included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation
extended to us during the course of this audit by CCU.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Cash Receipts
Finding 1 – Accountability and Control Were Not Sufficient For 9
Receipts at Two Locations Reviewed
* Finding 2 – CCU Lacked Procedures to Ensure That All Deposit 10
Adjustments Were Identified and Properly Investigated
Debt Collection Efforts
* Finding 3 – Certain Debt Collection Tools, Such as Wage Garnishments, 12
Were Not Pursued in a Timely Manner
Finding 4 – CCU Did Not Conduct Comprehensive Collection Actions on 13
22,000 Delinquent Accounts Totaling $60 Million
Motor Vehicle Administration Debts
Finding 5 – CCU Did Not Adequately Pursue Collection on Certain 14
Delinquent Uninsured Motorist Penalties Accounts
Finding 6 (Policy Issue) – CCU Needs to Work With the Motor Vehicle 15
Administration to Address the Timely Collection of Delinquent
Uninsured Motorist Penalties
Account Receivable
Finding 7 – CCU Did Not Ensure the Validity of Signatures Authorizing 16
Account Adjustments Received From State Agencies
Finding 8 – Critical Capabilities on the Automated Accounts Receivable 17
System Were Not Adequately Controlled or Subject to Independent
Approvals
Private Collection Agency
* Finding 9 – CCU Did Not Adequately Monitor the Private Collection 18
Agency It Used
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 10 – CCU Did Not Adequately Address Backup and Transfer 19
of Critical Data
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 21
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Department of Budget and Management
Central Collection Unit (CCU)
April 2009
• Accountability and control over cash receipts at CCU’s headquarters
office and the one satellite office we examined were not sufficient to deter
or detect errors or other discrepancies in a timely manner. For example,
certain employees who handled receipts could make critical adjustments
to the accounts receivable system and certain collections were not
recorded upon receipt and were not properly accounted for. According
to CCU’s records, cash and checks received at these two locations totaled
approximately $11.8 million during fiscal year 2008.
CCU should take steps to improve accountability and control over all cash
receipts, including ensuring that employees who have access to receipts
cannot alter critical data on the accounts receivable system and ensuring that
all funds are recorded upon receipt and are properly accounted for.
• CCU lacked procedures to ensure that all deposit adjustments were
identified and properly investigated.
Since deposit adjustments may be caused by errors, theft, or other
discrepancies, CCU should ensure that all deposit adjustments were identified
and properly pursued.
• Certain available collection procedures were not always pursued in a
timely manner. For example, CCU had not pursued wage garnishments
for all accounts.
CCU should pursue available collection procedures, including wage
garnishments, on a timely basis.
• Comprehensive collection actions were not conducted on 22,000 debtor
accounts totaling $60 million.
CCU should ensure all significant debts are subject to CCU collection
procedures.
5

--- Page 8 ---
• CCU did not adequately pursue collection of certain uninsured motorist
fines and penalties and needs to address the timely collection of these
cases from the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA).
CCU should pursue collection of certain uninsured motorist fines and
penalties and work in conjunction with the MVA to develop a better method
of assessing and collecting uninsured motorist penalties.
• CCU did not adequately verify the propriety of account adjustments
requested by State agencies. Specifically, although adjustment forms are
signed by at least one agency employee, the signatures were not compared
to a listing of authorized signatures maintained at CCU.
CCU should develop procedures for ensuring that adjustment forms are signed
by an authorized employee.
• CCU did not adequately monitor the private collection agency (PCA) it
hired to help collect outstanding debts. During fiscal years 2006 through
2008, CCU referred approximately 161,000 debts totaling $166 million to
the PCA.
CCU should take steps to adequately monitor the efforts of the PCA,
including on-site reviews of applicable PCA records, ensuring that all
uncollected accounts are returned when required, and ensuring the PCA has
adequate procedures to safeguard collections of State funds and sensitive
client information.
• We noted certain security and control deficiencies relating to CCU’s
information systems. For example, CCU did not adequately address the
back up of critical data.
CCU should take the recommended actions to improve security and control
over its information systems.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Central Collection Unit (CCU) is a program within the Department of Budget
and Management’s Office of the Secretary. CCU’s primary responsibility is to
collect all delinquent debts due the State, except those excluded by law (such as
taxes and child support). Collections on debt, less CCU’s assessed collection
fees, are generally paid to either the State Treasury or the unit of State
government where the debt originated. CCU’s operations include its headquarters
office and five satellite offices established at selected Motor Vehicle
Administration locations to assist primarily in the collection of uninsured motorist
penalty fees assessed by the Administration.
State law authorizes CCU to assess and collect for each debt a fee sufficient to
cover all collection and administrative costs. The fee may not exceed 20 percent
of the outstanding principal and interest. Currently, CCU’s collection fee is 17
percent which is added to the original debt amount. Collection fees are deposited
into the Central Collection Fund, a continuing, non-lapsing special fund used to
pay CCU’s operating expenses.
Outstanding Debts
According to CCU’s records,
Fiscal (at June 30) Total
collection fees exceeded CCU
Year Accounts Balance Collections
operating expenses by
2005 1,034,000 $922,133,000 $102,156,000
approximately $8 million annually
2006 1,192,149 $1,022,713,315 $114,450,760
during fiscal years 2006 through
2007 1,236,407 $1,138,175,882 $122,279,482
2008. As a result, the balance in
2008 1,350,481 $1,271,599,187 $129,235,773
the Fund has increased from
approximately $14.4 million at Source: CCU records
June 30, 2005 to $39.7 million as of
June 30, 2008. As noted in the accompanying chart, outstanding debt referred to
CCU was approximately $1.3 billion.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the current status of the 10
fiscal/compliance findings contained in our preceding audit report dated March
13, 2006. We determined that CCU satisfactorily addressed seven of these
findings. The three remaining findings are repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Receipts
Background
According to the Department of Budget and Management – Central Collection
Unit’s (CCU) records, cash receipts totaled approximately $129 million during
fiscal year 2008 (see chart at right). CCU collects receipts at its headquarters
office and at five satellite offices
established at certain Motor Vehicle
2008 Collections
Administration locations. These
Cash and Check $22,015,381
receipts included checks and cash
Credit Card and EFT $37,772,281
(currency) totaling approximately $22
Lockbox $12,122,912
million. Although CCU also received
Transfers (for example,
collections in a number of other ways
TRIP1) $57,325,233
(as noted in the table), checks and cash
Total $129,235,807
received directly by any entity are
particularly vulnerable to loss. Source: CCU records
During our audit period, CCU procured and implemented an automated cash
register system to account for its receipts. The system was used to record all walk
in receipts at CCU headquarters and at the satellite offices across the State and
interfaced with its accounts receivable system.
Finding 1
Adequate accountability and control had not been established over cash
receipts.
Analysis
CCU had not established adequate accountability and control over cash receipts
received at CCU headquarters and the one satellite office we reviewed.
According to CCU records, during fiscal year 2008 receipts in the form of cash
and checks at CCU headquarters and the one satellite office reviewed totaled, $4.2
million and $7.6 million, respectively. Our review of the procedures and controls
over these cash receipts disclosed the following conditions:
• Six CCU headquarters employees involved in the cash receipts process also
had the capability to change the debtor’s billing/mail address on the
automated accounts receivable system. Consequently, receipts could be
misappropriated and subsequent notices to the debtor could be diverted.
1 TRIP is the State’s Tax Refund Intercept Program.
9

--- Page 12 ---
• Cash receipts received by mail at CCU headquarters were not recorded
immediately upon receipt and the transfer of these receipts to the cash office
for deposit preparation was not properly documented to establish
accountability over the funds. Rather, these receipts were processed by two
individuals before being recorded. In addition, there was no documentation of
the transfer of the mail receipts from the personnel who processed mail
receipts to the cash office personnel responsible for forwarding the deposit to
the bank by courier.
• In addition to their assigned supervisory duties, a supervisory employee at the
satellite office routinely performed cashier responsibilities that were not
subject to any independent review. This supervisor also had access to all cash
receipts prior to deposit without any independent supervision. This is
significant because this employee’s supervisory duties included the ability to
process voids and modify debtor addresses on CCU’s accounts receivable
system.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that
a. employees who have access to cash receipts not have the capability to
adjust critical data on the automated accounts receivable system,
b. CCU establish accountability over mail receipts by recording such
payments immediately upon receipt and by documenting the transfer of
funds to the cash office, and
c. CCU establish adequate procedures and controls at the aforementioned
satellite office to ensure all receipts are properly controlled.
We advised CCU on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 2
CCU lacked adequate procedures for ensuring all deposit adjustments were
identified and properly investigated.
Analysis
CCU lacked adequate procedures for ensuring all deposit adjustments were
identified and properly investigated. Such adjustments may be necessary when
actual receipts submitted to the bank are less than those indicated on the
corresponding deposit documents, or when a particular debtor’s payment is
rejected by the bank due to insufficient funds. In these instances, CCU is notified
by the State Treasurer’s Office (STO) and directly by the financial institutions
10

--- Page 13 ---
(ssuch as throuugh on-line ddeposit docuumentation pposted by thee bank) that a deposit
had to be adjuusted.
WWhile CCU innvestigated adjustments based on nootifications ffrom the finaancial
innstitutions, CCCU did not use the repoort received from the STTO to ensure all
addjustments wwere properlly investigateed. In this reegard, our teest of 25 bannk
addjustments ddisclosed thaat, for six adjjustments tootaling $20,0000, CCU could not
document thaat the adjustmments were iinvestigated and the apprropriate debtor
acccount was aadjusted on CCCU’s accounts receivaable system.
AAccording to CCU recordds, bank adjuustments totaaled approxiimately $4777,000
duuring fiscal yyear 2007. SSince deposit shortages can be causeed by error, theft or
otther discrepaancies, CCUU should adequately monnitor and evaaluate such
occurrences oon an ongoinng basis, andd investigate as necessaryy. A similarr
coondition wass commentedd upon in ouur preceding audit reportt.
RRecommenddation 2
WWe recommeend that CCCU ensure aall deposit adjustments are identifiied and
pursued. Speecifically, wwe recommennd that CCUU
a. use the addjustment rreports receeived from tthe STO to iidentify all ddeposit
adjustmeents, and
b. properly investigate and resolvee the deposiit adjustmennts and thatt
documenntation of suuch efforts bbe maintaineed (repeat)..
DDebt Collection Effoorts
CCU Fiscal YYear 2008 Deebt Collectioons
BBackground
CCCU uses a vvariety of
Refeerring
mmethods and resources
Other Ageency
too facilitate thhe $357,189 Collecctions
coollection of delinquent $4,1229,811
acccounts incluuding
auutomated, mmanual, and
TRIP
ouutsourced coollection Collectionns CCU
effforts. Autoomated $44,595,3331 Collections
$$78,312,642
coollection effforts
innvolve the usse of the
State’s Tax RRefund
Inntercept Proggram Private
Collectionn
(TTRIP), whichh captures
Agency
debtor tax reffunds. This
collections
prrocess is useed in $1,840,8000
Soource: CCUrecords
11

--- Page 14 ---
conjunction with the other CCU collection efforts. Manual collection efforts
involve CCU collectors who attempt to identify debtors and related assets and
pursue collection of the delinquent accounts. Collectors will pursue voluntary
payments via phone and written correspondence and also forward certain accounts
to CCU’s legal unit for proactive non-voluntary collection actions such as wage
garnishments and property liens. Lastly, CCU outsources certain accounts to a
private collection agency. For example, CCU forwards accounts with balances
less than $750, accounts with no identifiable wages or assets, or accounts with no
collections for six months to the agency. See the chart on the preceding page for
a breakdown of fiscal year 2008 collections by collection method.
If the aforementioned collection efforts are unsuccessful CCU can abate the
delinquent account based on the decision of an internal abatement committee. If
an account is abated, CCU may still subject the accounts to the automated
collection efforts or may terminate all collection efforts.
Finding 3
CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments and/or
property liens from debtors.
Analysis
CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments and/or property liens
from debtors. Specifically, our review disclosed the following conditions:
• CCU did not always pursue wage garnishments when eligible wages were
identified. Debtors with wages are identified through computer matches of
CCU’s records with wage data from the Department of Labor, Licensing and
Regulation. CCU’s December 2007 match identified 59,000 debtors with
aggregate debt totaling approximately $152 million who had wages that could
possibly be subject to garnishment. However, our test of 10 of these debtors
with accounts totaling approximately $362,000 disclosed that, as of February
28, 2008, CCU had not initiated wage garnishments for 8 of the debtors tested
owing approximately $162,000 that were identified as wage earners as early
as February 2006. A similar condition has been commented upon in our
preceding audit reports dating back to January 1997.
• Computer matches of CCU’s records with the Department of Assessments and
Taxation’s property ownership database were not analyzed in a timely manner
to identify debtors owning property that might be subject to a lien.
Specifically, while several of these matches were performed during the audit
period, as of June 2008, the last match used to identify potential property was
12

--- Page 15 ---
generated in December 2005. A similar condition was noted in our preceding
audit report.
The failure to pursue timely wage garnishments and property liens is significant
because CCU does not pursue certain cases that are more than one year old (such
as MVA insurance lapse cases) due to statute of limitations issues. Consequently,
CCU management advised us that it could not pursue wage garnishments for three
of the ten accounts noted in our test of wage garnishments and could not pursue
property liens for nine of the ten accounts noted in our test of property liens
because they exceeded the one-year limit.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that
a. CCU ensure that timely follow-up collection efforts are made with regard
to wage garnishments (repeat),
b. property lien matches be performed on a regular basis (at least
semiannually) and that the results be pursued on a timely basis (repeat),
and
c. all debt collection efforts be documented (repeat).
Finding 4
CCU did not conduct comprehensive collection actions on 22,000 delinquent
accounts totaling $60 million.
Analysis
CCU did not conduct all possible collection actions on 22,000 delinquent
accounts that, according to CCU records, totaled $60 million as of March 12,
2008. CCU automatically distributed cases to its employee collectors based on
various criteria such as the amount of delinquent account. However, there was a
vacancy in the collector position responsible for cases between $2,000 and
$10,000. As a result, cases assigned to this position were not actively pursued for
collection. While the aforementioned cases would still have been subject to TRIP
recovery, the cases were not subject to all other normal collection actions.
CCU management advised us that the aforementioned condition resulted from a
vacancy during fiscal year 2007 and it was allocating the cases from this collector
to other collectors during fiscal year 2008.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCU ensure that all significant cases are subject to
comprehensive collection actions.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Motor Vehicle Administration Debts
Background
State law authorizes the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to assess penalties
for customers who violate the motor vehicle insurance laws (for example, if a
vehicle’s insurance lapses during the registration period). If the penalties are not
paid, the debts are referred to CCU for collection action. To assist in these
collection efforts, CCU has satellite offices at certain MVA offices, and CCU may
establish installment payment plans for customers who meet certain requirements.
According to CCU records, as of June 30, 2008, MVA had referred $787 million
in debts to CCU for collection assistance.
Finding 5
CCU did not adequately pursue certain delinquent uninsured motorist
penalty accounts.
Analysis
CCU did not adequately pursue recovery of certain lapsed fines and penalties
related to delinquent motor vehicle insurance. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
• Our test of 10 delinquent installment plans with principal balances totaling
$82,086 disclosed that for 7 installment plans with principal balances totaling
$52,604, CCU did not notify the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) of the
collection lapse for periods ranging from four to five months after the last
payment was received. In this regard, CCU had an agreement with MVA that
these cases would be referred three months after the last payment. Timely
notification to the MVA of the delinquent accounts is critical since the MVA
will suspend the registration of debtors that are delinquent on their accounts in
an effort to compel payment.
• Although CCU routinely forwarded certain accounts to a private collection
agency (PCA) for additional collection efforts (for example, accounts less
than $750 and accounts that were six months old without any collection
activity), no such referrals were made for delinquent insurance lapse fines or
penalties. CCU management advised us that it did not refer the insurance
lapse accounts because of logistical problems with receiving payments at the
MVA branches. Specifically, since the PCA had no representatives at the
MVA branches, debtors would not be able to pay their fines and penalties at
the MVA branch when the debtor was there to address their lack of insurance
with MVA. However, we believe that given the total outstanding dollar value
of these accounts, CCU should use all available resources to pursue collection.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCU
a. provide timely notification to the MVA of delinquent installment plans,
and
b. implement an appropriate process to forward delinquent insurance lapse
fines and penalties to the PCA. For example, CCU employees at the
MVA branches could collect such fines and penalties and still credit the
PCA, as applicable.
Finding 6 (Policy Issue)
CCU needs to work with MVA to address the timely collection of delinquent
uninsured motorist penalties.
Analysis
CCU needs to work with the MVA to address the timely collection of delinquent
uninsured motorist penalties. Our audit report covering MVA dated October 19,
2007 noted significant delays in the referral of delinquent uninsured motorist
penalties to CCU. Specifically, we noted that the MVA’s procedure was to wait
until an event occurred (such as the expiration of registration or notification of
new insurance coverage) before assessing an uninsured motorist penalty and
forwarding the account to CCU. MVA management advised us that this practice
was implemented because CCU regulations require all debts referred for
collection be for the total amount due. Since the insurance penalties increase
daily ($7 per day), the MVA would not know the total amount due until the
“event occurs” which would stop the accumulation of the penalty.
As a result of this procedure, significant delays (up to two years) could occur
before accounts are forwarded to CCU. Therefore, the accounts would not be
subject to CCU’s normal collection efforts, such as the State’s automated tax
refund intercept program.
In our MVA audit report, we recommended that CCU work with the MVA to
develop a better method of assessing and collecting uninsured motorist penalties.
In response to our recommendation, the MVA contacted CCU to address this
issue. On April 2, 2008, CCU management notified the MVA that it could not
deviate from its policy requiring all referrals to be for the total amount due. CCU
management provided a number of issues supporting its position. For example, if
a debtor is taken to court by CCU and settles or pays the current balance, CCU
would not be able to collect any additional amounts due.
15

--- Page 18 ---
While we acknowledge that there may be issues with forwarding the debt before
the final amount due is determined, we continue to believe that the magnitude of
the receivables from uninsured motorist penalties warrant modifications to
improve the collectability of the amounts due. In this regard, we were advised by
CCU management that it may be possible for CCU to apply certain collection
procedures (such as tax refund intercept) without the accounts formally being
referred to CCU, since a similar process is employed for a few other State
agencies.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCU work in conjunction with MVA to develop a better
method of assessing and collecting uninsured motorist penalties. For
example, CCU should consider the feasibility of having uninsured motorist
accounts transferred to CCU on an interim basis so that the accounts could
be certified for the State’s tax refund intercept program.
Accounts Receivable
Finding 7
CCU did not ensure the validity of signatures authorizing account
adjustment requests received from State agencies.
Analysis
CCU did not ensure the validity of signatures authorizing account adjustment
requests received from State agencies. Specifically, although adjustment forms
are signed by at least one agency employee, the signatures were not compared to a
listing of authorized signatures maintained at CCU. In this regard, our test of 15
adjustments totaling $485,000, disclosed that for five adjustments totaling
approximately $197,000 authorizing signatures did not match those on file at
CCU. While we were able to confirm the propriety of four of the aforementioned
adjustments with the referring agencies, for one of the adjustments tested
eliminating a $39,000 receivable, we were advised by the referring agency that
the adjustment was processed in error and should be reinstated on CCU’s records.
In response to this issue, CCU management advised us that, rather than require a
review of signed adjustment forms, it would issue monthly summary reports of
adjustments to agencies for their review. According to CCU this process was put
in place in January 2008, however, for adjustments subsequent to that month,
CCU could not document that this process was performed nor did it require
agencies to confirm receipt of such reports. Since the actual forms are the source
for adjustments that can reduce account balances on CCU’s records, CCU should
16

--- Page 19 ---
ensure that such forms are properly authorized and adequately supported.
According to CCU’s records, approximately 31,000 adjustment forms totaling
approximately $27 million were received in fiscal year 2007.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCU develop procedures for ensuring that account
adjustment request forms are signed by an authorized agency employee.
Finding 8
Critical capabilities on the automated accounts receivable system were not
adequately controlled or subject to independent approvals.
Analysis
Critical capabilities on the automated accounts receivable system were not
adequately controlled or subject to independent approvals. For example, our
review disclosed that 60 individuals could change “desk codes” without any
independent approval. Furthermore, all individuals with access to CCU’s
automated receivable system, including those involved in the collection process,
could change account status codes without any independent approval. Access to
these critical capabilities should be restricted to only those individuals who
require such access for their job duties and should be subject to independent
approval.
Desk codes are used to designate who is responsible for working accounts
referred to CCU, and status codes are used to manage accounts at CCU and
designate the types of collection efforts and monitoring that should exist on each
account. Improper code or status changes could result in an accounts not being
actively worked or subject to TRIP.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCU establish adequate controls over all critical
transactions. Specifically, we recommend that access to critical transactions
should be
a. limited to individuals who require such access for their job duties, and
b. subject to independent approval.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Private Collection Agency
Finding 9
CCU did not adequately monitor the private collection agency to ensure they
were pursuing delinquent accounts in accordance with the terms of the
contract.
Analysis
CCU did not adequately monitor the private collection agency (PCA) contracted
to help collect debts to ensure they were pursuing delinquent accounts in
accordance with the terms of the contract. Generally, debts are referred to the
PCA after six months of unsuccessful collection efforts or when CCU does not
consider it to be cost effective to pursue the account with CCU staff. Our review
of CCU’s monitoring of the PCA disclosed the following conditions:
• CCU did not conduct documented inspections of the PCA during the audit
period as provided for in the contract. The contract specifies that the PCA
will implement thorough collection procedures including a reasonable number
of telephone calls, direct mailing efforts, and skip tracing procedures (data
base searches) when necessary. The contract further provides that CCU shall
have the right to inspect the PCA’s records relating to all referred accounts.
We were advised by CCU management that it did monitor the PCA
performance using a variety of onsite and offsite procedures and that the PCA
performed well compared to national benchmarks. However, CCU lacked
documentation of its monitoring efforts to substantiate these claims. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• CCU did not have procedures to ensure that uncollected accounts were
reverted to CCU from the PCA as required. The contract required the PCA to
revert uncollected accounts to CCU after six months of no collection activity.
Although accounts submitted to the PCA are still subject to certain automated
collection procedures (such as TRIP), the accounts are not actively pursued by
CCU while at the PCA. Our review of the PCA’s records disclosed
approximately 19,000 cases that met the contract's criteria for return, but that
had not been returned.
• Although CCU required the PCA to submit annual audited financial
statements and any management letter comments regarding the adequacy of
internal controls, it did not obtain the reports for fiscal years 2005 and 2007.
As a result, there was a lack of assurance that the PCA had adequate
procedures and controls in place to safeguard collections of State funds and
sensitive client information (such as social security numbers).
18

--- Page 21 ---
According to CCU’s records, during fiscal years 2006 through 2008, CCU
referred approximately 161,000 debts totaling $166 million to the PCA.
Collections received by the PCA are deposited directly into a State’s account.
CCU pays the PCA a commission of 7.9 percent of amounts collected on referred
debts. According to CCU’s records, during fiscal year 2008, CCU paid the PCA
commissions totaling approximately $360,000.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCU ensure
a. that referred accounts are subject to all appropriate and required
collection practices, through periodic on-site visits and an examination of
a sample of relevant PCA records, and that the monitoring procedures
performed are documented (repeat);
b. that all uncollected accounts are returned from the contractor when
required; and
c. that the PCA has adequate procedures to safeguard collections of State
funds and sensitive client information by obtaining and reviewing copies
of the PCA’s audited financial statements and management letters.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 10
CCU did not adequately address backup and transfer of critical data.
Analysis
CCU did not adequately address backup and transfer of critical data. CCU stored
backup tapes of its Revenue Collection System (RCS) servers in the same room
where the servers were located. Accordingly, if the facilities which house both
the original data and the backup copies were destroyed by the same disaster, it is
uncertain if all critical information not retained at the Annapolis location could be
recreated. In addition, the backup tapes containing critical accounts receivable
and RCS data were not encrypted. Finally, sensitive information (including
names and social security numbers of debtors) sent to another State agency, via
the United States Postal Service, was also not encrypted.
Best practices according to the Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT)
Information Technology Security Program Standard specify that agencies should
encrypt information when the confidentiality or sensitivity of information must be
maintained while a message is in transit between computing devices and when
confidential or sensitive information is stored in a file or database.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 10
We recommend that
a. the weekly backups of RCS servers be maintained at a secure offsite
location, and
b. CCU encrypt backup data sent to offsite storage and to other State
agencies.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Department of Budget and Management – Central Collection
Unit (CCU) for the period beginning July 1, 2005 and ending February 29, 2008.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CCU’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of CCU’s operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives. Data provided in this report for background or informational
purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to CCU by the
Department of Budget and Management – Office of the Secretary. These support
services (such as payroll) are included within the scope of our audit of the Office
of the Secretary.
CCU’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect CCU’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to CCU that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Department of Budget and Management’s response to our findings and
recommendations, on behalf of CCU, is included as an appendix to this report.
As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our
review of its response.
22

--- Page 26 ---
Department of Budget and Management
Central Collection Unit
Response to Legislative Audits Findings and Recommendations
Audit Period: July 1, 2005 and ending February 29, 2008
Cash Receipts
Finding 1
Adequate accountability and control had not been established over cash receipts.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that
a. employees who have access to cash receipts not have the capability to adjust critical data on the
automated accounts receivable system,
b. CCU establish accountability over mail receipts by recording such payments immediately upon
receipt and by documenting the transfer of funds to the cash office, and
c. CCU establish adequate procedures and controls at the aforementioned satellite office to ensure all
receipts are properly controlled.
We advised CCU on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
DBM-CCU Response 1:
We agree with the recommendations. CCU has changed the Cash Office staff to avoid conflicts with
collection activity and the ability to change addresses. Our new collection system, which is planned to
be implemented in fiscal year 2011, will be designed to prevent employees that have access to
collections to also have the ability to adjust related critical receivable data. With regard to the six
employees identified above they no longer handle cash receipts.
In order to ensure that mail receipts are recorded immediately upon receipt, the agency has placed a
separate Revenue Collection System (RCS) machine in the mailroom. This allows all checks received
via mail to be recorded in a similar manner to that of the Cash Office and deposited directly to the bank
daily.
CCU had implemented personnel changes at the referenced satellite office. This provides for adequate
segregation of duties and re-establishes adequate controls over collections.
Finding 2
CCU lacked adequate procedures for ensuring all deposit adjustments were identified and
properly investigated.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCU ensure all deposit adjustments are identified and pursued. Specifically, we
recommend that CCU

--- Page 27 ---
a. use the adjustment reports received from the State Treasurer’s Office (STO) to identify all deposit
adjustments, and
b. properly investigate and resolve the deposit adjustments and that documentation of such efforts be
maintained (repeat).
DBM-CCU Response 2:
We agree. Accounting did not start using the daily transaction register for the STO until July 2008.
Currently, CCU Accounting uses both the STO report and the daily bank report to investigate all
adjustments and, as appropriate, adjust the appropriate debtor account on CCU’s accounts receivable
system. All investigations are documented.
Debt Collection Efforts
Finding 3
CCU did not adequately pursue potential wage garnishments and/or property liens from debtors.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that
a. CCU ensure that timely follow-up collection efforts are made with regard to wage garnishments
(repeat),
b. property lien matches be performed on a regular basis (at least semiannually) and that the results be
pursued on a timely basis (repeat), and
c. all debt collection efforts be documented (repeat).
DBM-CCU Response 3:
We agree with the recommendations. Wage garnishment is a complex and labor intensive process. This
is an area we believe can be improved with the implementation of the new collection system.
In the meantime, CCU is exploring ways to improve the process including the establishment of written
criteria to make it more efficient. CCU will make best efforts to perform a wage match at least
semiannually to identify those matches that can be pursued for wage garnishment. Based on this work,
CCU will analyze the individual merits of each case to determine the likelihood of positive results. Key
considerations in this analysis include child support and payment of taxes (both of which have priority
over CCU debts), staff resources and minimum amounts that must be earned in the quarter in order to
establish a wage garnish. All efforts will be documented in the account notes.
The existing property match process is also labor intensive as matches are performed utilizing a
computer match on just the first four letters of the last name and address, Further, this is a low yield
area as collections on liens are only recognized when property is sold. CCU is currently working with
the Annapolis Data Center to assist in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the computer match
process.

--- Page 28 ---
CCU will make best efforts to perform a real estate match semiannually and then narrow those matches
to ones that meet the criteria for pursuing property liens. The accounts that are identified to be pursued
for property liens will be worked by collectors and submitted to the Legal Measures unit of CCU. All
efforts will be documented in the account notes.
Finding 4
CCU did not conduct comprehensive collection actions on 22,000 delinquent accounts totaling $60
million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCU ensure that all significant cases are subject to comprehensive collection
actions.
DBM-CCU Response 4:
We agree. This recommendation has already been addressed. CCU reviewed the collector desk
assignments and on August 8, 2008 did a complete reorganization of each desk. As a result, each
collector has a desk assignment and the dollar amount associated with that desk is based on the collector
classification. Currently, all material accounts are assigned to a collector.
If future vacancies occur, accounts will be reallocated to ensure that each material account is assigned to
a collector.
Motor Vehicle Administration Debts
Finding 5
CCU did not adequately pursue certain delinquent uninsured motorist penalty accounts.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCU
a. provide timely notification to the MVA of delinquent installment plans, and
b. implement an appropriate process to forward delinquent insurance lapse fines and penalties to the
PCA. For example, CCU employees at the MVA branches could collect such fines and penalties
and still credit the PCA, as applicable.
DBM-CCU Response 5:
We agree with the recommendations. CCU now adheres to an agreement we have with MVA that
payment plans in default after 90 days will be reported to MVA for re-flagging and further MVA action.
Because the report is run monthly, accounts will be reported to MVA on the first report following the 90
days of non-payment.
CCU doesn’t forward MVA accounts to the PCA because it is not permitted under CCU’s MOU with
MVA to do so. Per current agreed upon policy and practice, an individual who pays off their account
anticipates immediate release of services from MVA. Accounts sent to the PCA and paid to the PCA
would not be able to comply with this requirement (i.e., immediate release could not be granted until

--- Page 29 ---
CCU receives payment or a signed contract and payment plan). However, we will work with MVA to
explore a process and timeframe for sending accounts to the PCA which minimizes the immediate
release issue. This is a complex issue which will require agreement and a modification of the MOU
with MVA as well as modification of the PCA contract.
Finding 6 (Policy Issue)
CCU needs to work with MVA to address the timely collection of delinquent uninsured motorist
penalties.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCU work in conjunction with MVA to develop a better method of assessing and
collecting uninsured motorist penalties. For example, CCU should consider the feasibility of having
uninsured motorist accounts transferred to CCU on an interim basis so that the accounts could be
certified for the State’s tax refund intercept program.
DBM-CCU Response 6:
We agree to work with MVA to explore methods to address the timely collection of delinquent
uninsured motorist penalties. CCU has already been in discussion with MVA to see if some other means
to refer accounts could be developed. However, a number of difficulties and logistical problems have
been identified given the timing and structure of the fine and penalty. We will explore the possibility of
utilizing the State’s Tax Refund Intercept Program (TRIP) to collect these accounts prior to the accounts
being transferred to CCU.
Accounts Receivable
Finding 7
CCU did not ensure the validity of signatures authorizing account adjustment requests received
from State agencies.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCU develop procedures for ensuring that account adjustment request forms are
signed by an authorized agency employee.
DBM-CCU Response 7:
We agree. CCU has procedures in place for ensuring that debt adjustment forms have the proper
authorized signature. As of September 2008, any debt adjustment form that does not have an authorized
signature will be returned to the agency.

--- Page 30 ---
Finding 8
Critical capabilities on the automated accounts receivable system were not adequately controlled
or subject to independent approvals.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCU establish adequate controls over all critical transactions. Specifically, we
recommend that access to critical transactions should be
a. limited to individuals who require such access for their job duties, and
b. subject to independent approval.
DBM-CCU Response 8:
We agree that controls over the automated accounts receivable system could be strengthened. The
CCU’s current automated accounts receivable system allows anyone with access to the collector screen
to have either complete access or no access to desk code and status code changes. We are working with
our vendor to make changes to the program to address this issue. In the meantime, we will restrict the
ability to make changes to status codes and desk codes to management. Our new collection system will
be designed to allow flexibility in this area including the generation of desk code and status code change
reports which will be independently approved.
Private Collection Agency
Finding 9
CCU did not adequately monitor the private collection agency to ensure they were pursuing
delinquent accounts in accordance with the terms of the contract.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCU ensure
a. that referred accounts are subject to all appropriate and required collection practices, through
periodic on-site visits and an examination of a sample of relevant PCA records, and that the
monitoring procedures performed are documented (repeat);
b. that all uncollected accounts are returned from the contractor when required; and
c. that the PCA has adequate procedures to safeguard collections of State funds and sensitive client
information by obtaining and reviewing copies of the PCA’s audited financial statements and
management letters.
DBM-CCU Response 9:
We agree with the recommendations. CCU did not conduct periodic on-site visits as required in the
existing PCA contract. However, effective May 1, 2009, a new PCA contract will be in place. This new
contract includes specific monthly monitoring requirements, which CCU will follow and document.

--- Page 31 ---
Due to staff shortages the PCA did not revert accounts to CCU in a timely manner, nevertheless, the
collection process continued on those accounts. In September, 2008, CCU performed a mass recall of
accounts from the PCA after six months of no collection activity and kept supporting documentation.
Account reversion from the PCA is now performed on a monthly basis.
CCU did receive Audited Financial Statements for calendar year 2003, 2004 and 2006 and subsequently
obtained the 2005 and 2007 statements. Going forward, CCU annually will obtain and review the
PCA’s audited financial statements and management letters.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 10
CCU did not adequately address backup and transfer of critical data.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that
a. the weekly backups of RCS servers be maintained at a secure offsite location, and
b. CCU encrypt backup data sent to offsite storage and to other State agencies.
DBM-CCU Response 10:
We agree. Starting in November 2008, RCS data has been stored at an off site facility weekly at 45
Calvert St. in Annapolis.
CCU, working with DoIT, implemented encryption of backup data sent to offsite storage in January
2009. In addition, procedures for the password encryption of file data sent to other State agencies were
implemented in December 2008. A broader “industry best practices standard” for the encryption of a
variety of media (e.g. e-mail, FTP, CD, etc.) utilizing a single technology is being explored.

--- Page 32 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
A. Jerome Sokol, CPA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Keonna M. Wiley
Senior Auditor
Veronica Arze
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
John F. Nogel
Marva M. Sutherland
Staff Auditors