Title: Baltimore City Police Department Death Relief Fund
Date: 03/01/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d14cc9d7245606744eb
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:21:10.172105
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Baltimore City Police Department
Death Relief Fund
March 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
March 1, 2010
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
A prescribed by Article 24, Section 16-106 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we have audited the Baltimore City Police Department Death Relief Fund for the
period beginning January 1, 2007 and ending January 26, 2010. The Fund is
administered by an elected Board of Trustees consisting of members of the
Baltimore City Police Department. The Fund’s purpose is to pay death benefits to
eligible beneficiaries of deceased Baltimore City Police Department employees.
Our audit did not disclose any findings.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of our
audit by the Fund’s Board of Trustees.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Baltimore City Police Department Death Relief Fund was established as an
instrumentality of the State of Maryland to pay special death benefits to eligible
beneficiaries (such as surviving spouse, children) upon the death of police officers
or civilian employees of the Baltimore City Police Department. The Fund is
administered by an elected Board of Trustees of the Baltimore City Police
Department Death Relief Fund which consists of nine members from the
Baltimore City Police Department (one major or above, one deputy major, one
lieutenant, one sergeant, three patrolmen, one civilian employee, and the Director
of the Fiscal Affairs Division).
During calendar years 2007 through 2009, there were four approved payments
from the Fund for death benefits, which totaled $40,000. As of December 31,
2009, the Fund had a balance of approximately $479,000.
Financial Statement Audits
The Board of Trustees engaged the City of Baltimore Department of Audits to
perform audits of the Fund’s financial statements for the calendar years ended
December 31, 2006, 2007, and 2008. In the related audit reports, the Department
stated that the Fund’s financial statements for the aforementioned years were
presented fairly in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 9, 2007. We determined that the Fund
satisfactorily addressed these findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of the Fund’s internal control. Nor did our audit disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
3

--- Page 6 ---
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Fund. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
As prescribed by Article 24, Section 16-106 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we have audited the Baltimore City Police Department Death Relief Fund for the
period beginning January 1, 2007 and ending January 26, 2010. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
The objectives of this audit were to examine the Fund’s financial transactions,
records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with applicable State
laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the findings
included in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included disbursements from the Fund and compliance
with regulatory requirements. Our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations of
the Fund’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided
in this report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable,
but were not independently verified.
The Fund’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark A. Ermer, CPA
Audit Manager
Athenia M. Rock, CFE
Senior Auditor