Title: Medical Mutual Liability Insurance Society of Maryland

NOTE: OLA only conducts audits of the Medical Mutual Liability Insurance Society of Maryland as required by law.
Date: 02/25/2008
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d15cc9d724560674508
Extracted: 2025-06-17T19:25:06.135197
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Medical Mutual Liability Insurance Society
of Maryland
February 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
February 25, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
As required by the Insurance Article, Section 24-213 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have audited the accounts and transactions of the Medical Mutual
Liability Insurance Society of Maryland (the Society) for the period beginning
January 1, 2005 and ending December 31, 2006.
Our audit disclosed that the Society could improve certain controls over
professional services including legal services obtained from various law firms.
For example, formal written agreements were not established with many of the
firms, so neither the services to be provided nor the basis for payments to the
firms were clearly established.
We also noted that the Society had no formal procurement policy, and had
internal control deficiencies relating to payroll processing and information
systems security.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Society Responsibilities 4
Dividend Declared by the Society 4
Findings and Recommendations 6
Contracts
Finding 1 – Certain Controls Over Professional Services Were Inadequate 6
Finding 2 – Certain Law Firms Hired for Claims Defense Services Were 7
Not Used to the Fullest Extent Permitted by Their Contracts
Procurement
Finding 3 – The Society Lacked a Formal Procurement Policy 8
Payroll
Finding 4 – Internal Control Over Payroll Was Not Sufficient 8
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5 – Security Reporting and Backups of Critical Network Servers 9
Were Inadequate
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Society Responsibilities
The Medical Mutual Liability Insurance Society of Maryland (the Society) was
established under Section 24-203 of the Insurance Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland. The Society operates under a certificate of authority issued by the
Commissioner of the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA), and provides
medical professional liability and general liability insurance to health care
providers exclusively in Maryland. The Society was established as a non-stock
corporation and, accordingly, is not a department, unit, agency or instrumentality
of the State. The Society’s funds are not part of the General Fund of the State.
Since the Society is a domestic insurer, MIA must examine the Society at least
once every five years for compliance with applicable insurance laws and
regulations. In addition, since the Society received rate subsidy payments from
the Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization Fund (the Fund), MIA is
required to conduct an annual audit (as required for any insurer receiving subsidy
payments) to verify the information submitted by the Society when it applied for
such payments from the Fund. Furthermore, the Society obtains an annual audit
of its financial statements by a certified public accounting firm. For the year
ended December 31, 2006, the Society reported in its audited financial statements
net premiums earned of approximately $157.3 million and total losses and
expenses (excluding any investment losses) of approximately $103.5 million
($82.1 million in losses plus $21.4 million in underwriting expenses). The
Society has about 90 employees.
Dividend Declared by the Society
On September 12, 2007, the Society’s Board of Directors (the Board) declared a
dividend to its members in the amount of $68.6 million. Notice of the resolution
adopted by the Board approving and implementing the dividend payment was
provided to the State’s Insurance Commissioner on the same date. Pursuant to the
Society’s participation in the Maryland Health Care Provider Rate Stabilization
Fund (the Fund), as well as certain related statutory requirements, the Society
proposed in its resolution distributing a portion of the dividend to the State
(approximately $44.2 million), with the remainder being distributed to its
policyholders in the form of a credit against their renewal premiums effective
January 1, 2008.
Chapter 1, Laws of Maryland 2005 established the Fund, in part, to retain certain
health care providers in the State by subsidizing their malpractice insurance
4

--- Page 7 ---
premiums for a specified number of years, specifically through fiscal year 2009.
As of December 12, 2007, the Society had received subsidies on behalf of its
policyholders from the Fund for this purpose totaling approximately $72.4
million, and was due an additional $11.7 million for calendar year 2007 for a total
of $84.1 million. However, the law also provides certain conditions under which
an insurer participating in the Fund must pay a portion of any dividend or similar
distribution to the State. On September 13, 2007, the State Insurance
Commissioner issued an order to the Society to cease and desist from advertising,
publicizing, implementing, or otherwise taking any action under or with respect to
the dividend resolution adopted by the Society’s Board of Directors. According
to that order, a question existed as to the exact portion of the dividend to which
the State was entitled. The Commissioner held public hearings on this matter, and
on November 20, 2007, issued a final order requiring the Society to pay the entire
dividend to the State for the benefit of the Fund. Payment was due within 30 days
from the date of the order to allow parties from MIA and the Society to meet and
determine if other alternatives to the Commissioner’s order existed.
On December 12, 2007, the Board rescinded its original dividend declaration of
$68.6 million and declared a new dividend in the amount of approximately $97.9
million. The Board proposed to divide the dividend between the Fund ($84.1
million) and the Society’s policyholders ($13.8 million). Additionally, the
Society proposed that policyholders’ 2008 rates be reduced by eight percent from
the rates the Society charged in 2007. On the same date, the Commissioner and
the Society entered into a consent order agreeing to the terms in the Board’s
proposal. The Society also agreed that in 2008 it would not participate in the
Fund nor would it receive any further disbursements. On December 19, 2007, the
Society transferred $72.4 million ($84.1 million less $11.7 million due to the
Society but not yet received) to MIA to be credited to the Fund.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Contracts
Finding 1
Certain controls over professional services were inadequate. For example,
the Society did not have formal written agreements with many of the law
firms it used for claims defense and general legal services.
Analysis
The Medical Mutual Liability Insurance Society of Maryland (the Society) could
improve certain controls over professional services including legal services
obtained from various law firms. Specifically, the Society lacked formal written
agreements with many of the law firms it used for claims defense and general
legal services. Additionally, for a law firm with whom the Society did have a
written agreement, bonus payments were made to a partner in the firm that were
not provided for in the agreement. Written agreements should be prepared and
should serve to clearly identify critical provisions, such as services to be provided,
the basis for billings and payments, the use of retainers if applicable, and the
responsibility for other expenses incurred.
For example, we noted that there was no formal agreement with the firm that
provided general legal services to the Society, even though the firm was paid
approximately $170,000 during calendar year 2006. Similarly, the Society had no
agreement with the majority of the law firms that provided claims defense
services, including seven firms that received payments totaling approximately
$5.7 million during 2006. Although the Society received hourly rate schedules
from these firms, good business practices dictate that the Society have formal
written agreements with the law firms that it uses. In this regard, we noted that
the Society had written agreements in place with certain other law firms used for
claims defense services.
Furthermore, we noted that a consulting contract effectively guaranteed a certain
level of payments without the related billings requiring documentation of hours
worked or tasks completed. The agreement stipulated that the Society would use
the consultant’s services for no less than 500 hours at a rate of $300 per hour for
each year of the two-year contract. In this regard, the consultant emailed a
payment request twice a month indicating 20 hours worked and no other
supporting detail was submitted.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Society enter into formal written agreements, which
include the terms for any payments, with all law firms from which it obtains
6

--- Page 9 ---
significant services. We also recommend that, for future consulting
agreements, the Society ensure that the basis for amounts to be paid
correlates with the services provided or deliverables received. We also
recommend that sufficient documentation be required to support the
propriety of billings.
Finding 2
Certain law firms hired for claims defense services were not being used to the
fullest extent permitted by their contracts, but the fixed monthly fees paid to
those firms remained constant.
Analysis
Certain law firms hired for claims defense services were not being used to the
fullest extent permitted by their contracts, but the fixed monthly fees paid to those
firms remained constant. As previously mentioned in Finding 1, the Society did
not have formal agreements with most of the law firms it used. However,
contracts were established with four firms used for claims defense services.
Under the terms of those contracts, the Society paid a fixed monthly fee for which
the applicable firm agreed to handle, in any given month, a specified average
number of open claims. However, during calendar year 2006, the average number
of open claims at each of the four firms was 12 to 50 percent below the average
caseloads specified in their contracts, and at the same time additional claims were
assigned at additional costs to firms other than these four firms.
In total, the four firms handled a monthly average of approximately 230 open
claims during calendar year 2006, and were paid approximately $6.3 million. At
the same time, the Society also assigned claims to several other law firms that
were not under similar fixed monthly fee type contracts (see Finding 1). These
firms billed the Society their customary hourly rates. According to the Society’s
records, these firms handled a combined monthly average of approximately 190
open claims during 2006, and were paid approximately $5.7 million.
We recognize that factors other than quantity need to be considered when
assigning claims to law firms. However, considering that claims are not being
assigned to the aforementioned four firms to the fullest extent permitted by their
fixed fee contracts, while additional claims are being assigned at significant costs
to other firms, we believe it is incumbent upon the Society to evaluate its
contracts with the four firms and the assignment of claims for cost effectiveness.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Society evaluate its contracts with the firms, along
with the overall assignment of claims, to determine if changes are needed,
7

--- Page 10 ---
such as adjusting the average caseloads and related monthly fees. We also
recommend that the Society use the four law firms under contract to provide
claims defense services to the fullest extent permitted under the terms of
their contracts.
Procurement Policy
Finding 3
The Society lacked a formal procurement policy.
Analysis
The Society did not have a formal written policy or procedure for the procurement
of goods and services, such as when and how competitive bids are to be solicited
and evaluated. Currently, purchasing discretion is generally left to department
heads and payments are processed based on invoice approval by a designated
employee on the Society’s signature authority list. The list includes the types of
purchases the individual is authorized to approve as well as the approval limit.
The Society’s practice did not provide assurance that consistent and adequate
procedures were employed throughout the Society to ensure effective broad-based
procurement competition and that best values were obtained. During calendar
year 2006, the Society made non-claims related disbursements of approximately
$8.9 million.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that the Society develop a formal comprehensive
procurement policy that establishes standards and minimum requirements
for purchasing goods and services. For example, the policy should address
the solicitation of bids and establish approval requirements prior to the
commitment to purchase.
Payroll
Finding 4
Internal control over the Society’s payroll was not sufficient.
Analysis
Internal control over the Society’s payroll was not sufficient since the processing
of payroll was handled entirely by one individual. Specifically, one employee
added and deleted employees from the payroll, recorded the biweekly hours
8

--- Page 11 ---
worked and leave taken, recorded adjustments such as overtime hours, transmitted
the payroll to the service center for processing, and received the related payroll
checks. In addition, there were no supervisory reviews or approvals of the
biweekly payroll process. As a result of these conditions, errors or irregularities
could occur without detection. During calendar year 2006, the Society’s payroll
expenditures totaled approximately $6.1 million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that supervisory personnel approve the biweekly time
reports and, at least on a test basis, review supporting documentation for
adjustments recorded on the reports, and that these reviews be documented.
We also recommend that the individual who approves the reports release
them to the service center for processing. Finally, we recommend that any
employees involved in the payroll preparation and approval processes not
have access to the related payroll checks. We advised the Society on
accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 5
Security reporting and backups of critical network servers were inadequate.
Analysis
Security reporting and backups of critical network servers were inadequate.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• Security reports for the minicomputer hosting several critical applications
were not generated. Specifically, security reports of user profile changes,
system value changes, and direct modifications of certain critical files were
not generated. As a result, significant security violations could go undetected
by management, thus permitting unauthorized or inappropriate changes to
certain critical files.
• Although backups of critical network servers were performed daily, the
backup tapes were not taken offsite from January 27, 2007 to August 23,
2007. Accordingly, if the facility which houses both the original data and the
backup tapes were destroyed by a disaster, the Society could lose a significant
amount of data or system information that it could not readily recreate.
9

--- Page 12 ---
The Information Systems Department supports the Society’s information
technology infrastructure which includes the computing system that hosts critical
applications, such as accounts receivable and claims payments and provides
networking, telecommunications, and Internet access.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that the Society generate the aforementioned security
reports, review these reports, investigate items as necessary, and document
these reviews and investigations. We also recommend that backup of critical
network servers be stored at a secure offsite location.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
As required by the Insurance Article, Section 24-213 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we have conducted an audit of the accounts and transactions of the
Medical Mutual Liability Insurance Society of Maryland (the Society) for the
period beginning January 1, 2005 and ending December 31, 2006. The audit was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
The objectives of this audit were to examine the Society’s financial transactions,
records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with any applicable
State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. Our audit
procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents
and records, and observations of the Society’s operations. We also tested
transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Society’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings that we consider to be significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect the Society’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit did not
disclose any significant instances of non-compliance with applicable laws, rules,
or regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to the Society
that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
11

--- Page 14 ---
The response from the Society to our findings and recommendations is included
as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the Society
regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
February 21, 2008
Page 2
adjusting the average caseloads and related monthly fees. We also recommend that the
Society use the four law firms under contract to provide claims defense services to the
fullest extent permitted under the terms of their contracts.
Society Response – The Society does evaluate it contracts with the firms identified in
this finding, along with the overall assignment of claims, to determine if changes are
needed. The proposed recommendation to utilize the four firms to the fullest extent
permitted under the terms of their contracts is inconsistent with the purpose of these
contracts. It is vital that Medical Mutual have available premier quality attorneys to
represent our insureds. The maximum case volume outlined in the contracts has always
represented a threshold for the firms, not a guaranteed number of cases. If we were, as
the recommendation says, to assign cases solely based on maximizing our utilization of
these four firms based upon the contracts in place, we would lose access to non-contract
firms available to defend Medical Mutual cases that bring unique strengths in certain
cases and certain venues. Moreover, in light of certain conflict of interest prohibitions
affecting attorneys and the cases they may handle, it is in the best interest of our insured
physicians to maintain the current relationships that are now in place. Medical Mutual
would not want to lose its ability to utilize its non-contracting firms and we strongly
assert that implementing the recommendation would have a detrimental, adverse effect on
our ability to provide quality legal representation to our insureds.
Recommendation 3 – The Society should develop a formal comprehensive procurement
policy that establishes standards and minimum requirements for purchasing goods and
services.
Society Response – While all significant purchases are evaluated thoroughly by senior
management and competitive quotes are received and reviewed, we agree that no formal
written policy exists. We will implement a formal written procurement policy for the
purchasing of goods and services.
Recommendation 4 - The Society should improve the internal controls surrounding the
payroll process, specifically related to segregation of duties and supervisory review of
biweekly payroll records.
Society Response – The Society has numerous internal controls surrounding the payroll
process, and many other compensating controls in place to detect errors or irregularities.
The Society is in the process of upgrading its payroll processing software, which will
allow for increased supervisory review and improve the segregation of duties.
Recommendation 5 – The Society should generate several security reports, and review
these reports, investigate items as necessary, and document these reviews. In addition,
the Society should backup critical network servers and store them at secure offsite
locations.

--- Page 18 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
A. Jerome Sokol, CPA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Senior Auditor
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Lauren R. Crue
Staff Auditor