Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Vital Statistics Administration


NOTE: For the audit period beginning October 15, 2009 a separate audit of DHMH - VSA will be conducted. Previously, VSA was audited and reported on as part of our audit of DHMH - Office of the Secretary.
Date: 05/27/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ecc9d724560674760
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:00:12.876398
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Vital Statistics Administration
May 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Vital Records
Finding 1 – Adequate Controls Were Not Established Over Vital Records 5
Finding 2 – VSA Did Not Exercise Adequate Oversight of Certificate 6
Issuances at the Local Health Departments and Related Cash Receipts
Finding 3 – Database and Application Controls Were Not Sufficient to 7
Protect Critical Data
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Vital Statistics
Administration (VSA) is responsible for registering all births and deaths occurring
in the State; issuing certified copies of birth, death, and marriage certificates; and
compiling and analyzing various vital statistics data. Certified copies of these
certificates are available at the VSA headquarters location in Baltimore. Birth
certificates and certain death certificates are also available at 22 local health
departments (LHDs). Previously, VSA was audited and reported on as part of our
audit of the DHMH – Office of the Secretary. The audit report for the previous
audit of DHMH – Office of the Secretary, which was dated August 9, 2011,
covered the period September 1, 2006 to October 14, 2009.
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2012, VSA operating
expenditures were approximately $3.9 million. According to its records, VSA
collected approximately $9.2 million in vital record fees during fiscal year 2012
for the issuance of approximately 600,000 certified copies of certificates, of
which approximately $2.8 million was collected by LHDs.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the four findings contained
in our preceding audit report, dated August 9, 2011, on DHMH – Office of the
Secretary related to VSA. We determined that VSA satisfactorily addressed these
findings.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Vital Records
Background
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Vital Statistics
Administration (VSA) issues certified copies of birth, death, and marriage
certificates. Information for births since 1939 is maintained on DHMH’s
Electronic Vital Record System (EVRS) which is a web-enabled system used for
the registration of births; issuance of certified copies of birth certificates; and
preparation of vital statistics, data files, and reports. EVRS serves all entities
providing birth data to VSA including the local health departments (LHD),
hospitals, and birthing centers. All death and marriage records, as well as birth
information prior to 1939, are manually maintained (that is, a paper copy of the
record is maintained on file). Applicants for certified copies of birth, death, or
marriage certificates are required to pay a fee for each copy and to provide
sufficient identification and other relevant information to substantiate that the
applicant is eligible to request and receive the certificate in accordance with law
and regulations.
The control and accountability of these documents, especially birth certificates, is
critical because false identification could be a major factor in many types of
crimes, including illegal immigration and flight from justice. In addition, falsified
or stolen vital statistics could allow the holder to obtain other critical documents
(such as passports and driver’s licenses) and improper benefits (such as Social
Security benefits and temporary cash assistance).
Finding 1
Adequate controls were not established over the issuance of certificates,
blank certificate inventories, and EVRS.
Analysis
Adequate controls were not established over the issuance of certificates, blank
certificate inventories, and EVRS at VSA headquarters. As a result, there was a
lack of assurance that transactions processed were proper.
 VSA did not always document that proper identification was sighted prior to
issuing certified copies of birth and death certificates, as required by State
regulations. Specifically, for 15 of the 30 certificate applications tested which
were received in person, electronically, or through the mail, VSA did not
document that it verified the identity of the applicant (for example, by sighting
5

--- Page 8 ---
photo identification) prior to the issuance of the certificate. In addition,
although we were informed that death certificates issued resulting from mail
or electronic requests were independently verified to the related applications
prior to issuance, this verification was not documented.
 The employee who accounted for the blank certificate forms as to certificates
issued, voided, or on hand had routine access to the blank certificates and the
related collections and could print certificates. As a result, certificates could
be issued improperly without detection.
 User access in EVRS was not adequately controlled and monitored. Although
we were advised in April 2013 that a review of access capabilities assigned to
EVRS users was last performed in December 2012, this review was not
documented. In addition, changes to user capabilities were made based on
management’s verbal requests, which were not documented. As a result, VSA
lacked assurance that employee access to EVRS was proper. As of March
2013, there were 602 userids, of which 165 were for its central headquarters
location. The remaining userids were assigned to LHD and hospital
employees.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that VSA
a. document the verification of proper identification prior to issuance of
certificates and verify that certificates issued were properly supported by
completed applications prior to issuance, as required;
b. separate the duties of certificate issuance, access to blank certificates, and
access to cash receipts; and
c. document its periodic review of user access capabilities and ensure that
modifications to user access are authorized in writing.
Finding 2
VSA did not exercise adequate oversight of certificate issuances at LHDs and
related cash receipts.
Analysis
VSA’s oversight of certificate issuances and related collections at the LHDs was
not adequate. Our review disclosed the following conditions:
 During the period from March 2012 to May 2013, VSA conducted reviews of
procedures and controls over cash receipts and critical records management at
19 of the 22 LHDs (VSA scheduled reviews for the remaining three LHDs)
6

--- Page 9 ---
and concluded that certain duties were not properly segregated at 18 LHDs.
However, VSA could not provide us with documentation that the results of the
reviews were communicated to the LHDs.
During our audit, we reviewed procedures and controls at two LHDs, which
issued 32,037 birth and death certificates during fiscal year 2012, with related
collections of approximately $490,000. For the two LHDs we visited, VSA
had identified procedural weaknesses related to collections and the processing
of related certificates, which were confirmed during our review. For example,
at one LHD, one employee unilaterally issued birth certificates, processed the
related collections, and maintained custody of the certificate stock. At the
other LHD, certain employees periodically processed collections and issued
related certificates. As a result, employees could process transactions and
misappropriate related funds without detection. Personnel at both LHDs
advised us that the results of the aforementioned VSA reviews were not
shared with them, as of September 2013. Consequently, corrective actions
had not been taken. The reviews for these two LHDs were conducted by VSA
in March and April 2013.
 VSA headquarters did not use available output reports from EVRS to ensure
birth certificates printed at the LHDs were issued in sequential order and to
reconcile certificates issued to related collections. Rather, VSA relied on
monthly manual reports of certificates printed and issued prepared by LHD
personnel to perform this review and reconciliation. This is critical since
headquarters was responsible for accounting for birth certificates issued at all
locations.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that VSA
a. communicate the results of reviews of operations in writing to the LHDs,
including the aforementioned reviews and take appropriate follow-up
action to ensure the identified deficiencies are corrected; and
b. use output reports from the EVRS to ensure birth certificates were issued
in sequential order and to reconcile certificates issued to related
collections.
Finding 3
Database and application controls were not sufficient to protect critical data.
Analysis
Database and application controls were not sufficient to protect critical data.
7

--- Page 10 ---
 Certain critical security-related events affecting the EVRS database were not
logged. For example, events relating to granting and revoking database
privileges, and modifying and stopping auditing were not logged, although the
database had the capability to log these events. In addition, although failed
sign-on attempts were logged, they were not reviewed. Accordingly,
significant database security violations could go undetected thereby
potentially affecting the integrity of the EVRS data.
 Certain EVRS application password and account settings were not in
compliance with the requirements of the Department of Information
Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy. For example, the EVRS
application did not require passwords to be periodically changed and account
lockout, after a predetermined number of failed logon attempts, was not
enforced.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that VSA
a. log critical EVRS database security and audit events, document the
review and investigation of these events, as well as failed database logon
attempts, and retain such documentation for verification; and
b. ensure that all EVRS application password and account settings are in
compliance with the requirements of the DoIT Information Security
Policy.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Vital Statistics Administration (VSA) of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for the period beginning October 15, 2009
and ending February 24, 2013. The audit was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine VSA’s financial
transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
four findings contained in our preceding audit report on DHMH – Office of the
Secretary, dated August 9, 2011 related to VSA.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, certificate issuance, and
information systems.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
VSA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the VSA Electronic Vital Records System
(EVRS) for the purpose of testing user access and the issuance of certificates. We
performed various tests of the relevant data and determined that the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit. Finally,
we performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our audit objectives. The reliability of data used in this report for background or
informational purposes was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to VSA by DHMH’s
Office of the Secretary and related units. These support services (such as payroll,
purchasing, maintenance of accounting records, related fiscal functions, and
certain aspects of the network information systems related to EVRS) are included
within the scope of our audits of the Office of the Secretary.
VSA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
9

--- Page 12 ---
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect VSA’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to VSA that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DHMH’s response, on behalf of VSA, to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise
DHMH regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 1
Adequate controls were not established over the issuance of certificates, blank
certificate inventories, and EVRS.
Auditor’s Recommendations:
We recommend that VSA
a. document the verification of proper identification prior to issuance of certificates
and verify that certificates issued were properly supported by completed
applications prior to issuance, as required;
b. separate the duties of certificate issuance, access to blank certificates, and access
to cash receipts; and
c. document its periodic review of user access capabilities and ensure that
modifications to user access are authorized in writing.
Administration’s Response:
a. We concur with the finding and are currently following the auditor’s recommendation
The Administration will continue to document the verification of proper identification
prior to issuance of certificates and verify that certificates issued were properly
supported by completed applications prior to issuance, as required. In the future, the
Administration will check the “mailed out” box on the application rather than writing
“mailed out” on the application, as has been the practice when certificates are mailed
to customers who provide alternative identification documents.
b. The Administration will separate the duties of certificate issuance, access to blank
certificates, and access to cash receipts to the extent possible.
c. We concur with the finding. The Administration will document its periodic review of
user access capabilities and ensure that modifications to user access are authorized in
writing. All EVRS supervisors have acknowledged by signing user agreement that
they will inform IT staff of changes to user status and access needs. In addition, bi-
annually we send out a listing of user access to the supervisors for review to
determine whether any changes are needed. All change requests are stored
electronically in an email folder on a password protected computer.

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 2
VSA did not exercise adequate oversight of certificate issuances at LHDs and
related cash receipts.
Auditor’s Recommendations:
We recommend that VSA
a. communicate the results of reviews of operations in writing to the LHDs,
including the aforementioned reviews and take appropriate follow-up action to
ensure the identified deficiencies are corrected; and
b. use output reports from the EVRS to ensure birth certificates were issued in
sequential order and to reconcile certificates issued to related collections.
Administration’s Response:
a. The Administration concurs with the recommendation that it should communicate to
LHDs in writing, in addition to verbally, the results of the periodic review of
procedures and controls over cash receipts and critical documents. This will be done
within 14 days of completion of reviews. Currently, deficiencies are shared with the
Local Health Officers. Going forward, DVR will provide this information to the
supervisory staff at the local health departments as well. DVR will communicate to
Local Health Officers by June 30, 2014 that duties should be segregated and that an
employee who does not work in the vital records unit must conduct a periodic
inventory of security paper on hand.
b. The Administration concurs and has implemented the recommendation that output
reports from EVRS should be utilized to ensure the birth certificates are issued in
sequential order and to reconcile certificates issued to related collections.
Finding 3
Database and application controls were not sufficient to protect critical data.
Auditor’s Recommendations
We recommend that VSA
a. log critical EVRS database security and audit events, document the review and
investigation of these events, as well as failed database logon attempts, and retain
such documentation for verification; and
b. ensure that all EVRS application password and account settings are in
compliance with the requirements of the DoIT Information Security Policy.

--- Page 16 ---
Administration’s Response:
a. We concur with the finding and have obtained the auditing tool which is a server and
database auditing and compliance utility. We have implemented a variety of reports
to log critical EVRS database security, audit security and logon events. Daily reports
are reviewed by staff. The review is documented and stored electronically on a
password protected computer.
b. We concur with the recommendation and have implemented the application password
and account settings per the DoIT Information Security Policy.

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Elaine D. Portnoy
Senior Auditor
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Staff Auditor