Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Springfield Hospital Center
Date: 04/13/2009
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1bcc9d7245606746ba
Extracted: 2025-06-17T22:45:38.315210
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Springfield Hospital Center
October 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Springfield Hospital Center (SHC) is a State-operated psychiatric facility located
in Sykesville, Maryland. SHC operates as a unit of the Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene’s Behavioral Health Administration and provides acute, sub-
acute, and long-term inpatient services to State residents. SHC is accredited by
The Joint Commission, which evaluates and monitors health care organizations
nationwide to ensure the highest quality of care is provided. During fiscal year
2014, SHC had a licensed capacity of 522 inpatients, a budgeted average daily
population of 228, and an actual average daily population of 225. According to
the State’s records, SHC’s operating expenditures totaled approximately $71.2
million during fiscal year 2014.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated February 3, 2012. We determined that SHC
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Maintenance Contracts
Finding 1
A management employee exercised virtually complete control over all aspects
of the procurement and related invoice approvals for maintenance contracts,
resulting in questionable activity with one contractor.
Analysis
A Springfield Hospital Center (SHC) management employee controlled virtually
all aspects of the procurement and related invoice approvals for maintenance
contracts, resulting in questionable activity with one contractor with whom the
employee appeared to have conducted personal business. Specifically, there was
a lack of separation of duties as this employee handled all aspects of the
procurement process for maintenance contracts (including the solicitation of bids,
evaluation of bids, and selection of the winning bidder), monitored the work, and
approved the related invoices for payment. During the period from July 2011 to
January 2015, this employee awarded 33 contracts for electrical, plumbing, and
3

--- Page 6 ---
construction services and supplies totaling approximately $439,300 to this
contractor and approved the related invoices for payment. These contracts
represented more than one-third of the total dollar value of all maintenance
contracts awarded during this same period. Furthermore, each contract awarded
was for an amount less than $25,000, which is the threshold over which approval
is required by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Office of
Procurement and Support Services (OPASS).
Our review of the 33 contracts disclosed numerous instances of SHC’s failure to
comply with procurement regulations and other questionable activities that
appeared to compromise the integrity and competitive nature of the procurement
process.
 Bid solicitations and the resulting contract awards for seven contracts totaling
$149,600 (each valued at amounts greater than $15,000) were not publically
advertised on eMaryland Marketplace, as required. State procurement
regulations require that bid solicitations and resulting contract awards
exceeding $15,000 be publically advertised on eMaryland Marketplace.
Thirteen of the 33 contracts reviewed totaling $281,430 were valued at
amounts greater than $15,000.
 Our review of the bid information related to six contracts, totaling $92,800,
for plumbing and construction services disclosed certain anomalies that raised
questions about the validity of the bids and whether a competitive process
was, in fact, used to select the winning bidder. We noted that three of the six
contractors who purportedly submitted losing bids for these contracts were not
in good standing with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation
(SDAT) at the time some bids were submitted. In addition, three of the
contractors (including two mentioned above) appeared to have connections to
the winning contractor. For example, SDAT records indicated that the
addresses for two of the contractors were in very close proximity to the
address of the winning contractor or to the winning contractor’s relative.
Furthermore, 9 of the 13 losing bids did not contain the bidder’s contact
information (such as complete address or phone number) and the bid forms
used by two of the contractors were similar in appearance. Finally, for one
contract valued at $14,800, the bid price on the winning contractor’s bid was
altered to decrease the amount by $1,200 after it was received by SHC—
making it the lowest bid by a difference of $100.
 Three procurements for electric distribution and emergency generator
maintenance were artificially split and were awarded as six contracts, totaling
approximately $72,500, in an apparent attempt to avoid either OPASS
4

--- Page 7 ---
approval or eMaryland Marketplace bid solicitation requirements.
Specifically, the first year and optional second year for the same service was
split into two contracts instead of being combined into a single contract in
accordance with State procurement regulations. For example, a two-year
electrical distribution maintenance procurement for $36,660 was split into two
annual contracts, each for $18,330.
 Four procurements to obtain and deliver street light poles were questionable.
Specifically, the related solicitations did not specify the number of street light
poles needed. Rather, the solicitations were structured so that the bidder
would specify how many street light poles could be supplied without
exceeding a cost of $25,000, the dollar amount requiring OPASS approval.
Four contracts totaling $96,100 were awarded during the period from
September 2011 to October 2014 using this solicitation process and each
contract resulted in fewer street light poles being provided than the original
contract which was for 16 poles.
 The management employee approved payments totaling $19,000 for electrical
transformer repair work, but the related quote was only $12,500. SHC could
not provide us with an explanation for the $6,500 difference.
SHC was unaware of these questionable activities until our audit findings were
brought to its attention in May 2015. We were advised by SHC that the employee
responsible for these questionable activities resigned in lieu of termination in June
2015. We referred these matters to the Office of the Attorney General – Criminal
Division. A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal act
has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
According to State records, SHC paid the aforementioned contractor
approximately $523,300 during the period from July 2011 to January 2015. This
amount included payments related to these contracts totaling $434,750 and
payments for additional maintenance related goods and services, in amounts less
than $5,000, using the State’s corporate purchasing credit card totaling $88,550.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHC
a. properly separate the duties over the procurement, contract monitoring,
and invoice approval functions for maintenance services; and
b. ensure procurements are performed in accordance with State regulations
and DHMH requirements.
We advised SHC on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Springfield Hospital Center
(SHC) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for the period beginning
July 29, 2011 and ending January 27, 2015. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine SHC’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements, disbursements, payroll, corporate
purchasing cards, and pharmaceutical inventories. We also determined the status
of the finding contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
SHC’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as expenditure data) and the
State’s Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor
administering the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card
activity). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
various sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used
during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
6

--- Page 9 ---
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
SHC’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding that we consider to be a significant deficiency in the
design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect SHC’s ability to
maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently, and/or
comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. This finding is also regarded
as a significant instance of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Another less significant finding was communicated to SHC that did
not warrant inclusion in this report.
The Department’s response, on behalf of SHC, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
A management employee exercised virtually complete control over all aspects
of the procurement and related invoice approvals for maintenance contracts,
resulting in questionable activity with one contractor.
Auditor’s Recommendation:
We recommend that SHC
a. properly separate the duties over the procurement, contract monitoring,
and invoice approval functions for maintenance services;
b. ensure procurements are performed in accordance with State regulations
and DHMH requirements.
Administration’s Response:
a. SHC concurs with the recommendation and has properly separated the duties
over the procurement, contract monitoring, and invoice approval functions for
maintenance services. SHC immediately pursued appropriate administrative
action to ensure accountability when it was discovered that established
procurement policies and procedures were not being followed. Springfield has
strengthened its internal control processes through policy, education, and
monitoring. Springfield developed a new Policy on Procurement of
Commodities, Equipment and Services that establishes a separation of duties
and stronger internal controls. Under the new policy, all procurement activity
above the credit card level will be performed by the Director of Purchasing
(commodities/equipment) or the Director of Contracts (services). The Chief
Financial Officer will be responsible to ensure that the proper approval has
been obtained for payment processing and that payments do not exceed the
amount of the contract, requisition or purchase order. This new policy was
implemented on September 1, 2015.
b. SHC concurs with the recommendation. The new policy will ensure that all
State regulations and DHMH requirements for procurement are being
followed. The Small Procurement Quick Reference Chart has been
incorporated into the policy to assist employees with some of these
regulations and requirements. All support services department heads will be
met with individually and instructed of importance of diligence when making
purchases/contracts. Additionally, all SHC personnel involved in the
procurement process will be required to review the new policy annually and
acknowledge their understanding of the policy with their signature and date.
All education will be in place by October 1, 2015.
An online requisition system is being developed that will aid in the oversight
process. Additionally, a listing of all contracts, with vendor name and amounts
will be established. The CEO and COO will review list monthly for
questionable activities. The Office of Inspector General, Division of Internal
Audits will monitor for compliance.

--- Page 12 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditor
Julian N. Greene
Kathryn A. Jones
Staff Auditors