Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Jessup Region


NOTE: OLA no longer conducts a separate audit of the Jessup Region due to the establishment of the DPSCS - Central Region Finance Office.
Date: 07/13/2010
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d18cc9d7245606745b0
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:27:46.478450
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Jessup Region
July 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
July 13, 2010
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have audited the Jessup Region of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services for the period beginning August 21, 2006 and ending
September 21, 2009. The Region comprises the Jessup Correctional Institution,
the Maryland Correctional Institution – Jessup and, until its closing in March
2007, the Maryland House of Correction.
Our audit disclosed that improvements were needed to strengthen controls over
inmate funds, purchases, equipment, and materials and supplies. For example,
critical reconciliations of the Region’s inmate fund records were not performed on
a timely basis, and significant equipment purchases were not recorded in the
Region’s records.
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services’ response, on behalf
of the Region, to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of this audit by the
Region.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 4
Findings and Recommendations 5
Inmate Funds
Finding 1 – Critical Reconciliations Were Not Performed on a 5
Timely Basis
Purchases
Finding 2 – Proper Internal Controls Were Not Established Over the 6
Processing of Certain Purchasing Transactions
Equipment
Finding 3 – Equipment Records Were Not Adequately Maintained 6
Materials and Supplies
* Finding 4 – Certain Record Keeping and Procedural Deficiencies Were 7
Noted
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Jessup Region is a separate budgetary unit within the Department of Public
Safety and Correctional Services and consists of the Jessup Correctional
Institution and the Maryland Correctional Institution – Jessup. These institutions
are maximum and medium security facilities, respectively, for adult male
offenders. A third institution, the Maryland House of Correction, was closed in
March 2007 due to the facility’s antiquated design and safety concerns.
Approximately 980 inmates were transferred out of the institution, with most
remaining within the Department’s Division of Correction. Although the facility
no longer houses inmates, certain other functions remain there, including an
infirmary and a maintenance unit which are now under the control of the Jessup
Correctional Institution. As of June 30, 2009, the Region had a total population
of 2,708 inmates, and its fiscal year 2010 appropriation provided for 935
employee positions, including 735 correctional officers. According to the State’s
records, the Region’s expenditures totaled approximately $100 million during
fiscal year 2009.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the five findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated February 16, 2007. We determined that the
Region had satisfactorily resolved four of those findings. The remaining finding
is repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Inmate Funds
Finding 1
Critical reconciliations were not performed on a timely basis.
Analysis
Critical reconciliations were not performed on a timely basis. Consequently,
there was a lack of assurance that all recorded transactions were authorized and
accurately posted. Specifically, we noted the following deficiencies:
 The Region had not reconciled the aggregate balance of inmate accounts
maintained on its records with the corresponding records of the State
Comptroller since February 2009. As of September 30, 2009, the Region’s
balance ($604,000) was less than the State Comptroller’s balance ($744,000)
by approximately $140,000.
 The Region’s checking account used to process inmate funds disbursements
had not been reconciled with the corresponding bank records since April 30,
2009. As of September 30, 2009, the two records had negative balances of
approximately $15,000 and $3,000 respectively. In addition, according to the
bank’s records, the Region paid service charges in August and September
2009 totaling $8,240 for 206 nonsufficient fund items (checks). We were
advised by the Region’s management that it wrote checks assuming that
deposits would be made in time to allow the checks to clear the bank.
Inmate accounts include funds earned by or received on behalf of inmates. These
funds, which are deposited with the State Treasurer, can be saved or inmates can
direct the Region to disburse the funds to third parties. Periodically, funds are
transferred to the Region’s checking account to make disbursements. Inmate fund
revenues and disbursements during fiscal year 2009 totaled approximately $3.3
million and $3.4 million, respectively.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Region
a. complete the aforementioned reconciliations, investigate differences
noted, and take appropriate corrective action;
b. in the future, complete all account reconciliations on a monthly basis,
investigate all differences, and document supervisory review and
approval of the reconciliations; and
5

--- Page 8 ---
c. only write checks if the corresponding funds are available in the bank
account, thus avoiding unnecessary bank charges.
Purchases
Finding 2
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of certain
purchasing transactions.
Analysis
Proper internal controls were not established over the processing of certain
purchasing transactions. Specifically, the Region’s online approval rules
allowed six employees that had the capability to initiate purchase orders to also
make changes to those transactions after independent approvals were obtained.
Consequently, the aforementioned employees could make unauthorized changes
to critical information (such as vendors and amounts) without the changes being
subject to independent approval.
According to the State’s accounting records, during fiscal year 2009, the Region
used the State’s Financial Management Information System to process
disbursements totaling approximately $22 million, of which $6.5 million related
to purchase orders.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the Region establish approval requirements that
prevent employees with the capability to initiate purchasing transactions
from modifying the transactions after related approvals have been obtained.
Equipment
Finding 3
Equipment records were not adequately maintained.
Analysis
Equipment records were not adequately maintained as required by the Department
of General Services’ (DGS) Inventory Control Manual. Specifically, we noted
that the equipment detail records were not updated for all purchases. Our test of
10 equipment purchases totaling $202,000 disclosed that 5 equipment purchases
6

--- Page 9 ---
totaling $168,000, made between December 2006 and December 2008 for the two
institutions, had not been recorded in the detail records as of the time of our
review in November 2009.
We were advised by Region personnel that detailed equipment records at one
institution had not been updated since February 2009 and that the equipment
control account for the other institution had not been maintained since April 2009.
As a result, reconciliations between detail records and control accounts could not
be performed for either institution. According to its records, as of June 30, 2009,
the Region’s equipment inventory totaled approximately $5.4 million.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual requires that equipment detail and control
records be properly maintained on a current basis and periodically reconciled.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that
a. equipment detail records and control accounts be maintained on a
current basis, and
b. control accounts be periodically reconciled to the aggregate balance of the
related detail records.
Materials and Supplies
Finding 4
Certain record keeping and procedural deficiencies existed that precluded
adequate internal control over materials and supplies.
Analysis
Certain record keeping and procedural deficiencies existed that precluded
adequate internal control over materials and supplies. According to the State’s
records, during fiscal year 2009, the Region’s materials and supplies expenditures
totaled approximately $7.1 million. As of June 30, 2009, the book value of
materials and supplies reported to DGS totaled approximately $1.4 million. Our
review disclosed the following conditions:
 Perpetual inventory records for materials and supplies were not consistently
maintained. Specifically, we were advised by Region personnel that the
perpetual inventory records for certain categories of supplies such as office
supplies, maintenance supplies, janitorial supplies and clothing were not
maintained during our audit period. Our test of 14 purchases in June and
August 2009 totaling approximately $95,000, for items such as dietary items
7

--- Page 10 ---
and janitorial supplies, disclosed that, as of November 2009, 13 items totaling
$49,000 had not been recorded on the perpetual inventory records.
Furthermore, a comparison on December 9, 2009 of our physical count of 10
items, costing $25,700, from the dietary, janitorial supplies, clothing, and
office supplies inventories, to the perpetual inventory records disclosed
differences for all 10 items totaling $23,697 (shortages of $13,892 and
overages of $9,805).
 The Region lacked adequate procedures to ensure that withdrawals of
materials and supplies posted to the perpetual inventory records agreed with
the actual items and quantities received by the unit that requisitioned the
goods. Specifically, when withdrawals were posted to the inventory records,
the requisition forms used to post the withdrawals were not verified to
independent documentation of supplies actually received (documentation
provided by the unit that received the goods).
 The custodian of the storerooms at one institution was responsible for
reconciling physical inventory counts to the perpetual records that were
maintained. As a result of this lack of separation of duties, the Region’s
management may not readily detect any misappropriations or irregularities
involving its materials and supplies inventories.
The DGS Inventory Control Manual specifies the requirements for proper
maintenance of perpetual inventory records, controls over inventory withdrawals,
and adequate separation of employee duties. Some of these conditions have been
commented upon in our preceding audit reports, including one which has been
commented upon in our audit reports dating back to 1992.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that the Region establish proper internal controls over
materials and supplies (repeat). Detailed recommendations were provided to
the Region which, if implemented, should correct the conditions identified.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Jessup Region of the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services for the period beginning August 21, 2006 and ending
September 21, 2009. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the Region’s
financial transactions, records and internal controls, and to evaluate its
compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also
determined the status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included inmate and welfare funds, purchases and
disbursements, cash receipts, equipment, payroll, and materials and supplies. Our
audit procedures included inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of
documents and records, and observations of the Region’s operations. We also
tested transactions and performed other auditing procedures that we considered
necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided in this report for background
or informational purposes were deemed reasonable, but were not independently
verified.
The Region’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations including the safeguarding of
assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings related to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect the Region’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to the Region that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations, on behalf of the
Region, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
10

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
David S. Propper
Senior Auditor
Carey L. Harper
Staff Auditor