Title: Uninsured Employers' Fund
Date: 11/07/2014
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d72456067471a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:54:52.304493
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Uninsured Employers’ Fund
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Unfunded Liability 5
Outstanding Claim Against the Subsequent Injury Fund 5
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Accounts Receivable
* Finding 1 – The Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) did not conduct 7
independent reviews of accounts receivable transactions.
* Finding 2 – UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue collection of 8
delinquent accounts. As of January 5, 2017, there were 3,980
delinquent accounts totaling $5.2 million that should have been
referred to the Department of Budget and Management’s Central
Collection Unit.
Claims Processing
* Finding 3 – UEF did not adequately review indemnity and medical 11
claim payments for propriety.
* Finding 4 – UEF violated State procurement regulations to obtain 12
claims processing and related services from 11 vendors, did not have
written agreements, and did not adequately monitor the vendors’
services and verify their billings.
Cash Receipts
* Finding 5 – UEF did not have adequate procedures and controls to 16
ensure that all collections were deposited.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6 – Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by 19
UEF was stored without adequate safeguards.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
* Finding 7 – Security event monitoring, access controls, and user access 19
monitoring were not sufficient.
* Finding 8 – UEF did not have an information systems disaster recovery 21
plan.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) is responsible for paying workers’
compensation awards (including medical payments) to claimants who failed to
receive payments from their employers that did not have workers’ compensation
insurance as required by State law. The principal source of funding for claim
payments and UEF operating expenses is an assessment (currently two percent)
collected from employers and insurance companies on awards and settlement
agreements approved by the Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC)
involving permanent disability and death. UEF also collects fines and penalties
assessed by WCC on uninsured employers and on insurers who fail to comply
with certain statutory filing requirements. Finally, UEF bills uninsured employers
for UEF payments made on their behalf to injured workers.
According to UEF’s records for fiscal year 2016, income (primarily assessments)
totaled approximately $9.5 million, claim payments (indemnity and medical
payments) totaled approximately $9.5 million, and operating expenses totaled
approximately $1.2 million. According to State records, UEF’s fund balance as
of June 30, 2016 totaled approximately $8.8 million.
Unfunded Liability
UEF’s most recent actuarial study performed in January 2015 indicated that, at
that time, UEF had an unfunded liability for its claims of approximately $16
million. The unfunded liability results from claim obligations being funded on a
pay-as-you-go basis. Accordingly, obligations that become due in future periods
will have to be paid from future assessments collected from employers and
insurance companies.
Outstanding Claim Against the Subsequent Injury Fund
On April 10, 2012, UEF requested that the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF) return
$544,000 in assessments that UEF believed it had erroneously paid in connection
with a 2006 memorandum of understanding (MOU). The MOU addressed the
processing of workers’ compensation claims associated with employees of the
former Bethlehem Steel Corporation (BSC), which had filed for federal
bankruptcy protection in 2001. As of June 2017, UEF’s claim was still
outstanding.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Under the terms of the 2006 MOU, the Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance
Company (CEIC), formerly the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund, on behalf of the
State of Maryland, was to process workers’ compensation claims of former BSC
employees, and UEF was to reimburse CEIC for the claims paid. In accordance
with the MOU, UEF reimbursed CEIC for the claim payments but subsequently
discovered that some of these payments improperly included SIF assessments
relating to BSC claims. UEF requested SIF to return the assessment payments
related to these BSC claims, which it valued at $544,000.
On April 9, 2014, UEF requested an advice from the Office of the Attorney
General (OAG) as to whether SIF should reimburse UEF for these assessments.
While a written advice was not received, UEF management advised us that the
OAG verbally recommended that the issue be directed to the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM). UEF did not pursue the issue with DBM, as
recommended, and made no additional attempts to recover the funds from SIF
until December 2016. At that time, UEF provided SIF with details of the specific
BSC assessments it was attempting to recover. SIF has preliminarily agreed to
reimburse UEF for certain of these assessments totaling approximately $441,468
(which includes lost interest). UEF and SIF believe the proposed resolution
should be referred to the Governor’s Office for review prior to finalization. As of
June 2017, the issue had not been referred to the Governor’s Office.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the seven findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated November 7, 2014. We determined
that UEF did not satisfactorily address any of these findings and, therefore, these
seven findings are repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Accounts Receivable
Background
The Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) maintains accounts receivable records for
its billings to insurance companies and employers. These billings include
assessments (currently two percent on certain Workers’ Compensation
Commission [WCC] awards), fines and penalties assessed by WCC, and
reimbursements due from uninsured employers for claimant awards and medical
payments made on their behalf. UEF is also required to transfer delinquent
accounts to the Department of Budget and Management’s Central Collection Unit
(CCU) for additional collection actions. The vast majority of UEF’s accounts
receivable balance is related to amounts due from uninsured employers.
According to UEF’s records, approximately $9.5 million was collected for fiscal
year 2016, consisting of $8.7 million in assessments, $717,000 in recovery of
claim payments and CCU collections, $105,000 in interest on the fund balance,
and $4,000 in fines and penalties. As of January 5, 2017, UEF’s records reflected
an accounts receivable balance totaling approximately $77.7 million, including
accounts totaling $67.8 million that had been referred to CCU for additional
collection actions. UEF’s detail records reflected approximately 11,700 accounts
(including multiple accounts for many employers).
Finding 1
UEF did not conduct independent reviews of accounts receivable
transactions.
Analysis
UEF did not conduct independent reviews of accounts receivable transactions.
 Verifications to ensure the accuracy of WCC awards entered in UEF’s
automated accounts receivable system were not performed. Ensuring the
accuracy of award information in UEF’s automated accounts receivable
system is crucial since the award information is used to automatically
calculate the assessments and to generate billings to employers and insurance
companies.
Our test of 10 awards received during the period from January 2015 to July
2016, totaling approximately $17.7 million, disclosed that, because UEF
entered the award amounts incorrectly in its accounts receivable records, the
7

--- Page 10 ---
two percent assessments for 6 awards totaling $14.2 million were improperly
calculated, resulting in over-billings and under-billings totaling $54,800. For
example, the two percent assessment for one award totaling $10.7 million was
improperly calculated and billed as $194,520 instead of $214,520 (resulting in
an under-billing of $20,000). UEF was not aware of these improper
assessments until we brought them to its attention in February 2017, which
was more than six months after the errors had occurred.
 The three employees responsible for processing adjustments to the accounts
receivable records could do so without independent review and approval.
According to UEF’s records, adjustments to decrease accounts receivable
balances or to alter payments applied to accounts receivable balances totaled
approximately $2.4 million during the period from November 1, 2013 to
November 30, 2016.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our three preceding audit reports
dating back to May 2009.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UEF establish a process to ensure the propriety of
transactions recorded in its accounts receivable records. Specifically, we
recommend that UEF perform independent reviews to ensure that all WCC
awards and properly authorized adjustments are accurately entered into its
accounts receivable records (repeat). We advised UEF on accomplishing the
necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Finding 2
UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue collection of delinquent
accounts. As of January 5, 2017, there were 3,980 delinquent accounts
totaling $5.2 million that, based on their age, should have been referred to
CCU.
Analysis
UEF did not bill outstanding accounts and refer delinquent accounts to CCU, as
required.
 UEF’s automated accounts receivable system did not generate dunning notices
in accordance with CCU requirements. Although the system tracked the
accumulated accounts receivable balances for uninsured employer accounts
(including billings for assessments, medical payments, award payments, and
penalties and fines), the system did not generate dunning notices for these
8

--- Page 11 ---
accounts and UEF did not manually send dunning notices except for penalties
and fines. In addition, for insurance company accounts, the system was not
programmed to continue generating monthly dunning notices after the
accounts were delinquent for more than 90 days, and UEF did not manually
send subsequent dunning notices. CCU regulations, as amended for UEF,
require that written demands be made at 30-day intervals and that outstanding
accounts which remain uncollected for 180 days be transferred to CCU for
further collection activity. Consequently, all required dunning notices were
not generated before accounts were due to be referred to CCU.
 UEF had not referred delinquent accounts to CCU as required. Based on our
analysis of UEF’s records as of January 5, 2017, there were 3,980 delinquent
accounts totaling $5.2 million that, based on their age, should have been
referred to CCU. This included 31 delinquent accounts with balances greater
than $30,000 totaling approximately $1.7 million that had been delinquent for
periods ranging from 187 days to more than 9 years. One of these accounts
totaling $35,300 had been delinquent for more than 25 years. Delays in the
pursuit of outstanding debts may decrease the likelihood of collecting the
funds.
 The account aging reports produced by UEF’s automated accounts receivable
system were not accurate and reliable for use in monitoring its accounts
receivable. Specifically, the amount of delinquent accounts reported as
having been referred to CCU on the monthly aging summary report ($67.8
million) did not agree to a detailed report of delinquent accounts that were
referred ($20 million) – a difference of $47.8 million. UEF could not explain
these discrepancies. An accurate monthly report to age delinquent accounts is
required by the Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual
and is a critical tool to help UEF monitor unpaid accounts and related
collection efforts, including delinquent accounts referred to CCU.
 UEF had not established a process to identify and refer delinquent employers
for license suspension. State law permits UEF to request State licensing
authorities to suspend the applicable licenses or permits of employers who
failed to pay an assessment or penalty or who failed to reimburse UEF for the
payment of an award. Although UEF notified delinquent employers that its
license or permit could be suspended if payment was not received, UEF had
not attempted to refer any employers for license or permit suspension as an
enforcement tool for delinquent accounts.
Conditions regarding UEF’s failure to ensure accounts are adequately monitored
and pursued for collection have been noted during our three preceding audits
9

--- Page 12 ---
dating back to May 2009. In addition, the conditions regarding the inaccuracy of
the monthly account aging reports and the failure to refer delinquent employers
for license suspension were noted in our preceding audit report. According to
UEF’s records, during the period from November 2013 to January 2017, accounts
receivable increased $26.1 million from $51.6 million to $77.7 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UEF
a. investigate and take the necessary corrective actions to resolve the noted
deficiencies (generate dunning notices and produce accurate accounts
receivable aging reports) to ensure that the accounting system provides
sufficient information to monitor and pursue collection activities (repeat),
b. refer delinquent accounts to CCU for collection as required (repeat), and
c. establish a process to identify and refer delinquent employers to
applicable State licensing authorities for license or permit suspension
(repeat).
Claims Processing
Background
UEF pays claimants who are not reimbursed by their employers for injuries
associated with their employment. The payments to these claimants are based on
workers’ compensation awards (including medical payments) as determined by
the WCC. These awards include funds for the indemnification of injuries and for
future medical claims. Indemnification of injury funds are paid to the claimants
or their applicable beneficiaries in biweekly installments or as a lump sum;
medical claim payments are made as incurred directly to medical providers for
services provided to claimants.
UEF determines a claimant’s initial eligibility by reviewing the WCC award, and
periodically ensures claimants
are still eligible for payment UEF Claims-Related Payments
(such as by reviewing physician January 2014 to April 2017
reports). UEF also determines Type of Payment Amount
the amounts of the biweekly Indemnity Payments $12,054,053
indemnity payments and uses a Medical Provider Claim Payments 13,511,542
Claims Related Services Payments 3,467,109
third-party vendor to process
TOTAL $29,032,704
medical claims received from
Source: State Accounting Records
medical providers.
10

--- Page 13 ---
According to State accounting records, during the period from January 2014
through April 2017, approximately $29.0 million was disbursed to claimants for
indemnification of injuries and to providers and vendors for medical claims and
related expenses, as depicted in the preceding table. As of April 28, 2017,
according to UEF’s records, 78 claimants were receiving biweekly indemnity
payments.
Finding 3
UEF did not adequately review indemnity and medical claim payments for
propriety.
Analysis
UEF did not adequately review indemnity and medical claim payments for
propriety.
 UEF did not conduct independent supervisory reviews of indemnity payments.
Specifically, UEF’s review of indemnity payments was performed by an
individual who had the ability to modify payment records in UEF’s automated
accounts payable system and to approve the payments in the State’s Financial
Management Information System. As a result, this employee could process
improper indemnity payments without detection. Indemnity payments totaled
approximately $12.1 million during the period from January 2014 to April
2017.
 UEF paid each medical provider based solely on the amounts reflected on a
summary report submitted by its medical bill verification vendor without
obtaining any documentation to support the claims (such as, medical bills).
Consequently, UEF lacked assurance that this vendor had sufficiently verified
provider claims and ensured the rates billed were consistent with rates
established by the WCC. Furthermore, some of those claims were paid to
providers within the vendor’s preferred provider network, which raises
questions regarding the independence of the bill verification process.
Medical providers submitted medical bills to the claims processing vendor,
which were then forwarded to the medical bill verification vendor. The
medical bill verification vendor then submitted a monthly summary report to
UEF indicating how much to pay each medical provider. Medical provider
claim payments totaled approximately $13.5 million during the period from
January 2014 to April 2017, including payments to preferred providers. For
example, one provider under the vendor’s preferred provider network was
paid $1.3 million during this period.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Similar conditions were noted in our two preceding audit reports dating back to
September 2011.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UEF
a. conduct independent supervisory reviews of indemnity payments to
ensure the payments are valid and accurate (repeat); and
b. establish a documented procedure to verify, at least on a test basis, that
medical claim payments were proper based on supporting documentation
(repeat).
We advised UEF on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 4
UEF violated State procurement regulations to obtain claims processing and
related services from 11 vendors, did not have written agreements with the
vendors, and did not adequately monitor the vendors’ services and verify
their billings. During the period from January 2014 to April 2017, UEF paid
these vendors approximately $3.5 million.
Analysis
UEF violated numerous State procurement regulations to obtain claims processing
and related services from 11 vendors. UEF did not have current written
agreements with the vendors, did not enter into competitive procurements for any
of the services, and did
Payments to Improperly Procured Vendors
not obtain Department of
January 2014 to April 2017
Budget and Management
Number of
(DBM) and Board of Service Provided Payments
Vendors
Public Works (BPW)
Claims Processing Services 1 $1,319,653
approvals. UEF also did Nurse Case Management 3 796,275
not adequately verify the Medical Bill Verification 1 667,859
propriety of amounts Independent Medical Assessments 2 365,397
Claimant Medical Transportation 1 290,266
billed nor ensure the
Claims Investigations 3 27,659
related services were
TOTAL 11 $3,467,109
provided. According to
Source: State Accounting Records
State records, during the
period from January 2014 to April 2017, UEF paid these vendors approximately
$3.5 million, as depicted in the table.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Continued Use of Claims Processing Vendor Procured Without Competition and
Control Agency Approvals
UEF continued to use a vendor improperly procured during our preceding audit.
In January 2014, UEF entered into a temporary agreement with a vendor for
claims processing services. As noted in our November 2014 audit report, UEF
did not solicit competitive bids for these services and did not submit the
agreement to DBM for review and approval as required. In addition, the
agreement did not include certain critical provisions, such as the contract term and
the maximum contract value. Furthermore, although the agreement included the
hourly billing rate for certain claims adjusters, it did not include the rates for
numerous other individuals billed by the vendor nor scope of the work and
estimated labor hours. In response to our preceding audit, UEF advised DBM that
it would obtain retroactive approval for the agreement from BPW and would
competitively procure a new contract for these services. However, UEF had not
requested the retroactive BPW approval nor procured a new contract for these
services, and continued to use this vendor for claims processing as well as for
other services (as further detailed below) until July 2017. During the period from
January 2014 to April 2017, UEF paid this vendor approximately $1.3 million.
Expanded Use of Claims Processing Vendor Also Circumvented State
Procurement Regulations
During the current audit period, UEF allowed the claims processing vendor to
select 10 other vendors to provide a variety of services (as depicted in the table on
the preceding page) including assisting in efforts to verify claims. The vendors
were not selected through competitive procurements, and no written agreements
were established governing the scope, terms, and payment provisions for the
services provided and paid for by UEF. Accordingly, there was no review and
approval of the terms of these agreements by DBM or BPW. Given the diverse
scope of work being provided by the vendors and the fact that UEF paid the
vendors directly, these services should have been competitively procured by UEF
and written contracts submitted to DBM and/or the BPW for approval as required.
During the period from January 2014 to April 2017, UEF paid these vendors
approximately $2.2 million.
Concerns with the procurement of certain of these services (independent medical
assessments, nurse case management, and claims investigations), which were
previously procured directly by UEF, were noted in our preceding audit report.
Specifically, we noted that UEF had routinely procured these services from
numerous vendors on an “as needed basis” without soliciting competitive bids and
entering into written agreements. Four of these previous vendors were among the
10 vendors that were currently providing services without written agreements.
13

--- Page 16 ---
UEF Did Not Verify the Propriety of Amounts Paid to the Vendors nor Ensure
Appropriate Services Were Provided
UEF lacked an effective means to ensure payments to all 11 vendors were proper
and were commensurate with the work performed. Although UEF paid these
vendors directly, it was not involved in the negotiation of costs or services for the
10 vendors selected by the claims processing vendor. For example, UEF
essentially paid all vendor invoices without performing any sort of verification as
to the propriety of the charges, including the reasonableness of the hours charged,
or assessing if appropriate services were performed. In some cases, the payments
appeared questionable.
 UEF paid for individuals not included in the temporary agreement and there
was a lack of detail for certain invoices. The January 2014 temporary
agreement for the claims processing vendor included two claims adjusters at
hourly rates of $29.50 and $39.50. However, during the audit period, the
claims processing vendor billed UEF weekly for up to 10 individuals (1
managing consultant, 4 claims adjusters, 2 investigators, 1 financial assistant,
1 data entry clerk, and 1 account collection clerk) at hourly rates ranging from
$17 to $39.50.
Additionally, UEF did not obtain or review any billing data, such as the
amount of time the vendor spent on claims or the quality of the claims
administration and processing services, to help monitor the vendor’s
performance. Finally, our test of five vendor payments totaling $57,066
disclosed that invoices for three payments totaling $34,095 did not specify the
hours worked by each individual, and none of the invoices specified the
hourly rates and the specific work performed by each individual.
 UEF paid for alleged cost savings without verifying the savings were actually
realized. As previously mentioned in Finding 3, the medical bill verification
vendor maintained a preferred provider network for medical and
pharmaceutical services at reduced rates. In addition to paying this vendor
$7.50 for each claim processed, UEF paid an additional 28 percent for any
savings the vendor claimed was achieved by using its preferred provider
network. (Payments were made separately to the preferred providers for the
medical claims.) UEF did not verify the reported savings by reviewing the
related medical bills submitted by the providers nor recalculate the amounts
billed to ensure the payments were proper.
For example, the vendor reported that one provider claim totaling $377,332
was reduced by $94,326 because the provider was in the vendor’s preferred
provider network. UEF paid the vendor $26,419 ($7.50 plus the 28 percent
14

--- Page 17 ---
savings fee) for verifying this medical bill without ensuring the savings were
actually realized. During the period from January 2014 to April 2017, UEF
paid this vendor approximately $668,000.
 UEF paid an administrative fee to the claims processing vendor that had not
been negotiated with UEF, was not provided for in the temporary agreement,
and was not separately disclosed on the vendor’s invoices. Although two
vendors were hired by the claims processing vendor to perform independent
medical assessments, which were then sent directly to UEF, the claims
processing vendor also used other providers for these assessments. Under the
latter arrangement, those providers sent the assessments to the claims
processing vendor, which then charged an administrative fee for handling and
forwarding those assessments to UEF. Based on information we obtained
from the vendor, the fee UEF was billed varied from one invoice to another.
Our review of 28 payments totaling $28,930 for independent medical
assessments invoiced by the claims processing vendor disclosed that
administrative fees were assessed at rates ranging from 12 to 38 percent
(average of 26 percent) and totaled $7,630. For example, $800 invoiced for
one assessment included $300 in administrative fees (38 percent). Payments
to the claims processing vendor for independent medical assessments totaled
approximately $137,000 during the period from January 2014 to August 2016
when UEF instructed the vendor to discontinue the arrangement.
New Claims Processing Vendor Was Procured Through Emergency Procurement
In March 2017, UEF became aware that its claims processing vendor was
experiencing financial difficulty. UEF was concerned that critical services
(including payments to claimants) could be disrupted if its claims processing
vendor went out of business. On July 6, 2017, UEF notified the claims processing
vendor that its contract would be terminated effective September 1, 2017.
UEF entered into an emergency contract with another vendor to obtain claims
processing and related services previously performed by the aforementioned 11
vendors. The emergency contract had an estimated cost of $994,500 (plus fees)
over an 18-month term beginning September 1, 2017. UEF submitted this
emergency contract award to BPW for inclusion on its September 6, 2017 agenda,
but the item was withdrawn before being accepted by the BPW. As of November
1, 2017, the award had not been re-submitted to BPW, even though the new
contractor has been performing services under this arrangement.
In order to ensure continuity of claims processing services, UEF paid its former
claims processing vendor a total of $40,000 to transfer claims data and records to
15

--- Page 18 ---
the new vendor. However, UEF could not document how it determined this
amount.
On August 10, 2017, the former claims processing vendor formally notified UEF
that it intended to pursue damages totaling $521,545 incurred as a result of UEF
terminating the contract. The claim for damages consisted of outstanding past
due invoices totaling $178,265 and administrative expenses totaling $343,280. In
a settlement agreement dated October 13, 2017, UEF agreed to make a lump-sum
payment of $240,000 to settle the claims of the former claims processing vendor.
State procurement regulations generally require contracts in excess of $25,000 be
awarded by competitive sealed bidding. Additionally, procurements exceeding
$5,000 must have written contracts and include certain standard contract
provisions (such as, contract term ending date and contract maximum value or
estimated value). Finally, procurements for services exceeding $25,000 must be
submitted to DBM for approval and contracts over $200,000 must be submitted to
the BPW for approval.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UEF
a. comply with the procurement and contract provisions of the State
procurement regulations by soliciting competitive bids and executing
written contracts for the claims processing and related services that
include all relevant contract provisions (repeat),
b. ensure that invoiced amounts are supported and agree to contract-
approved rates and level of services prior to approving invoices for
payment,
c. establish a process for monitoring vendor performance for claims
processing and related functions, and
d. re-submit the emergency contract award to the BPW.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
UEF did not have adequate procedures and controls to ensure that all
collections were deposited.
Analysis
UEF had not established adequate controls over its collections from employers
and insurance companies. According to UEF records, collections totaled
approximately $9.5 million during fiscal year 2016.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 The initial record of collections (an adding machine tape) was not forwarded
directly to the employee responsible for independently verifying that all
collections had been deposited. Instead, the initial record and related
collections were forwarded to two employees responsible for preparing the
bank deposit and for recording the deposit in the State’s accounting records.
Consequently, the initial record of collections could be altered to conceal
misappropriations. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
 Although the employee responsible for verifying the deposit documented that
the collections were deposited intact, during the course of our audit work we
identified undeposited funds that were not detected during these verifications.
Specifically, our review disclosed four checks totaling $2,655 that were
recorded upon receipt but were improperly excluded from three separate
deposits. In each case, UEF employees documented the deposit verifications
but did not detect the errors. UEF personnel were unaware that these checks
had not been deposited until notified by the bank or by us. Although, we
confirmed that these funds were deposited 14 to 21 days later, there is a lack
of assurance that deposit verifications are being properly performed.
 UEF did not adequately secure collections prior to deposit and allowed a
contractual employee to take collections home overnight. Specifically, we
observed that collections were routinely stored in an unlocked desk drawer
that was accessible to numerous employees throughout the day prior to
deposit. In addition, a contractual temporary agency employee took
collections home overnight. This process violated the employment agreement
with the temporary agency that expressly prohibited the individual from
transporting collections and increased the risk of misplacement or
misappropriation.
UEF management subsequently determined the practice of allowing an
employee to take collections home occurred during the period from November
2016 through February 2017, without its knowledge, enabling the employee to
make the deposits on the way to work on the next business day. According to
UEF’s records, 56 bank deposits totaling $2.1 million were made during this
period, of which 31 deposits totaling $1.2 million appeared to have been taken
home by this individual including 9 deposits totaling $250,975 that may have
been kept by the employee over the weekend.
 Deposits were not made timely in accordance with State policy. Specifically,
our test of the aforementioned 56 bank deposits totaling $2.1 million made
between November 2016 and February 2017 disclosed that 42 deposits
17

--- Page 20 ---
totaling $1.4 million were made from 2 to 11 business days after receipt. As
noted above, 31 of these deposits appeared to have been taken home by the
contractual temporary employee, which would have contributed to the delay
in deposit.
 The responsibilities for the cash receipts and accounts receivable functions
were not separated. Specifically, three employees involved in the collection
process were also responsible for recording their receipt and any adjustments
in the related automated accounts receivable records, or had the capabilities to
do so. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
The Comptroller of Maryland’s Accounting Procedures Manual requires that
receipts as recorded on initial records of collection be reconciled to amounts
deposited by an employee independent of the cash receipts functions.
Additionally, the Manual requires the separation of cash receipts and accounts
receivable duties, that receipts be adequately safeguarded until deposited, and that
deposits be made by the next business day.
Given the significance of UEF’s collection activity and the aforementioned
internal control weaknesses, UEF should evaluate the feasibility of using a bank
lockbox account to receive collections. The Office of the State Treasurer
maintains a banking contract to provide lockbox services to State agencies. A
bank lockbox could be beneficial to UEF since it has the inherent control of
checks being directly sent to the bank for deposit and allows its limited staff to
focus on other fiscal responsibilities (such as, accounts receivable activities).
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UEF ensure that
a. the initial record of collections is forwarded directly to an independent
employee to perform the deposit verification function (repeat),
b. all deposits are made intact,
c. collections are properly safeguarded and are transported directly to the
bank for deposit no later than the next business day,
d. the cash receipts and accounts receivable duties are adequately separated
(repeat), and
e. consider the feasibility of using a bank lockbox account to receive
collections.
We advised UEF on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6
Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by UEF was stored
without adequate safeguards.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) maintained by UEF was stored
in clear text. Specifically, we noted that a server hosting the accounts receivable
and claim payment functions contained social security numbers stored in clear
text along with names, addresses, and dates of birth as of the date of our test work
in March 2017. During our review, we determined that one file contained
676,727 unique social security numbers. In addition, we were advised that this
sensitive PII was not protected by other substantial mitigating controls.
This sensitive PII is commonly associated with identity theft. Accordingly,
appropriate information system security controls need to exist to ensure that this
information is safeguarded and not improperly disclosed.
The State of Maryland Information Security Policy requires that agencies protect
confidential data using encryption technologies and/or other substantial mitigating
controls.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UEF properly protect sensitive PII information by
encryption or other substantial mitigating controls.
Finding 7
Security event monitoring, access controls, and user access monitoring were
not sufficient.
Analysis
Security event monitoring, access controls, and user access monitoring were not
sufficient for the dedicated server that hosts UEF’s critical applications, such as
accounts receivable and accounts payable.
 Security auditing was not enabled for certain files on the dedicated server. In
addition, for security events which were logged, we were advised that reports
of security events were not generated for review. As a result of these
conditions, there was no monitoring of security events applicable to this
dedicated computer server. The State of Maryland Information Security
19

--- Page 22 ---
Policy requires that information systems must generate audit records for all
security-relevant events, including all security and system administrator
accesses, and procedures must be developed to routinely (for example, daily
or weekly) review audit records for indications of unusual activities,
suspicious activities or suspected violations, and report findings to appropriate
officials for prompt resolution.
 Numerous users had unnecessary modification access to files and programs.
We identified 21 active accounts on the aforementioned dedicated server that,
via access to a utility and access inherited from a default server role, had
unnecessary modification access to numerous critical system, application and
data files and programs. The State of Maryland Information Security Policy,
states that agencies must ensure that only authorized individuals (employees
or agency contractors) have access to confidential information and that such
access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of least
possible privilege and need to know.
 UEF did not periodically generate and review system security reports to
identify capabilities assigned to users of its automated accounts receivable and
accounts payable applications. Consequently, UEF lacked assurance that user
capabilities were properly assigned to employees to provide adequate
separation of duties and to restrict the capabilities to only those needed to
perform their job duties. Our review of all 12 active users disclosed that 5
users could perform incompatible functions or had unnecessary capabilities.
For example, three users had access to cash receipts and had the capability to
update, adjust, or delete the related automated accounts receivable records, as
noted in Finding 5.
 UEF permitted one employee to use another employee’s assigned userid to
process certain transactions (such as to create accounts payable records). This
allowed the employee to process transactions that were restricted by the
employee’s assigned userid. This sharing of userids results in a loss of
accountability and reduced assurance over the propriety of the transactions
processed.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UEF
a. enable security auditing for files on the dedicated server which hosts
UEF’s critical applications (repeat);
20

--- Page 23 ---
b. generate and review, on a weekly basis, reports of critical security events,
document these reviews, and retain the documentation for future
reference (repeat);
c. limit modification access to critical files and programs on the dedicated
server to only those employees who require such access for their job
duties (repeat);
d. periodically generate system security reports and use these reports to
ensure users cannot perform incompatible functions and are assigned
only those capabilities needed to perform their job duties (repeat); and
e. prohibit the sharing of userids (repeat).
Finding 8
UEF did not have an information systems disaster recovery plan.
Analysis
UEF did not have a disaster recovery plan (DRP) for recovering from disaster
scenarios (for example, a fire). In accordance with the State of Maryland
Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines, a complete DRP
should address, at a minimum, concept of operations, notification and activation
procedures, recovery strategies (including use of alternate sites), reconstitution
procedures, and periodic testing of the DRP. Without a complete DRP, a disaster
could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period) in restoring
information systems operations above and beyond the expected delays that would
exist in a planned recovery scenario. This same condition was commented upon
in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that UEF develop and implement a comprehensive disaster
recovery plan, in accordance with the Information Technology (IT) Disaster
Recovery Guidelines (repeat).
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Uninsured Employer’s Fund
(UEF) for the period beginning November 14, 2013 and ending November 27,
2016. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UEF’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included assessment collections and billings, claim
payments, and information systems security and control. We also determined the
status of the findings contained in our preceding audit report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of the
UEF’s operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from the system
were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit.
We also extracted data from UEF’s automated accounts receivable and accounts
payable system for the purpose of testing assessment accounts receivable and
claim payment monitoring. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
22

--- Page 25 ---
considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in this
report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
UEF’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes findings relating to conditions that we consider to be
significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UEF’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes findings regarding significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant
findings were communicated to UEF that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
As a result of our audit, we determined that UEF’s accountability and compliance
level was unsatisfactory. The primary factors contributing to the unsatisfactory
rating were the significance of our audit findings, and the number of repeat
findings from preceding reports. Our rating conclusion has been made solely
pursuant to State law and rating guidelines approved by the Joint Audit
Committee. The rating process is not a practice prescribed by professional
auditing standards.
UEF’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise UEF regarding the results of our
review of its response.
23

--- Page 28 ---
UNINSURED EMPLOYERS’ FUND
RESPONSES TO DRAFT AUDIT REPORT
DECEMBER 2017
Accounts Receivable
Finding 1
UEF did not conduct independent reviews of accounts receivable transactions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UEF establish a process to ensure the propriety of transactions
recorded in its accounts receivable records. Specifically, we recommend that UEF perform
independent reviews to ensure that all WCC awards and properly authorized adjustments
are accurately entered into its accounts receivable records (repeat). We advised UEF on
accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
UEF Response to Recommendation 1
The UEF concurs. The UEF has a process in place for reviewing awards and payments that
involves multiple employees who review awards and adjustments. This current system is being
reviewed, evaluated and adjusted to comply with this recommendation.
Issues regarding the correct calculation and entry of assessments have already been recognized
by the agency and are also being reviewed, revised, corrected and evaluated on an ongoing basis
in order to insure accuracy. The UEF intends on automating the assessment process to the extent
possible and has begun work on establishing that program.
Finding 2
UEF did not adequately monitor and pursue collection of delinquent accounts. As of
January 5, 2017, there were 3,980 delinquent accounts totaling $5.2 million that, based on
their age, should have been referred to CCU.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that UEF
a. investigate and take the necessary corrective actions to resolve the noted deficiencies
(generate dunning notices and produce accurate accounts receivable aging reports) to
ensure that the accounting system provides sufficient information to monitor and
pursue collection activities (repeat),
b. refer delinquent accounts to CCU for collection as required (repeat), and

--- Page 29 ---
c. establish a process to identify and refer delinquent employers to
applicable State licensing authorities for license or permit suspension (repeat).
UEF Response to Recommendation 2
a. The UEF concurs. The correction of deficiencies in the collection of delinquent accounts
has been and remains a top priority of the agency. The UEF has been evaluating and
addressing the condition and effectiveness of the entire system of collections and
assessments utilized by the agency. Systems in different collection and billing areas have
been examined and changes implemented – and in certain cases established or re-
established - and will continue to be developed, implemented, evaluated and adjusted,
and are being monitored to ensure that this recommendation is implemented.
The UEF has made substantial progress in addressing the lack of adequate and effective
collection processes by the Agency. A number of systems have already been established
regarding billing and collections regarding fines, penalties, assessments and employer
debts. This process remains ongoing. It includes, among other items, the re-establishment
of a program to suspend business licenses for enforcement purposes, which has again
begun to occur and is ongoing.
In addition, the UEF, working with the Offices of the Governor and the Attorney
General, has received authority to enforce criminal penalties against employers who fail
to secure payment of required compensation pursuant to sections 9-1108 and 9-402 of the
Labor and Employment Article. Although this has been contained in statute for decades
authority for this enforcement mechanism has never been sought, or utilized, by the
agency until subsequent to November 27, 2016. The process of implementing this
authority is ongoing.
In order to effectively enforce collections and otherwise facilitate the function of the
agency, the agency recognized the need for additional attorney staffing. The UEF has,
therefore, already authorized two additional Office of the Attorney General (OAG)
Assistant Attorneys General (AAG) positions who will begin service with the UEF in
January of 2018. This will bring to five the number of AAGs working at the UEF. These
new staff positions will play an important role in enabling the agency to effectively
implement, and enforce, an effective collections process.
Finally, the UEF is developing a new protocol to deal with uninsured employer
obligations much earlier in the process. The program is designed to ensure that such
obligations are recognized and collection initiated in a program contemporaneous with
the issuance of Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) Orders and any resulting
failure by the uninsured employer to reimburse the Fund for payments made pursuant to a
claim found by the WCC to be the responsibility of that uninsured employer (and

--- Page 30 ---
therefore the UEF). This program is planned to include business license and permit
suspensions, as are available, to ensure payment by uninsured employers. By initiating
collections in this fashion, instead of waiting months and years to genuinely attempt to
collect these debts, it is our evaluation that uninsured employers’ payments will be
recovered in a quicker and more effective manner and the prior numbers of delinquent
accounts subject to CCU collection will be reduced.
b. The UEF concurs. In response to a prior audit finding the UEF referred a number of
accounts to the CCU for collection several years ago. As of October of 2016, the CCU
had reported to this agency substantial amounts of uncollected UEF funds on its books.
Collection of UEF accounts by the CCU have been generally minimal, with some
exceptions, because of the nature of these debtors and accounts and, in many cases, the
inability of the agency to effectively collect the debt as well as the unusual length of time
between the establishment of the debt and the actual forwarding of the debt account to the
CCU for collection by the agency in the past.
The UEF has had discussions with the CCU regarding collections and working to develop
a more effective process for both agencies to utilize to facilitate collection effectiveness.
The UEF is also considering requesting a waiver be granted of the requirement that debts
be forwarded to the CCU in all cases after a certain period of time in order to permit the
agency to utilize all available resources authorized and available to the agency to collect
the debts directly.
c. The UEF concurs. The agency has already re-established a complete program to identify
employers and act to suspend business licenses. This program has already generated
appeals and hearings in various locales in which the UEF is represented by the OAG. The
UEF has been upheld in all appeal hearings held as of this time. This process remains
ongoing and will be refined as experience indicates is appropriate.
Claims Processing
Finding 3
UEF did not adequately review indemnity and medical claim payments for propriety.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that UEF
a. conduct independent supervisory reviews of indemnity payments to ensure the
payments are valid and accurate (repeat); and
b. establish a documented procedure to verify, at least on a test basis, that medical claim
payments were proper based on supporting documentation (repeat).

--- Page 31 ---
We advised UEF on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
UEF Response to Recommendation 3
a. The UEF concurs. The UEF has been implanting this recommendation and continues to
do so.
b. The UEF concurs. The UEF has been implementing this recommendation and continues
to do so.
The agency will attempt to implement all these recommendations within the existing staffing
situation but reserves the right to add staff if necessary to implement these recommendations.
Finding 4
UEF violated State procurement regulations to obtain claims processing and related
services from 11 vendors, did not have written agreements with the vendors, and did not
adequately monitor the vendors’ services and verify their billings. During the period from
January 2014 to April 2017, UEF paid these vendors approximately $3.5 million.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that UEF
a. comply with the procurement and contract provisions of the State procurement
regulations by soliciting competitive bids and executing written contracts for the claims
processing and related services that include all relevant contract provisions (repeat),
b. ensure that invoiced amounts are supported and agree to contract-approved rates and
level of services prior to approving invoices for payment,
c. establish a process for monitoring vendor performance for claims processing and
related functions, and
d. re-submit the emergency contract award to the BPW.
UEF Response to Recommendation 4
a. The UEF concurs. The agency has implanted this recommendation and has obtained the
services of a third-party claims administrator by way of soliciting proposals and
executing a written contract for services with that vendor by way of an emergency
procurement. The agency is in the process of developing a Request for Proposals for
these services for the issuance, bidding and award of the contract in the future.
b. The UEF concurs. The UEF is currently implementing this recommendation with the new
claims services vendor and will continue to do so.

--- Page 32 ---
c. The UEF concurs. The UEF reviews these services and functions now but will continue
to develop a process to insure adherence to this recommendation.
d. The UEF concurs. The UEF has re-submitted the emergency procurement contract for the
Board of Public Works for acceptance as of December, 2017.
As of September 1, 2017, the UEF entered into an emergency procurement contract to deal with
the subject matter of Recommendation 4, as well as other issues related to claims administration.
This contract provides the agency with the services of a national third-party claims
administration vendor, and related service providers, and provides the UEF with services related
to claims processing and administration. All relevant contractual agreements with a claims
processing function are now handled by the agency’s third-party administrator as part of this
contract. This claims administrator function and staffing has also been brought physically into
the agency office for implementation and for agency interaction, supervision and review
purposes. The transition to that vendor remains ongoing and the UEF will work with that vendor
to respond to the noted issues in this audit report.
The UEF previously recognized that the issues in Finding 4 were valid and required addressing.
By hiring an experienced third-party claims administrator company thru the emergency
procurement process, the UEF now has a written contract with a nationally-experienced
company to handle this work and to assist in dealing with the issues raised in this Finding.
Cash Receipts
Finding 5
UEF did not have adequate procedures and controls to ensure that all collections were
deposited.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that UEF ensure that
a. the initial record of collections is forwarded directly to an independent employee to
perform the deposit verification function (repeat),
b. all deposits are made intact,
c. collections are properly safeguarded and are transported directly to the bank for
deposit no later than the next business day,
d. the cash receipts and accounts receivable duties are adequately separated (repeat), and
e. consider the feasibility of using a bank lockbox account to receive collections.
We advised UEF on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.

--- Page 33 ---
UEF Response to Recommendation 5
a. The UEF concurs. The UEF has been implementing this recommendation and will
continue to do so.
b. The UEF concurs. The UEF has been implementing this recommendation and will
continue to do so.
c. The UEF concurs. The UEF has been implementing this recommendation and will
continue to do so.
d. The UEF concurs. The UEF will continue to develop the agency’s process so that the
cash receipts and accounts receivable functions are separated.
e. The agency concurs. The agency will work to implement this recommendation after
resolving all issues related to the agency’s possible utilization of a bank lockbox system.
This will include dealing with the requirement that certain relevant information contained
on checks received (including claim number, claimant name, the statement stubs attached
thereto, and other information) must be transmitted to the UEF by the bank for various
critical agency purposes, including accounting and collections requirements, in order for
this recommended system to be utilized.
The agency will attempt to implement all these recommendations within the existing staffing
situation but reserves the right to add staff if necessary to implement these recommendations.
Information Systems Security and Control
Finding 6
Sensitive personally identifiable information maintained by UEF was stored without
adequate safeguards.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that UEF properly protect sensitive PII information by encryption or other
substantial mitigating controls.
UEF Response to Recommendation 6
The UEF concurs. The UEF will work with both our technical advisor company and DoIT to
comply with this recommendation to the extent changes are required.
Finding 7
Security event monitoring, access controls, and user access monitoring were not sufficient.

--- Page 34 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that UEF
a. enable security auditing for files on the dedicated server which hosts UEF’s critical
applications (repeat);
b. generate and review, on a weekly basis, reports of critical security events, document
these reviews, and retain the documentation for future reference (repeat);
c. limit modification access to critical files and programs on the dedicated server to only
those employees who require such access for their job duties (repeat);
d. periodically generate system security reports and use these reports to ensure users
cannot perform incompatible functions and are assigned
only those capabilities needed to perform their job duties (repeat); and
e. prohibit the sharing of userids (repeat).
UEF Response to Recommendation7
a. The UEF concurs. The UEF is in the process of implementing this recommendation and
will work with both DoIT and our technical advisor company to do so.
b. The UEF concurs. The UEF will continue to work with both DoIT and our technical
advisor company implement this.
c. The UEF concurs. The UEF has initiated a program to implement this recommendation
and will continue the process of insuring the recommendation is executed.
d. The UEF concurs. The UEF will continue to work with both DoIT and our technical
advisor company to implement this recommendation.
e. The UEF concurs. The UEF has recognized previously the importance of this
recommendation and will continue to develop a system to ensure it is accomplished.
The agency has attempted to implement several of these recommendations and it is its
position that the agency has complied as to the dedicated server for its critical applications.
The UEF will work with both our technical advisor company and DoIT to comply with this
these recommendations to the extent further changes are required.
Finding 8
UEF did not have an information systems disaster recovery plan.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that UEF develop and implement a comprehensive disaster recovery plan,
in accordance with the Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines (repeat).

--- Page 35 ---
UEF Response to Recommendation 8
The UEF concurs. As a result of the prior audit report the UEF engaged in a process to
ensure that all internal systems were recoverable. The UEF will work with both our technical
advisor company and DoIT to comply with this these recommendations to develop an
appropriate comprehensive disaster recovery plan, in accordance with the Information
Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines, to the extent any changes are required.

--- Page 36 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditor