Title: College Savings Plans of Maryland
Date: 06/23/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0dcc9d724560674376
Extracted: 2025-06-17T14:19:46.696940
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
College Savings Plans of Maryland
June 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The College Savings Plans of Maryland (CSPM) is an independent State agency
that currently provides two separate plans – the Maryland Prepaid College Trust
(MPCT) and the Maryland College Investment Plan (MCIP) – to help individuals
save for future college expenses and to reduce dependence on student loans and
other forms of debt. These plans are administered by the College Savings Plans
of Maryland Board, which includes the Secretary of the Maryland Higher
Education Commission, the State Superintendent of Schools, the State Treasurer,
the State Comptroller, the Chancellor of the University System of Maryland, and
five members of the public appointed by the Governor. Effective October 1,
2008, State law authorized the CSPM to establish a third plan option, the
Maryland Broker-Dealer College Investment Plan, which allows contributions to
an investment account through private investment firms selected by the account
holder; however, as of February 2015, the plan was not operating as CSPM’s
Board had not opted to offer this plan.
Individuals seeking to participate in a college savings plan may execute a prepaid
tuition contract available through MPCT and/or establish an investment account
in the MCIP. Students may use their accounts at nearly any accredited college
nationwide. According to the State’s records, CSPM’s operating expenditures
totaled approximately $2.6 million during fiscal year 2014.
Maryland Prepaid College Trust
MPCT offers tuition contracts for the future payment of tuition and mandatory
fees at any eligible institution of higher education. Contracts, which require
scheduled payments, may be purchased by individuals on behalf of a designated
beneficiary. MPCT is operated directly by CSPM, which processes enrollments,
invests funds, and makes disbursements. State law requires that either the account
holder or the beneficiary be a resident of Maryland or the District of Columbia at
the time that a contract is purchased.
State law provides State income tax benefits for Maryland taxpayers who elect to
participate in the MPCT. Specifically, the Tax-General Article, Section 10-208 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland allows a Maryland taxpayer to deduct up to
$2,500 for any tax year, per prepaid tuition contract, for the purpose of calculating
his or her Maryland adjusted gross income.
3

--- Page 6 ---
CSPM does not guarantee that the assets of MPCT will be sufficient to pay the
tuition and fees estimated under the contracts. However, in the event that the
market value of MPCT’s assets is not sufficient to fund its contract obligations,
State law provides that State funds may be appropriated to fund the related
difference or the Board may adjust the future contract payments to meet MPCT’s
contract obligations. CSPM must repay any related authorized appropriations
during each of the two succeeding fiscal years. State law also specifies that the
debts and contract obligations of MPCT are not debts of the State. An actuarial
study conducted in October 2014 indicated that MPCT had a surplus of $321.5
million as of June 30, 2014 and was 142.5 percent funded.
The Education Article, Section 18-1906 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
provides that the Board may authorize a refund to MPCT account holders should
the funded status of MPCT exceed 130 percent and if certain other conditions are
met. The College Savings Plans of Maryland Board has not authorized a refund
at this time. The Board attributes the current surplus to strong market
performance and lower than projected tuition increases at Maryland’s public
colleges; however, the Board believes there is a significant likelihood that these
trends may not continue at the same levels over the next few years.
Maryland College Investment Plan
MCIP was established to allow individuals to invest funds to help pay the cost of
providing a college education for a designated beneficiary. CSPM executed a
contract with a private investment company that is responsible for managing
MCIP by processing Plan enrollment applications, investing related payments,
and disbursing funds. The current contract will expire in June 2017. Earnings on
funds invested in MCIP and the future principal value of individual accounts are
not guaranteed. Payments into the investment plan will be accepted provided the
aggregate balance of all accounts for a designated beneficiary does not exceed
$350,000. Account holders and designated beneficiaries participating in MCIP
are not required to be residents of Maryland or the District of Columbia.
State law provides State income tax benefits for Maryland taxpayers who elect to
participate in MCIP based on their contributions. Specifically, the Tax-General
Article, Section 10-208 of the Annotated Code of Maryland allows a taxpayer to
deduct up to $2,500 for any tax year, per qualified beneficiary, for the purpose of
calculating his or her Maryland adjusted gross income.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Information
According to its records, as of June 30, 2014, CSPM was administering
approximately 31,600 prepaid tuition contracts applicable to MPCT. The market
value of the MPCT’s investments (including cash) totaled approximately $895
million as of June 30, 2014. CSPM records also indicated that CSPM deposited
contract application fees and related payments totaling approximately $58 million
into MPCT during fiscal year 2014.
As of June 30, 2014, CSPM’s records indicated that approximately 145,700
participants had opened investment savings accounts in MCIP with balances
totaling approximately $3.9 billion.
CSPM engages an independent accounting firm to audit its annual financial
statements for MPCT and MCIP. Such statements are included in CSPM’s annual
reports. In the related audit reports for the fiscal years ended 2012, 2013, and
2014, the firm stated that the financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial positions of MPCT and MCIP, and the changes in their
financial positions and cash flows for the years then ended, in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 18, 2012. We determined that CSPM
satisfactorily addressed these two findings.
Findings and Recommendations
Abandoned Funds
Finding 1
The College Savings Plans of Maryland (CSPM) did not determine the
disposition of uncashed checks nor did it take action to transfer funds
determined to be abandoned to the Comptroller of Maryland as required.
Analysis
CSPM did not determine the disposition of uncashed checks nor did it take action
to transfer funds determined to be abandoned to the Comptroller of Maryland as
required by its Board Policy Regarding Outstanding Checks. CSPM issues
checks from the Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) that are made payable
5

--- Page 8 ---
to account holders or to the colleges the plan beneficiaries attend. CSPM’s
records indicated that, as of August 2014, there were 448 uncashed checks
totaling approximately $1.7 million that were more than three years old.
Although CSPM determined that certain of these checks, such as those with stop
payment action, may no longer be properly classified as outstanding, CSPM had
not determined and specified which funds from the aforementioned $1.7 million
should be classified as abandoned and, accordingly, transferred to the
Comptroller.
State law requires trusts to transfer funds that are abandoned to the Comptroller of
Maryland for safekeeping until claimed by the owner. Funds are presumed to be
abandoned if they have not been claimed by the owner within three years. Board
Policy provides further guidance regarding monitoring, due diligence notification,
determination of abandonment, and transfer procedures. CSPM advised us it
never implemented the Board Policy due to subsequent concerns about certain
legal and tax implications associated with disbursing funds from the trust.
Disbursements from MPCT to colleges and account holders during fiscal year
2014 totaled approximately $51 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CSPM
a. determine the disposition of uncashed checks, and
b. ensure funds determined to be abandoned are transferred to the
Comptroller of Maryland in accordance with State law unless formal
legal advice is obtained to otherwise authorize CSPM to retain the funds.
System Security
Finding 2
CSPM lacked assurance that certain security controls were addressed by the
service provider administering the Maryland College Investment Plan
(MCIP).
Analysis
CSPM lacked assurance that sensitive account holder data maintained by the
third-party service provider used to administer the MCIP was properly processed
and secured. The private investment company that administered MCIP by
processing plan enrollment applications, investing related payments, and
disbursing funds, obtained a Service Organization Control 1 (SOC 1) Type 2
review from an independent accounting firm. The resulting report addressed the
company’s recordkeeping system and the suitability of the design and operating
effectiveness of its controls for the year ending June 30, 2014.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Although obtaining this type of review is appropriate because the company’s
services and related internal controls impact the financial statements for MCIP,
the review does not provide assurance regarding the company’s system security,
availability, processing integrity, data confidentiality, and privacy. Therefore,
because of the nature and sensitivity of the MCIP information (such as, personal
identifiable information), we believe CSPM should also require the company to
obtain a SOC 2 Type 2 review to address certain key security controls.
Appropriate controls would ensure, for example, that
 data backups and data at rest are encrypted;
 intrusion detection, malware prevention, data loss prevention, and
antivirus protection have been implemented;
 user account and password controls for applications and databases are in
accordance with an agreed-upon standard;
 restrictions of connections between trusted and untrusted networks are
reviewed at planned intervals; and
 production data are not used in development environments.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance
concerning examinations of service organizations. Based on this guidance, service
providers may contract for an independent review of controls, resulting in an
independent auditor’s report referred to as a SOC report. There are several types
of SOC reports with varying scope and levels of review and auditor testing. The
SOC 2 Type 2 report includes the results of the auditor’s review of controls
placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness for the period under
review and could include an evaluation of the company’s information technology
security, availability (such as, business continuity management), processing
integrity (completeness, accuracy, and timeliness), confidentiality (data
protection), and privacy (data access and monitoring) .
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CSPM
a. seek to amend the existing contract and ensure that future agreements
with contractors processing MCIP data to also include provisions
requiring the contractor to regularly obtain a SOC 2 Type 2 review
pertaining to the contractor’s system operations; and
b. obtain copies and review these SOC 2 Type 2 reports from the
contractors, and ensure that the related independent reviews adequately
address critical security concerns and that contractors implement all
critical report recommendations.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the College Savings Plan of
Maryland (CSPM) for the period beginning August 3, 2011 and ending November
17, 2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine CSPM’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts and disbursements. We also
determined the status of the findings included in our preceding audit report.
CSPM engages an independent accounting firm to audit its annual financial
statements for the Maryland Prepaid College Trust (MPCT) and for the Maryland
College Investment Plan (MCIP). In the related audit reports for the fiscal years
ended 2012, 2013, and 2014 the firm stated that the financial statements present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial positions of the MPCT and the MCIP,
and the changes in their financial positions and cash flows for the years then
ended, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America. We have relied on the work of the independent accounting
firm to provide audit coverage of the investments of the MPCT. Our audit
procedures for investments were generally limited, therefore, to obtaining a
sufficient basis for that reliance.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
CSPM’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as expenditure data). The extracts are performed as
part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of Legislative Audits
and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability. We determined that
the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the
data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures
8

--- Page 11 ---
that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data
used in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
CSPM ’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect CSPM’s ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our report also includes a finding regarding a significant instance of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. A less significant
finding was communicated to CSPM that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
CSPM’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise CSPM regarding the
results of our review of its response.
9

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
Marissa L. Eby, CPA
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker
Staff Auditor