Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration
Date: 06/12/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d0acc9d72456067427c
Extracted: 2025-06-16T22:38:52.102900
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration
October 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration (ADAA), within the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH), develops, establishes, regulates, promotes,
monitors, and supports prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation programs related
to the misuse of alcohol and drugs. ADAA also promotes and conducts substance
abuse related education, training, data collection, and research. ADAA awards
substance abuse treatment grants to local health departments and private
providers, such as nonprofit entities, throughout Maryland. According to the
State’s records, during fiscal year 2013, ADAA’s expenditures totaled $156
million, of which $147.8 million related to grants for alcohol and drug abuse
programs. ADAA does not provide direct treatment services.
Organizational Change
Chapter 460, Laws of Maryland, 2014, effective July 1, 2014, merged the Mental
Hygiene Administration and the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration to
establish the Behavioral Health Administration within DHMH. According to the
Fiscal and Policy Note accompanying the related legislation, this change was
prompted, in part, by DHMH’s examination of the issue of integrating substance
use disorders and mental health care to address fragmentation in the delivery and
government financing of those services. This organizational change had no
impact on our audit since it occurred after the end of our audit period (June 30,
2014).
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated June 12, 2012. We determined that ADAA
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of ADAA’s internal control. Our audit also did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
3

--- Page 6 ---
A draft copy of this report was provided to ADAA. Since there are no
recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Administration (ADAA) of the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(DHMH) for the period beginning July 15, 2011 and ending June 30, 2014. The
audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine ADAA’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts and grant awards and monitoring.
We also determined the status of the finding contained in our preceding audit
report.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
ADAA’s operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data). The extracts are
performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the Office of
Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data reliability.
We determined that the data extracted from this source were sufficiently reliable
for the purposes the data were used during this audit. Finally, we performed other
auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The
reliability of data used in this report for background or informational purposes
was not assessed.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to ADAA by DHMH’s
Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as payroll, purchasing,
4

--- Page 7 ---
grant disbursements, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Secretary. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls
for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of ADAA’s
compliance with federal laws and regulations pertaining to those programs
because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm to
annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including ADAA.
ADAA’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
5

--- Page 8 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Audit Manager
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditor
Steven A. Crocker
Staff Auditor