Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Division of Parole and Probation
Date: 12/05/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d17cc9d724560674592
Extracted: 2025-06-17T20:23:36.877656
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Division of Parole and Probation
December 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
Prior to a Department-wide reorganization discussed below, the Division of
Parole and Probation (DPP) of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services (DPSCS) supervised the conduct of parolees and regularly informed the
Maryland Parole Commission of parolee activities. DPP also conducted
investigations for the Commission and the courts, and performed probationary
services for the Circuit and District Courts of Maryland. When requested by the
Governor, DPP conducted investigations of persons who had applied for pardon
or commutation of sentences or clemency. Furthermore, DPP administered the
Drinking Driver Monitor Program (DDMP), a specialized monitoring service for
individuals convicted of driving while intoxicated or driving under the influence
of alcohol or drugs. Finally, DPP was responsible for the collection and
disbursement of fines, costs, fees, and restitution funds assessed in certain court
cases. According to DPP records, during fiscal year 2012, these collections and
disbursements totaled approximately $22.5 million and $24.5 million,
respectively.
During the audit period, DPP’s headquarters was located in Baltimore, Maryland,
with three regional offices located in Frederick, Baltimore, and Upper Marlboro.
The regional offices monitored and supervised the operations of DPP’s 42 field
offices, which included 20 DDMP monitoring sites. According to DPP’s records,
as of June 30, 2012, there were approximately 101,000 cases under DPP’s
jurisdiction, including approximately 13,000 active DDMP cases, and its fiscal
year 2012 operating expenditures totaled approximately $101.1 million.
Reorganization
In fiscal year 2012, the DPSCS initiated a Department-wide reorganization to
establish three regions within the State (North, Central, and South) for the purpose
of creating a regional approach to providing essentially all inmate-related
functions, such as incarceration, probation, parole, and reentry into society.
Through the reorganization, the DPSCS is seeking to keep inmates in one region
as they move within the DPSCS system. The reorganization is also meant to find
efficiencies, and to improve inmate reentry into society. While the reorganization
was initiated in fiscal year 2012, for budgetary purposes, the reorganization was
implemented via budget amendment in October 2012.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Accordingly, effective October 2012, DPP ceased to exist as a separate budgetary
unit, and its program functions and accounting and fiscal operations have been
transferred to the DPSCS Office of the Secretary and the regional offices
established by the reorganization. In the future, parole and probation program
functions and fiscal operations will be included in our audits of DPSCS Office of
the Secretary and the various regions.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated November 17, 2010. We determined that DPP
satisfactorily addressed two of these findings. The remaining finding is repeated
in this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Cash Balance Reconciliations
Finding 1
The Division of Parole and Probation (DPP) did not adequately reconcile its
cash balance of fines, costs, fees, and restitution funds collected and
disbursed with the corresponding balance on the State’s accounting records.
Analysis
DPP did not adequately reconcile its cash balance, according to the Offender-
Based State Correctional Information System (OBSCIS II), with the
corresponding balance on the State Comptroller’s records. OBSCIS II is used to
account for the collection and disbursement of the fines, costs, fees, and
restitution funds assessed in certain court cases. Although a monthly
reconciliation was prepared and approved, we noted that certain differences
identified in the most recent reconciliation could not be adequately supported or
explained by DPP as representing valid reconciling items. Furthermore,
reconciling items were not always resolved in a timely manner.
The reconciliation prepared for February 2012 disclosed that the cash balances in
OBSCIS II and the State Comptroller’s records agreed after considering
reconciling items. However, our review of 12 significant reconciling items
totaling approximately $5.9 million disclosed 6 items totaling $750,000 that did
not appear to be valid reconciling items—most of which related to events that
occurred after the reconciliation period—and DPP could not adequately support
4

--- Page 7 ---
or explain why they were included in the reconciliation. Furthermore, 338
reconciling items totaling approximately $105,000 were at least six months old,
with many items dating back to fiscal years 2007 and 2008. These conditions
made the reconciliation ineffective as a means of ensuring all cash transactions
were properly accounted for. Our preceding audit report commented on similar
deficiencies with DPP’s reconciliations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPSCS adequately reconcile the OBSCIS II cash
balance with the balance on the State Comptroller’s records. Specifically, we
recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that a comprehensive supervisory review of the cash balance
reconciliation is adequately performed (repeat),
b. ensure that all reconciling items are valid and adequately supported
(repeat), and
c. investigate and resolve differences identified during the reconciliation
process in a timely manner (repeat).
Substance Abuse Treatment Services
Finding 2
DPP did not ensure that it received all deliverables required by its agreement
with a local health department for substance abuse treatment services and
the agreement did not specify the basis for payment by DPP.
Analysis
DPP did not ensure that it received all deliverables required by its memorandum
of understanding (MOU) with a local health department to provide community-
based substance abuse treatment services to certain criminal offenders. In
addition, the MOU, which was renewed on an annual basis, did not specify the
basis for DPP payments to the health department for these services. As a result,
there was a lack of assurance that all agreed-upon services were provided and that
amounts paid were commensurate with services provided. The MOU for fiscal
year 2011 provided for the treatment of approximately 575 offenders and,
according to DPP’s records, services were provided by 10 providers during fiscal
year 2011. Payments to the health department under the MOU totaled
approximately $900,000 during the period February 2010 to October 2011,
according to the State’s records.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Although the MOU was between DPP and the health department, the health
department used an existing vendor to provide the treatment services specified in
the MOU. The vendor, in conjunction with DPP, selected and oversaw various
individual treatment providers. Although the vendor was not a party to the MOU,
the MOU specified certain oversight and reporting responsibilities of the vendor,
and was incorporated into the health department’s agreement with the vendor.
According to the MOU, the vendor was required to visit each provider’s treatment
site on a monthly basis to monitor the provision of treatment services, and to
provide DPP with a monthly site visit report and weekly treatment attendance
data. However, these reports were not received by DPP and DPP did not pursue
obtaining the reports. Furthermore, the MOU did not specify the basis for
determining amounts due from DPP, such as actual costs or fixed fee per
treatment session. Although it appears the health department billed DPP based on
expenditures incurred by the providers and reported by the vendor, DPP could not
adequately explain how the billings were developed.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPSCS
a. ensure that all required MOU deliverables are received; and
b. clearly state in future MOUs the basis for amounts due, and ensure that
billings reflect this basis and are verified to supporting documentation.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP) of the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) for the period beginning
December 14, 2009 and ending March 14, 2012. The audit was conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DPP’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included procurements and disbursements; payroll
preparation; the collection and disbursement of fines, fees, costs, and restitution;
and information systems security and control. Our audit procedures included
inquiries of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and
observations of DPP’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives.
Data provided in this report for background or informational purposes were
deemed reasonable, but were not independently verified.
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to DPP by the DPSCS
– Office of the Secretary. These support services (such as certain payroll and
purchasing transactions, maintenance of accounting records, and related fiscal
functions) are included within the scope of our audits of the Office of the
Secretary.
DPP’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect DPP’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our audit did not
disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or
regulations. Other less significant findings were communicated to DPP that did
not warrant mention in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The response from DPSCS to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DPSCS regarding the
results of our review of its response.
8

--- Page 13 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Rick E. Pyles
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Eoghan J. Doherty, CPA
Peter C. Flack
Staff Auditors