Title: Department of Transportation - Financial Management Information System - Centralized Operations
Date: 04/18/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1ccc9d7245606746fc
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:52:35.438348
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Transportation
Financial Management Information System
Centralized Operations
September 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
General Information
The Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) is an integrated database system with purchasing and
accounting components. The FMIS purchasing and accounting components are
operational in all MDOT modal administrations. FMIS runs on the MDOT Office
of Transportation Technology Services’ (OTTS) mainframe computer. According
to the State’s accounting records, expenditures processed through MDOT’s FMIS
for fiscal year 2014 totaled approximately $2.7 billion.
A separate version of FMIS (known as Statewide FMIS) is maintained by the
State’s Department of Information Technology and the Comptroller of
Maryland’s General Accounting Division for the use of most Executive Branch
agencies and is outside the scope of this audit. Because of the unique MDOT
needs, particularly with respect to federal grants and projects, MDOT maintains
its own version of FMIS.
FMIS Responsibilities
The FMIS Unit, within MDOT’s Secretary’s Office, and the MDOT OTTS are
responsible for daily FMIS administration, including maintenance, operation,
security, and backup of related database records, and the computer programs,
which perform online and overnight processing. The modals within MDOT are
responsible for establishing and monitoring their employees’ security accesses to
FMIS.
The Office of Legislative Audits separately audits the Secretary’s Office and all
of MDOT’s modal administrations. Our most recent audits of these entities
included a review of their agency-based FMIS responsibilities. This central audit
included elements of FMIS operation and internal control not included in these
agency audits (for example, database and security controls). For an expanded
explanation of the nature and purpose of this audit, see the Audit Scope,
Objectives, and Methodology section of this report.
FMIS Interface
MDOT interfaces certain FMIS financial information to the Statewide FMIS for
recordation, payment processing, and reporting. This audit included a review of
3

--- Page 6 ---
the controls and processing over financial information interfaced to and recorded
on Statewide FMIS.
Findings and Recommendations
Security Administration
Finding 1
MDOT FMIS security reports for modal administrations were not routinely
generated and provided to the modals.
Analysis
MDOT FMIS security reports for its modal administrations were not generated
and made available to the modals unless specifically requested by a modal. We
noted that the MDOT FMIS unit had created and could generate numerous
security reports of FMIS user capabilities and other critical security related
concerns (for example, initiating departments with no approval paths). However,
these reports were not routinely generated and provided to the modals.
These security reports provide the modals with an effective tool for monitoring
the adequacy of their internal controls involving online approvals and employee
access to critical FMIS functions. We were advised that MDOT holds the modals
responsible for ensuring that effective internal controls exist over FMIS
processing, and requires that the modals monitor their employees’ FMIS access
rights.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the MDOT FMIS unit routinely (at least quarterly)
generate the aforementioned security reports and provide these reports to
the respective modals. We also recommend that the MDOT FMIS unit
provide guidance to the modals on the contents and expected usage of these
reports.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the centralized operations of the
Department of Transportation Financial Management Information System
(FMIS). Fieldwork associated with our review was conducted during the period
from February 2015 to June 2015. The audit was conducted in accordance with
4

--- Page 7 ---
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our finding and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As FMIS is a vital procurement and accounting application in all of the
Department’s modal administrations, internal control over FMIS is critical to
these modals. Since we are responsible for auditing these modals and evaluating
their internal control, we periodically evaluate FMIS’ internal control. The State
of Maryland maintains its own Statewide version of FMIS, which is not included
in the scope of this audit.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine the elements of
FMIS operations, relative to the Department’s overall internal control, and to
evaluate compliance with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations not
included in our audits of the Department’s modals.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included central FMIS security administration and
maintenance, database and security controls, and the Relational Standard
Accounting and Reporting System (R*STARS) component operations, which
supports the Department’s accounting operations.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
FMIS operations, and tests of transactions. Generally, transactions were selected
for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit
sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the
tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in
this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
The Department’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control over FMIS operations. Internal control is a process
designed to provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of operations
5

--- Page 8 ---
including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the operation of internal control that could adversely
affect MDOT modals’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Our audit did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as
an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Financial Management Information Systems – Centralized Operations
Draft Audit Report Responses
August 2015
Security Administration
Finding 1
MDOT FMIS security reports for modal administrations were not routinely
generated and provided to the modals.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the MDOT FMIS unit routinely (at least quarterly)
generate the aforementioned security reports and provide these reports to
the respective modals. We also recommend that the MDOT FMIS unit
provide guidance to the modals on the contents and expected usage of these
reports.
Response
We concur with the recommendations. We will continue to review and make
improvements to the existing reports to ensure we provide MDOT modal
administration users with consistent and comprehensive methods for monitoring
internal controls involving on-line approvals and critical FMIS functionality. We
will develop a process by October 15, 2015, the next quarterly cycle, which will
automatically generate and distribute these reports to the respective modal
administrations quarterly. We will work with the modal administration staff to
provide guidance on the content and usage of the reports in order to identify
weaknesses in the internal control structure. The guidance will be incorporated
with the next report cycle in October 2015. The guidance will include that the
MDOT FMIS unit will follow up with the modal administrations to ensure that
the identified issue are addressed and remediated.

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information System Audit Manager
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information System Senior Auditor
Matthew D. Walbert
Information System Staff Auditor