Title: Department of Housing and Community Development - Divisions of Development Finance, Credit Assurance, and Neighborhood Revitalization
Date: 07/19/2012
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d11cc9d724560674458
Extracted: 2025-06-17T18:54:58.886548
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Housing and Community Development
Division of Development Finance
Division of Credit Assurance
Division of Neighborhood Revitalization
July 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities 4
Financial Statement Audits 5
Organizational Change 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 6
Findings and Recommendations 7
Maryland Affordable Housing Trust
* Finding 1 – Escrow Reports Were Not Reconciled On a Timely Basis 7
and Did Not Always Include Adequate Supporting Documentation
Finding 2 – MAHT Funds Erroneously Deposited With Another State 8
Entity Were Not Recovered Until Our Inquiries
Administrative Service Fees
Finding 3 – Discrepancies in Amounts Due From the Federal 9
Government Were Not Resolved
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) works with
partners to finance housing opportunities and revitalize places for Maryland
citizens to live, work, and prosper. To deliver these services, DHCD is organized
into six units. This audit report includes the operations of the following three
units:
Division of Development Finance
Division of Credit Assurance
Division of Neighborhood Revitalization
According to the State’s records, during fiscal year 2011, DHCD expenditures
totaled approximately $322.3 million, of which $308.1 million related to the units
audited. The remaining units of DHCD (Office of the Secretary, Division of
Finance and Administration, and Division of Information Technology) are
included within the scope of a separate audit conducted by our Office.
The Division of Development Finance (DDF) consists primarily of the
Community Development Administration (CDA). CDA works to increase the
supply of affordable housing within Maryland for the disabled, the elderly, and
families with low and moderate incomes. To assist in this mission, CDA provides
loans for the purchase and/or rehabilitation of single family homes and for the
acquisition, construction, renovation, and/or rehabilitation of multifamily rental
housing, transitional housing, and emergency shelters. Approximately 98 percent
of CDA’s single family mortgage loans are insured or guaranteed to varying
degrees by agencies of the United States government, the Maryland Housing Fund
(discussed below), or private mortgage insurers and all of CDA’s multifamily
loans are insured or guaranteed. DDF also provides rehabilitation and
weatherization assistance to improve basic livability, to increase energy
conservation, and to meet unique housing needs, including lead paint hazard
reduction, accessibility improvements for seniors, and financing of group homes.
These housing programs are funded primarily by revenue bonds issued by CDA,
State general obligation bonds, State appropriations, federal funds, and federal tax
credits.
The Division of Credit Assurance is responsible for the Maryland Housing Fund
(MHF) which was created in 1971 to insure certain mortgage loans issued by
DHCD. According to audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2011, MHF’s
outstanding insurance commitments totaled approximately $62.1 million for
4

--- Page 7 ---
single family mortgages and approximately $104.9 million for multifamily
mortgages, and MHF had total net assets of approximately $79.8 million.
The Division of Neighborhood Revitalization provides funding and technical
assistance to local governments, nonprofit organizations, community groups, and
businesses. Through this assistance, DHCD revitalizes communities, improves
basic infrastructure, creates small business and housing opportunities, rejuvenates
traditional business districts and cultural amenities, reuses historic sites, and
upgrades parks and playgrounds.
The following chart presents certain financial data pertaining to DHCD’s
outstanding loans as of June 30, 2011:
Loans Outstanding as of June 30, 2011
(in millions)
Single Family Multifamily Other Total
From State Funds $ 70.8 $ 402.9 $ 78.6 $ 552.3
From Revenue Bonds 2,067.4 606.2 126.8 2,800.4
Total Loans Receivable $2,138.2 $1,009.1 $205.4 $3,352.7
Source: Audited Financial Statements and DHCD records
Financial Statement Audits
DHCD engaged independent accounting firms to perform audits of certain of its
financial activities. Based on materiality and risk, we reviewed the following
financial statements for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011:
 CDA Single Family Housing Revenue Bonds
 CDA Revenue Obligation Funds
 CDA Multi-Family Mortgage Revenue Bonds
In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the related financial positions as of June 30, 2011,
and the changes in net assets and cash flows for the year then ended in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Organizational Change
Effective October 22, 2010, DHCD transferred the Maryland Affordable Housing
Trust (MAHT) from DHCD’s Office of the Secretary to DHCD’s Division of
Development Finance. The scope of this audit included the activities of MAHT.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the eight findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated March 11, 2009. Because of the
aforementioned organizational change, we also determined the status of one
finding contained in our preceding audit report on DHCD’s other units dated
February 19, 2009. We determined that DHCD satisfactorily resolved eight of
these findings. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Maryland Affordable Housing Trust
The Maryland Affordable Housing Trust (MAHT) is a charitable public
corporation which operates under the direction of an 11-member board of trustees
and is administered by the Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD) to promote affordable housing in the State. It acquires funds primarily
through interest earned on escrow accounts of the State’s approximately 1,000
title insurance companies, and it awards grants to eligible applicants (such as
nonprofit organizations and local government agencies) for activities such as the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, and preservation of affordable housing.
According to DHCD’s records for fiscal year 2011, income received by MAHT
totaled approximately $1.7 million, of which the majority was interest earned on
escrow accounts ($793,000) and income from the State’s general bond reserve
fund ($680,000). Grant expenditures for fiscal year 2011 totaled approximately
$2 million, and the program’s year-end fund balance totaled $2.5 million.
Finding 1
Escrow reports submitted by title insurance companies were not reconciled
on a timely basis to interest received, and the reports often lacked required
supporting documentation.
Analysis
Escrow reports submitted by title insurance companies were not reconciled on a
timely basis to interest received on a quarterly basis from the applicable financial
institutions, and several reports we examined lacked required supporting
documentation. These annual reports are due by March 31 for the preceding
calendar year and include financial data, such as the amount deposited and
interest earned for each escrow account established, and are used by DHCD to
help ensure that the correct amount of interest is received. We noted the
following conditions:
 The reconciliation of escrow reports to actual interest received for calendar
year 2008 was not performed until October 2009. In addition, the
reconciliation for calendar year 2009 was not performed until September 2010
and unresolved discrepancies noted for this year had not been submitted to the
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) for resolution as of May 2011.1
According to DHCD’s records for 2009, which we tested and determined were
1 Effective December 2006, MIA agreed to assist DHCD in monitoring and enforcing reporting
compliance as part of its oversight responsibilities for title insurance companies.
7

--- Page 10 ---
reliable for our purposes, there were 36 unexplained discrepancies in which
reported interest exceeded interest received by approximately $78,000. At the
time of our review in May 2011, the reconciliation for 2010 had not yet been
prepared. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 Our test of 10 calendar year 2009 escrow reports disclosed 4 instances in
which documentation was not provided by the title insurance company nor
obtained by DHCD to support bank service charges deducted from interest
paid to DHCD. State regulations permit financial institutions to deduct
reasonable and customary service charges from interest due DHCD, but
prohibit the deduction of certain charges, such as overdraft fees. Because the
reported service charges ($54,000) exceeded the reported interest ($32,800),
MAHT received no interest for these four accounts. Without such
documentation, such as an itemized statement of the charges incurred, there is
a lack of assurance that only valid service charges were deducted from interest
due DHCD. During fiscal year 2009, financial institutions claimed
approximately $390,000 in services charges. A similar condition was
commented upon in our two preceding audit reports.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHCD
a. perform reconciliations of interest earnings as reported in annual escrow
reports to funds actually received, and report unresolved discrepancies to
MIA in a timely manner (repeat); and
b. obtain adequate supporting documentation for service charges deducted
from interest remitted by financial institutions (repeat).
Finding 2
MAHT funds erroneously deposited with another State entity had not been
recovered until our inquiries.
Analysis
DHCD did not request the return of MAHT funds totaling approximately
$194,000 mistakenly deposited by a financial institution with the Maryland Legal
Services Corporation (MLSC), nor was adequate approval obtained to allow
MLSC to keep the funds. These funds represented interest earned from 2006
through 2008 on an escrow account established by a title insurance company, and
therefore should have been deposited with MAHT. According to management at
MLSC, the bank notified MLSC in January 2009 that interest earned on the
account had been mistakenly credited to MLSC, and MLSC subsequently advised
MAHT personnel.
8

--- Page 11 ---
The error occurred, in part, because of similarities in revenue sources for MAHT
and MLSC. Similar to MAHT’s interest from title insurance escrow accounts,
financial institutions submit interest earned on lawyer trust accounts to MLSC.
MAHT advised us that a decision was made by MAHT personnel to allow MLSC
to keep the funds. However, approval was not obtained from the Secretary of
DHCD or MAHT’s Board of Trustees. Since the law specifies that interest on
title company escrow accounts is to be remitted to MAHT, we questioned whether
MLSC should have been permitted to retain the funds, and whether such a
decision should have been made without approval of the Secretary and Board of
Trustees. Nevertheless, after our inquiries, these funds were recovered.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, DHCD ensure that similar decisions are
presented to the Secretary and Board of Trustees for approval.
Administrative Service Fees
Finding 3
Discrepancies in amounts due from the federal government have remained
unresolved.
Analysis
Discrepancies in amounts due from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) for administrative services performed by DHCD regarding
federal Section 8 housing assistance have remained unresolved. According to
DHCD’s records, as of March 31, 2011, fees due from HUD but not received
totaled approximately $421,000 and date back to September 2008. According to
DHCD, this condition is primarily the result of certain differences in critical data
(such as fair market rents) used by HUD and DHCD to determine fees due.
According to its records, DHCD collected fees from HUD totaling approximately
$4.6 million from October 2010 through March 2011.
DHCD has contracted with HUD to administer Section 8 housing assistance
agreements with owners of covered housing units. For example, DHCD conducts
periodic site management and occupancy reviews of applicable housing units,
reviews monthly vouchers for payments to unit owners, and provides HUD with
certain reports and other required data. Fees paid to DHCD for these services are
based primarily on the number of units under administration and the fair market
rent for those units.
9

--- Page 12 ---
DHCD advised us that it has previously attempted to resolve these fee
discrepancies with HUD, and that it continues to do so, but that it has very little
leverage in dealing with HUD regarding this matter. The amount of the
discrepancies may continue to grow until DHCD and HUD come to agreement on
this matter.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHCD continue its efforts to
a. resolve the reason for the discrepancies between calculated service fees
due and fees actually received, and
b. collect any previously uncollected fees due.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have audited the following units of the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) for the period beginning March 1, 2008 and
ending March 29, 2011:
Division of Development Finance
Division of Credit Assurance
Division of Neighborhood Revitalization
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine DHCD’s financial
transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance with
applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the
findings contained in our preceding audit report.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of materiality and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included specific programs (such as loan insurance and
other financing programs) used by DHCD to promote housing opportunities and
revitalize localities throughout the State. Our audit procedures included inquiries
of appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, and observations
of DHCD’s operations. We also tested transactions and performed other auditing
procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. Data provided
in this report for background or informational purposes were deemed reasonable,
but were not independently verified.
DHCD engaged independent accounting firms to perform audits of certain of its
financial activities. Based on materiality and risk, we reviewed the following
financial statements of the Division of Development Finance’s Community
Development Administration for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011:
 Community Development Administration Single Family Housing Revenue
Bonds
 Community Development Administration Revenue Obligation Funds
11

--- Page 14 ---
 Community Development Administration Multi-Family Mortgage Revenue
Bonds
In the related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented
fairly, in all material respects, the related financial positions as of June 30, 2011,
and the changes in net assets and cash flows for the year then ended in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
We have relied on the work of the independent accounting firm to provide audit
coverage of the aforementioned revenue bonds issued by DHCD’s Community
Development Administration. Our audit procedures in these areas were generally
limited, therefore, to obtaining a sufficient basis for that reliance.
Our audit did not include certain support services (such as payroll, maintenance of
accounting records, and related fiscal functions) provided by DHCD’s Division of
Finance and Administration. These support services are included within the scope
of our audit of the Division. In addition, our audit did not include an evaluation
of internal controls for federal financial assistance programs and an assessment of
DHCD’s compliance with federal laws and regulations pertaining to those
programs because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting firm
to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
DHCD.
DHCD’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes conditions that we consider to be significant deficiencies in
the design or operation of internal control that could adversely affect DHCD’s
ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate effectively and efficiently,
and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Our report also
includes a finding regarding a significant instance of noncompliance with
12

--- Page 15 ---
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Other less significant findings were
communicated to DHCD that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
DHCD’s response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-
1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DHCD regarding the
results of our review of its response.
13

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Affordable Housing Trust
Finding 1
Escrow reports submitted by title insurance companies were not reconciled on a timely basis to
interest received, and the reports often lacked required supporting documentation.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DHCD
a. perform reconciliations of interest earnings as reported in annual escrow reports to funds
actually received, and report unresolved discrepancies to MIA in a timely manner (repeat);
and
b. obtain adequate supporting documentation for service charges deducted from interest
remitted by financial institutions (repeat).
DHCD’s Response:
DHCD concurs with the finding and recommendations. The Department is working to clear a backlog
of interest revenue discrepancies with the assistance of the MIA who regulates the title insurance
companies. The calendar year 2010 reconciliation was completed and cases referred to MIA on June 30,
2011. The calendar year 2011 reconciliation will begin in the autumn of 2012.
DHCD is working with MIA to enforce the production of sufficient documentation related to the types
of bank service charges being charged and to determine their appropriateness. DHCD and MIA have
adopted a two-pronged approach to address this issue. First, in June 2011 DHCD reported 38 title
insurance companies to MIA for enforcement action and reported 26 others whose banks deducted fees
incorrectly from the interest earned on the title insurance companies’ MAHT accounts. MIA is taking
action on title insurance companies requiring them to provide additional details on the service charges
on their MAHT accounts or face penalty, sanctions or other forms of regulatory enforcement by the
Insurance Commissioner. Second, DHCD and MIA have consulted with the Maryland Office of the
Attorney General to advise and assist in a strategy to directly approach several banks to demand clearer
documentation on their service charges on MAHT accounts. This effort is used in cases where title
insurance companies have experienced difficulties in obtaining sufficient documentation from their
banks to resolve questions about service charges on MAHT accounts.
Finding 2
MAHT funds erroneously deposited with another State entity had not been recovered until our
inquiries.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, DHCD ensure that similar decisions are presented to the
Secretary and Board of Trustees for approval.

--- Page 18 ---
DHCD’s Response:
DHCD concurs with the finding and recommendation. In a letter dated December 14, 2011 the
Chairperson of the MAHT Board of Trustees wrote to the Executive Director of the Maryland Legal
Services Corporation requesting the funds in question. In January 2012, DHCD received and deposited
a reimbursement for MAHT in the amount of $194,145. In the future, the Secretary and Board of
Trustees will be informed of any such misrouting of MAHT funds for their consideration.
Administrative Service Fees
Finding 3
Discrepancies in amounts due from the federal government have remained unresolved.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DHCD continue its efforts to
a. resolve the reason for the discrepancies between calculated service fees due and fees actually
received, and
b. collect any previously uncollected fees due.
DCHD concurs with the finding and recommendations. However, DHCD wishes to clarify some
financial misinformation in the finding. The finding gives a misimpression that HUD owes or has
under paid DHCD administrative service fees in the amount of $421,000 for the time period in
question. Most of this amount is due to a timing difference within the billing and payment cycle
created by the HUD system. For example, HUD provides a “Monthly Summary ACC Amendment”
to DHCD detailing occupied housing units for a given month for DHCD to determine, among other
things, the amount of its administrative service fee billing based upon the unit counts on the
Summary. This Summary is dated a full month prior to the actual billing month. However, HUD
pays DHCD about two months later based upon its more current, updated occupancy data. For this
part of the equation, DHCD is being paid a correct and final amount based upon actual occupancy
data for the billing month.
However, DHCD and HUD were in dispute over the application of Fair Market Rents (FMR) to
housing projects located in the city of Columbia which is located in Howard County, Maryland.
There is an exception to Howard County FMRs for properties located in the city of Columbia which
are much higher than those for Howard County generally. The HUD Baltimore office had not been
applying them despite DHCD’s repeated protests of being underpaid for its earned administrative
service fees associated with those units. In early 2012, DHCD initiated an appeal to HUD
headquarters in Washington DC to resolve the issue. As a result, HUD headquarters agreed with
DHCD’s position and reimbursed DHCD for the amount it had been underpaid based on the FMR
dispute. In May 2012, HUD reimbursed DHCD the associated amount of $159,710. Going forward,
HUD will pay DHCD the correct FMR for these units located in the city of Columbia.

--- Page 19 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Heather A. Warriner
Senior Auditor
Cristen M. Ervin
Carey L. Harper, CPA
LaTeasa R. Robertson
J. Alexander Twigg
Staff Auditors