Title: University System of Maryland - University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science
Date: 05/20/2015
Type: Fiscal Compliance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a8f4d1dcc9d724560674728
Extracted: 2025-06-18T05:55:58.832016
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
University System of Maryland
University of Maryland Center for Environmental
Science
May 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report
fraud, waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government
resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated
anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES) engages
in environmental research, public service, and educational activities at four
regional laboratories: Appalachian Laboratory in Frostburg, Chesapeake
Biological Laboratory in Solomons, Horn Point Laboratory in Cambridge, and the
Institute for Marine and Environmental Technology in Baltimore. UMCES also
includes the Sea Grant College, which coordinates the research efforts of the
University System of Maryland that are associated with the Sea Grant Program
within the United States Department of Commerce’s National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. UMCES’ administrative office is located in
Cambridge, Maryland.
UMCES’ budget is funded by unrestricted revenues, such as State appropriations
and restricted revenues, such as federal grants. According to the State’s
accounting records, fiscal year 2014 revenues totaled approximately $43.8
million, which included a State general fund appropriation of approximately $20.7
million. UMCES expenditures for fiscal year 2014 totaled approximately $43.8
million.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated May 29, 2012. We determined that UMCES
satisfactorily addressed this finding.
Findings and Recommendations
Grants
Finding 1
Required collection efforts were not performed for outstanding grants
receivable.
Analysis
Grant amounts owed to UMCES were not always pursued in accordance with
State regulations. Our review of 10 delinquent grant accounts totaling
approximately $280,000, which had been outstanding for at least 90 days as of
3

--- Page 6 ---
October 31, 2014, disclosed that UMCES did not timely pursue collection for 8
accounts totaling approximately $253,600. The delays in issuing written demands
ranged from 24 to 311 days after the dates required, including one account for
which no written demand for payment was made until our inquiry. State
regulations generally require that three written demands for payment be made on
accounts at 30-day intervals. Delays in the pursuit of outstanding debts may
decrease the likelihood of collecting the funds.
The balance of grants receivable, due from federal and state agencies and certain
private sources, has increased over the audit period. According to UMCES’
records, as of October 31, 2014 there were 96 grant invoices with outstanding
balances totaling approximately $992,000. As of December 31, 2011, the total
outstanding balance was approximately $121,786.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMCES issue demands for payment at the intervals
required by State regulations.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the University System of
Maryland (USM) – University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science
(UMCES) for the period beginning December 2, 2011 and ending November 11,
2014. The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of this audit were to examine UMCES’
financial transactions, records, and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations.
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major financial-related
areas of operations based on assessments of significance and risk. The areas
addressed by the audit included cash receipts, purchases and disbursements,
payroll, grants and contracts, corporate purchasing cards, and revolving accounts
for research activities. We also determined the status of the finding contained in
our preceding audit report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our audit did not include certain support services provided to UMCES by the
USM Office (such as endowment accounting) and by the University of Maryland,
College Park (such as processing vendor payment transmittals and certain payroll
functions). These support services are included within the scope of our audits of
the USM Office and the University of Maryland, College Park, respectively. In
addition, our audit did not include an evaluation of internal controls over
compliance with federal laws and regulations for federal financial assistance
programs and an assessment of UMCES’ compliance with those laws and
regulations because the State of Maryland engages an independent accounting
firm to annually audit such programs administered by State agencies, including
UMCES.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspections of documents and records, observations of
UMCES’ operations, and tests of transactions. We also performed various data
extracts of pertinent information from the State’s Financial Management
Information System (such as revenue and expenditure data) and the State’s
Central Payroll Bureau (payroll data), as well as from the contractor administering
the State’s Corporate Purchasing Card Program (credit card activity). The
extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes established by the
Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to determine data
reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these various sources were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this audit. We also
extracted data from UMCES’ grants management system for the purpose of
testing grants and contracts. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were
used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that we
considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives. The reliability of data used
in this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
UMCES’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets, and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
This report includes a finding relating to a condition that we consider to be a
significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal control that could
adversely affect UMCES’ ability to maintain reliable financial records, operate
effectively and efficiently, and/or comply with applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. This condition is also a significant instance of noncompliance with
applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
The response from the USM Office, on behalf of UMCES, to our findings and
recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the
State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
we will advise the USM Office regarding the results of our review of its response.
6

--- Page 10 ---
RESPONSE TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT REPORT
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND CENTER FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
DECEMBER 2, 2011 TO NOVEMBER 11, 2014
Grants
Finding 1
Required collection efforts were not performed for outstanding grants
receivable.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that UMCES issue demands for payment at the intervals
required by State regulations.
University response
UMCES is collaborating with the University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP),
and is in the process of transitioning to the billing and accounts receivable system
currently utilized by UMCP which will eventually be integrated into the Kuali
Financial System. The implementation of this newer, more dependable invoicing
and receivables program will significantly increase the timeliness, reliability and
effectiveness of the entire invoicing process, including collections, at UMCES.
UMCES expects to be utilizing this system by late summer 2015.
UMCES hired a new Accountant in February to fill a position that had recently
been vacated, and the collection of past-due accounts was made a priority,
particularly those that were over ninety days old. Of those delinquent accounts,
85% have been collected, and the remainder is in the process of being collected.
As the invoicing process continues to generate invoices on a timely basis, we
expect to see the current receivable balances increase, but also expect to see the
delinquent balances decrease.

--- Page 11 ---
A
UDIT
T
EAM
William R. Smith, CPA
Audit Manager
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE
Senior Auditor
Annette L. Manning
Staff Auditor