Title: Maryland Thoroughbred and Harness Horse Racing Tracks
Date: 09/02/2010
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b62
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:04:37.507935
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Thoroughbred and Harness
Horse Racing Tracks
August 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternative formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Racetracks
The thoroughbred and harness racing tracks are licensed by the State of Maryland
to conduct live racing and accept wagering on simulcast racing from other
facilities throughout the United States. Details of live race days and wagering at
the racetracks for calendar year 2010 are provided in the following table:
Calendar Year 2010 Racetrack Activity
Live
Type of Pari-mutuel
Racetrack Race
Racing Wagering
Days
Laurel Park 119 $125,286,760
Thoroughbred Pimlico Race Course 20 $63,646,054
Timonium Race Course 7 $1,694,243
Rosecroft Raceway 0 $11,184,716
Harness
Ocean Downs Racetrack 4 $11,568,851
Total 150 $213,380,624
Source: Maryland Racing Commission records (unaudited)
Status of Licensees
There were two transfers of ownership, affecting three racetracks, since our
preceding audit report dated September 2, 2010. Both license transfers were
approved by the Maryland Racing Commission. A recent financial statement
audit for another licensee raised substantial doubt as to its ability to continue as a
going concern.
 Maryland Racing, Incorporated (MRI), through the Maryland Jockey Club,
owns Laurel Park and Pimlico Race Course. Ownership of MRI was
transferred from its co-owners, MI Developments, Incorporated, and Penn
National Gaming, Incorporated, to the Stronach Trust on July 1, 2011.
 A new parent company of Rosecroft Raceway, Penn National Gaming,
Incorporated, reopened the racetrack to live racing on October 21, 2011. The
racetrack had been closed since July 2010 due to bankruptcy under a different
licensee (Cloverleaf Enterprises, Incorporated).
 In its fiscal year 2011 audited financial statement report, which was submitted
subsequent to the completion of our audit fieldwork, the Ocean Downs
Racetrack independent auditor commented that recurring losses from
3

--- Page 6 ---
operations and cash flow deficiencies raised substantial doubt as to its ability
to continue as a going concern.
Automated Online Wagering Systems
Wagers at racetracks, both in Maryland and throughout the United States, are
recorded electronically by use of various automated systems. In Maryland,
racetracks generally use one system to transmit wagering transactions and
compute the payoff of winning bets, and another system to compute deductions,
such as for purses, State taxes, and simulcast signal fees.
Status of Finding From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated September 2, 2010. We determined that the finding
was not satisfactorily addressed and is repeated in this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
We have audited the licensees for the following racetracks for the period
beginning July 1, 2009 and ending June 30, 2011:
 Laurel Park
 Pimlico Race Course
 Timonium Race Course
 Rosecroft Raceway
 Ocean Downs Racetrack
These racetracks are licensed by the Maryland Racing Commission (the
Commission) to conduct live thoroughbred and harness racing in Maryland, and
to accept wagering on simulcast racing from other facilities throughout the United
States.
The purpose of this audit was to determine the licensees’ compliance with certain
State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the finding
included in our preceding audit report. The Business Regulation Article, Section
11-313 of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires the Office of Legislative
Audits to audit the licensees of thoroughbred and harness racing tracks at least
once every two years in accordance with the provisions of the State Government
Article, Sections 2-1217 through 2-1227, of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
Objectives
The three objectives of our audit were to determine whether
1. licensees disclosed all forms of ownership, as defined by the Annotated
Code of Maryland, to the Commission;
2. various systems used by licensees to distribute wagering revenues,
including taxes due the State, generated reliable financial information; and
5

--- Page 8 ---
3. licensees complied with certain requirements of State law (such as having
an annual audit performed of the financial statements for each racetrack,
and properly using revenue from video lottery proceeds), as well as with
licensing requirements of the Commission contained in the Code of
Maryland Regulations.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed various individuals employed by
the licensees. In addition, we reviewed applicable State laws, as well as records
maintained by the Commission. Furthermore, independent auditors for Laurel
Park, Pimlico Race Course, Rosecroft Raceway, and Ocean Downs Racetrack
performed certain agreed-upon procedures to provide assurances regarding the
accuracy of wagering revenues collected and the related distributions during the
audit period.1 The related reports disclosed no material deficiencies. We have
relied on the work of the independent auditors to provide audit coverage of
wagering revenues collected and related distributions. Therefore, our audit
procedures in these areas were generally limited to obtaining a sufficient basis for
that reliance.
The financial statements of each licensee are to be audited annually by
independent auditors for the purpose of expressing opinions on the fair
presentation of the licensees’ financial statements. We reviewed the available
financial statements and the related independent auditors’ reports for 2009 and
2010 (most of which are on a calendar year basis) to ensure the audits had been
completed as required by State law and to determine if any other conditions
existed that would impact our audit objectives. In each report issued,2 the
auditors stated that the licensees’ financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, their respective financial positions, results of operations and
cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States.
1 Due to the limited number of racing days (seven) at Timonium Race Course, and because the Maryland
Jockey Club (which operates Laurel Park and Pimlico Race Course) provided the pari-mutuel staff and
expertise during those seven days of racing, agreed-upon procedures were not conducted for Timonium
Race Course. For similar reasons, we also excluded such procedures from our scope. Nevertheless, an
independent accounting firm, under contract to the Maryland Racing Commission, monitors the wagering
and payments at each of the five tracks whenever racing is conducted.
2
Three of the five licensees had not obtained required audited financial statements (see Finding 1).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Our fieldwork was completed during the period from October 2011 to February
2012. A copy of this draft report was provided to each licensee and to the
Commission. The Commission’s response to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this report and represents the consolidated views of
the Commission and the licensees. Separate written responses to this report were
not requested from the licensees. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Commission regarding the results of our review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Conclusions
We concluded that, for the licensees tested, all forms of ownership were properly
reported to the Maryland Racing Commission as required by law. In addition,
based on our review of the work performed by other auditors, no material
deficiencies were disclosed regarding the various systems used by the licensees to
distribute wagering revenues, including taxes due to the State from wagering.
However, we noted that certain racetracks had not obtained audited financial
statements, as required by State law. We also noted that a written agreement
regarding the allocation of certain revenue at two racetracks had not been
executed.
Findings and Recommendations
Financial Statements
Finding 1
Audited financial statements had not been completed as required by State
law.
Analysis
Three of the five licensees had not obtained audited financial statements, as
required by State law, due to certain financial issues associated with the licensees.
Specifically, as of June 4, 2012, one licensee (Rosecroft) had not obtained audited
financial statements for two fiscal years, covering the period from January 1, 2009
through December 31, 2010. In addition, two licensees (Laurel and Pimlico) had
not obtained audited financial statements for the period from January 1, 2009
through April 30, 2010. We were advised that the financial statements were not
audited during these periods due to the bankruptcy status of the entities that
previously owned controlling interests in the racetracks.
In our preceding audit report, the financial statements for two of these licensees
(Laurel and Pimlico) for fiscal year 2008 (January 1, 2008 through December 31,
2008) were not issued. These financial statements also remain outstanding.
Because of the changes in ownership, Maryland Racing Commission management
advised us that it believes it is unlikely to receive these outstanding financial
statements.
The Business Regulation Article, Title 11-313 (b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires licensees to submit audited financial statements within 90 days
of the end of the fiscal year.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that the Commission work with the licensees to ensure that
audited financial statements are completed in accordance with the
requirements of State law (repeat).
Finding 2
Two racetracks had not entered into formal agreements concerning the
allocation of simulcast funds used for purses.
Analysis
Two thoroughbred racetracks (Laurel and Pimlico) had not entered into formal
agreements with the organizations that represent trainers and breeders concerning
how to allocate the revenue received from simulcast races at Maryland
racetracks. Instead, we were advised that only an oral agreement to allocate the
funds is in place.
According to licensee records, simulcast revenue for the two racetracks totaled
$15.3 million during calendar year 2010.
State law requires that revenue from simulcast races in this state shall be allocated
to the licensee, purse, and applicable bred fund according to the agreement made
by the licensee, licensed owners and trainers, and breeders.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that the racetracks execute written agreements with
organizations that represent trainers and breeders as to how to allocate the
revenue from simulcast races.
9

--- Page 13 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Joel E. Kleiman, CPA
Senior Auditor