Title: Kent County Public Schools
Date: 05/13/2013
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d37cc9d72404c150a22
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:45:03.372111
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Kent County Public Schools
May 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2012 Activity 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Finding 1 – Accountability Over School Activity Fund Cash Receipts 9
Was Not Maintained at One School
Finding 2 – KCPS Did Not Have an Independent Verification Process 11
to Ensure All Amounts Were Deposited
Federal Funds 12
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 3 – User Access to the Financial System Was Not restricted 13
For Certain Employees and Proper Controls Were Not Established
Over Disbursements and Wire Transfers
* Finding 4 – KCPS Did Not Analyze the Cost Benefit of Continuing to 14
Outsource Certain Facility Management Services
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 5 – Certain System Users Had Been Assigned Incompatible 15
Functions and Reports of Payroll Changes Were Not Generated
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 6 – KCPS Policies and Physical Inventory Procedures Need 16
Improvement to Safeguard Equipment
Information Technology
* Finding 7 – Proper Monitoring and Authentication Controls Were Not 17
Established Over a Critical Database, Application and Server
Finding 8 – The KCPS Network Was Not Properly Secured 19
* Finding 9 – Controls Over Disaster Recovery, Backup of Critical Data 20
and Devices, and Anti-Virus Protection Were Not Sufficient
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 10 – KCPS Entered Into a Long-Term Agreement to Purchase 22
Solar Energy But Did Not Establish Sufficient Procedures to Verify the
Related Billings
Transportation Services 23
Food Service Operations 24
School Board Oversight
Finding 11 – KCPS Financial Disclosure Forms Were Not Always 25
On File and Were Not Sufficiently Comprehensive
Other Financial Controls
Finding 12 – KCPS Did Not Ensure that Claims Paid Were Reviewed 26
for Propriety or Verify the Eligibility of Health Care Coverage
Participants
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 29
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Kent County Public Schools (KCPS)
May 2013
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
KCPS ranks lowest in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems
in Maryland. In fiscal year 2012, KCPS had a total full-time regular and
special education pupil population of 2,162 at its 7 schools. KCPS’ operating
and capital expenditures totaled $32.7 million during that year.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of KCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated May 11, 2007. While a number of our prior report findings
were addressed, our current audit identified several opportunities for KCPS to
improve internal controls and to consider the cost-effectiveness of a certain
contractual arrangement.
KCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability in Certain
Financial Areas
Although proper internal controls had been established in certain financial
areas, such as transportation and food services, KCPS needs to improve
internal controls and accountability in certain other financial areas. For
example, KCPS needs to enhance controls over the processing of
procurements and disbursements. We found certain employees had been
assigned critical automated financial system capabilities enabling them to
perform incompatible functions such as the ability to prepare purchase
orders, add vendors, process invoices, and approve payments. Similar control
weaknesses were identified for payroll processing functions.
Adequate security measures and monitoring procedures were not in place to
protect KCPS’ network and related critical devices from security risks. For
example, KCPS did not properly secure access to its internal network which
could allow unintended access to certain users. In addition, KCPS had not
developed a complete disaster recovery plan or adequately secured backup
files.
KCPS Should Evaluate the Cost Benefit of Continuing to Contract for Certain
Services
KCPS has used a maintenance management contract to perform certain
facility management services (such as overseeing custodial and maintenance
work) since 1988. This contract, which was rebid in 2008, has an annual cost
5

--- Page 8 ---
of $443,000 and includes provisions for paying the vendor administrative
overhead as well as a specific profit amount. KCPS had not analyzed the cost
benefits of using its own employees rather than contracting for the services.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Kent County Public Schools (KCPS) is the
lowest in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. From fiscal year 2002 to 2012, the total full-time regular and
special education pupil population has decreased 19 percent from 2,684 to
2,162 pupils. For the 2011-2012 school year, KCPS had 7 schools,
consisting of 5 elementary, 1 middle, and 1 high school. According to KCPS’
audited financial statements and required supplementary information,
operating and capital expenditures totaled $32.7 million in fiscal year 2012.
The largest expenditure category was salaries and wages, including benefits,
which accounted for 80 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2012.
According to MSDE records, as of October 2012, KCPS had 310 full-time
equivalent positions which consisted of 211 instructional and 99 non-
instructional employees.
Oversight
KCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Kent
County government provide the vast majority of KCPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with KCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Kent County government exercises authority over KCPS primarily
through review and approval of KCPS’ annual operational and capital budgets.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2012 Activity
KCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts
what is referred to as a Single Audit of KCPS federal grant programs, as
required by federal regulations. The resulting financial statement for fiscal
year 2012 and single audit reports were issued in September 2012 and
December 2012, respectively. Neither report included any material
7

--- Page 10 ---
weaknesses1 or deficiencies2 in KCPS’ record keeping, processes, and
controls. Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified
public accounting firm that audited KCPS’ financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we
relied on the results of the independent audit of the fiscal year 2011 financial
statements to reduce the scope of our audit work related to revenues,
accounts receivable, federal grant activity, and school activity fund
disbursements.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 12 of the 15 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated May 11, 2007. We followed up
on these 12 findings based on our current assessment of significance and
risk relative to the audit objectives. We determined that KCPS satisfactorily
addressed 8 of these findings. The remaining 4 findings are repeated in this
report.
1 A material weakness in internal control is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, such that
there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Board’s financial statements (or,
with respect to Single Audit, material noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal
program) will not be prevented or detected and corrected, on a timely basis.
2 A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent or
detect misstatements on a timely basis. With respect to Single Audit, a deficiency is a control deficiency,
or combination of control deficiencies, that does not allow management or employees, in the normal
course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct noncompliance with a
type of compliance requirement of a federal program on a timely basis.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Kent County Public Schools (KCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Kent County, the State, and the federal government. According
to the KCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled
$32.7 million during fiscal year 2012. In addition, KCPS maintains school
activity funds that are collected to operate various student activities, clubs,
and school publications. Each school maintains detail records which
separately account for the activity of each group or club. Each school also
maintains its own separate bank account. For fiscal year 2012, school
activity fund collections totaled $249,000 and disbursements totaled
$265,000. The June 30, 2012 balance based on the audited financial
statements totaled $57,000.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the KCPS financial statements and the objectives
of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of that
audit to reduce the scope of our audit procedures for certain revenues and
accounts receivable (for example, amounts due from other governments).
The auditor’s procedural review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses
or deficiencies regarding significant revenue types or accounts receivable.
Such testing included the most significant revenue types--the majority of
which related to electronic fund transfers from other government entities.
Finding 1
Accountability over school activity fund cash receipts was not maintained at
one school.
Analysis
Internal controls over school activity fund cash receipts at one school tested
(Kent County High School) were not adequate. Specifically we noted the
following conditions:
 The transfer of funds from the event/activity coordinators to an
administrative employee responsible for preparing the deposit and
maintaining the related records was not adequately documented.
Although this employee prepared a cash receipts form which was
9

--- Page 12 ---
generated from the automated cash receipts system and signed the form,
this form was not always signed by the employee who initially received and
delivered the funds to document the transfer.
 Collections were not verified to deposit by an employee independent of the
cash receipts process. In addition, the employee who prepared the bank
reconciliation also received, processed, and deposited cash receipts.
 Although a supervisory employee reviewed the monthly bank
reconciliation, this process did not include a review of the supporting
documentation, including deposit and related documents.
 The administrative employee had the ability to modify transactions in the
system (such as voiding transactions) without supervisory review or
approval. Although the system had the capability to generate a report of
modifications, the school did not generate such a report for subsequent
review. The same automated system was used at all KCPS schools;
therefore, users assigned the applicable system access capabilities at
those schools would also have the ability to modify posted transactions
without independent review or approval.
Our test of 20 school activity fund deposits for fiscal years 2011 and 2012
totaling $84,000 disclosed five deposits totaling $29,000 where certain
system documentation of funds received and processed did not agree to the
validated deposit slip. Specifically, funds recorded into the system upon
receipt from the event/activity coordinators exceeded the amounts deposited
by $8,000. We could not determine the reason for these differences. As a
result, we tested all fiscal year 2012 deposits and found no additional
instances of significant discrepancies between amounts recorded as having
been received and amounts ultimately deposited.
In April 2012, KCPS contracted with its independent auditor to perform
certain agreed upon procedures related to school activity funds at this school.
In its resulting correspondence and report, the auditor stated that certain
transactions could not be verified and made a number of recommendations to
improve internal controls over school activity fund receipts. In September
2012, KCPS issued additional guidance over the processing of school activity
fund receipts.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that KCPS ensure that
a. deposits are properly recorded upon receipt by the school’s administrative
employee, including signatures to document the transfer of funds from the
event/activity coordinators;
b. an employee independent of the cash receipts process verify that all
collections are subsequently deposited;
c. an independent employee review and approve the monthly bank
reconciliations, including a review of the related supporting
documentation; and
d. an employee independent of the school activity funds’ cash receipts and
recordkeeping functions review all modified transactions recorded (such
as voided transactions) in the system for propriety.
We advised KCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 2
KCPS did not have an independent verification process to ensure all amounts
were deposited.
Analysis
KCPS did not have an independent verification process to ensure all amounts
recorded as received at the central office were deposited. Specifically, after
initially recording in a log by one employee, another employee restrictively
endorsed the checks, prepared the deposit, and received the bank validated
deposit slip. However, no comparison was made of the validated deposit slip
to the log used to initially record all funds received by the office to ensure all
receipts were deposited. Cash receipts received and processed by the central
office totaled $1.2 million in fiscal year 2012 (such as certain grants and
certain payments from the State of Maryland).
Recommendation
We recommend that KCPS ensure that an employee independent of the
collection and deposit functions verifies that all recorded collections were
deposited. We advised KCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of
duties using existing personnel.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Federal Funds
Background
KCPS receives federal funds that are generally restricted for use for a
specified program (such as the School Lunch Program or Special Education).
According to the audited Schedule of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2012
expenditures of federal award funds totaled $3.7 million.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to the work performed by the independent certified public accounting
firm that conducted the Single Audit of the KCPS federal grant programs and
the objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor’s work and
results. Besides expressing an opinion on KCPS compliance with the terms of
several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal
control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2012
required Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported
grant-related expenditures). The related report stated that KCPS complied, in
all material respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal
programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the
operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did not identify any
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to KCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled $6.6 million
during fiscal year 2012. Board policies and procedures require the use of
competitive bidding and the solicitation of bids or quotations for most
procurements. KCPS has developed detailed procedures to govern the
procurement process, including the use of automated approvals. All invoices
are submitted by vendors directly to the finance office. The receipt of goods
and services is confirmed by the requesting department before payment
processing. Payments are processed by the finance office using an
automated system that prints vendor checks and also posts the payment to
the financial records.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 3
User access to the automated financial system was not restricted for certain
employees and proper controls were not established over disbursements and
wire transfers.
Analysis
KCPS did not establish adequate internal controls over its automated financial
system and related verification processes. Specifically, our review disclosed
the following conditions:
 KCPS did not adequately limit user capabilities on its automated financial
system used to prepare purchase orders and process invoice payments.
For example, our audit disclosed that three employees had unrestricted
access to critical system functions such as the ability to prepare purchase
orders, add vendors, process invoices, and approve payments. As a result
of these incompatible capabilities, improper or erroneous transactions
could be processed without detection. Our testing did not disclose any
improper payments as all items tested appeared to be for valid KCPS
business.
 Although KCPS implemented a process in April 2012 that required online
supervisory review and approval of all invoices prior to payment, the
employee responsible for this review function was one of the employees
with the unrestricted access capabilities commented on above. In
addition, this employee did not compare the payments entered into the
automated system to the source documentation (such as the invoice).
 Controls over wire transfers used to make certain payments were
inadequate. Specifically, four KCPS employees had the ability to initiate
and authorize wire transfers, and there was no call-back confirmation from
the bank to an independent KCPS employee. We were advised by the
bank that that the current agreement with KCPS only required one
authorized employee to initiate and process a transfer. Our test of wire
transfers processed by KCPS disclosed that the transfers tested were for
appropriate KCPS disbursements and were properly supported.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that KCPS
a. restrict critical system access capabilities so that incompatible functions
are separated;
b. ensure that an employee independent of the disbursement process review
supporting documentation (such as invoices) when approving payments in
the automated system; and,
13

--- Page 16 ---
c. establish proper controls over the processing of wire transfers, specifically
by requiring the bank to obtain call-back confirmation from an
independent employee before executing the wire transfer.
We advised KCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 4
KCPS did not analyze the cost benefit of continuing to outsource certain
facility management services.
Analysis
KCPS did not analyze the cost benefit of continuing to outsource certain
facility management services. KCPS has contracted with a vendor to provide
custodian, grounds, maintenance, building, and management services for all
facilities in the Kent County Public School System since 1988 and we were
advised by KCPS management that no analysis was prepared to determine if
outsourcing these services was cost beneficial for KCPS. The contract was
competitively bid in 2008 and, after exercising renewal options, the contract
with this vendor has been extended through fiscal year 2017 at an annual
cost of $443,000. Under the current contract, the vendor is responsible for
the following:
 On-site managers
 Custodial supplies and equipment
 Waste disposal
 Automated maintenance management system
Maintenance and custodial personnel are KCPS employees; two contractor
employees manage these individuals. In addition to the contracted services,
the contract pricing includes administrative and management overhead of
$22,000 and profit of $66,000 annually. KCPS has continued to contract
with this vendor for over 20 years, and we are not aware of any other school
system in the State that contracts for custodial and maintenance
management services to this extent. A similar condition was commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that KCPS formally determine whether the continued use of
an outsourced contractor for management of its maintenance and custodial
operations is cost beneficial for KCPS (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll represents the largest single cost component in the KCPS budget.
According to KCPS records, fiscal year 2012, salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled approximately $26.1 million. According to MSDE reports, as of
October 2012, KCPS had 310 full-time equivalent positions including 99 non-
instructional positions.
Finding 5
Certain users of the automated human resources and payroll system had
been assigned incompatible functions, and reports of payroll changes were
not generated.
Analysis
KCPS did not establish adequate internal controls over its automated human
resources and payroll system and related processes. Specifically, our review
disclosed the following conditions:
 KCPS did not adequately segregate duties by limiting authorized users’
capabilities on the automated human resources and payroll system. Our
review of the 11 user IDs with access to the automated human resources
and payroll system disclosed that 4 employees had been assigned system
capabilities that allowed them to perform all critical system functions
(including the ability to add and delete employees and process payroll
adjustments), even though these employees did not require these
capabilities to perform their job duties. In addition, although the
remaining seven users required access to perform their job duties, these
employees had complete and unrestricted access to all human resources
and payroll functions. As a result of these conditions, improper or
erroneous transactions could be processed without detection.
 KCPS did not generate any report of changes made to payroll (such as the
addition of new employees or pay rate changes) and, as a result, did not
verify the propriety of the individual changes actually processed. Although
we were advised that such changes were reviewed prior to processing,
these reviews did not provide assurance that all processed changes were
proper since changes entered in the payroll system were not subject to
review after they were entered onto the system, and the employees
responsible for this review also had the capability to process payroll
changes on the system. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Our tests of payroll changes and adjustments did not disclose any
inappropriate or erroneous transactions.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that KCPS ensure that adequate controls are in place over
payroll processing. Specifically, we recommend that KCPS
a. separate incompatible functions and only assign critical system functions
to employees who need those capabilities to perform their job duties; and
b. perform independent supervisory reviews of changes actually processed
for the bi-weekly payroll, at least on a test basis, by agreeing changes to
appropriate supporting documentation (repeat).
We advised KCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to KCPS records, the undepreciated value of its equipment totaled
approximately $9.4 million as of June 30, 2012. KCPS uses centralized
automated records to track equipment items with an individual cost of $5,000
or more for financial statement purposes. In addition, KCPS maintains
secondary records of certain other technology sensitive equipment (such as
laptops) for control purposes.
Finding 6
KCPS’ policies and physical inventory procedures need improvement to
promote more accountability over equipment.
Analysis
Our review disclosed that KCPS’ policies over the recordation of sensitive
equipment (such as laptops, projectors, and other electronic equipment) were
not comprehensive. Although KCPS’ policy required items costing more than
$5,000 to be capitalized and recorded on the detail records, KCPS did not
have a formal policy addressing the recordation of sensitive items costing less
than $5,000 to help ensure proper accountability and control over those
items.
Furthermore, we noted that the physical inventory counts taken by equipment
custodians (the teachers and staff using the equipment) were not subject to
independent verification, even on a test basis. In addition, the count sheets
prepared by the custodians were forwarded to the central office but were not
16

--- Page 19 ---
reconciled to the detail records since equipment tag numbers were often not
included on the count sheets. As a result, it was impossible for KCPS to
reconcile the count sheets to the detail records and ensure that all equipment
on the detail records was properly accounted for.
Our review of the physical inventories for fiscal years 2011 and 2012
disclosed that two locations (out of nine total locations) did not submit
inventory results and one location did not include sensitive equipment on the
fiscal year 2012 physical inventory count sheets. KCPS Board policy requires
that inventories include all equipment.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that KCPS
a. establish a formal policy addressing the recordation of sensitive items;
and
b. perform physical inventories of all equipment, record equipment tag
numbers on the count sheets, independently verify the counts at least on
a test basis, and reconcile the inventory results to the detail records.
Information Technology
Background
The KCPS Technology Department maintains and administers the KCPS
computer network, computer operations, and information systems
applications. KCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects the individual schools to the computer resources located at
the KCPS headquarters building. This building hosts critical devices including
computer servers which support KCPS’ critical applications including its
student management system and its financial management and
payroll/human resources systems.
Finding 7
Proper monitoring and authentication controls were not established over a
critical database, application, and application server.
Analysis
Monitoring and authentication controls over a critical database, application,
and application server were not adequate. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
 Account and password controls over the student information system
application were not sufficient to properly protect critical resources.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Password lifetime, length, complexity, history, and account lockout were
not in accordance with best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) Information Security Policy.
For example, required password length was set to one character for
administrators and teachers; however, the aforementioned Policy requires
a minimum of eight characters.
 The student information system database was not configured to log any
database security activity. Examples of database activities which should
be logged and analyzed include direct changes to critical data tables,
changes to database security settings, and use of certain critical
privileges. This condition could result in unauthorized or inappropriate
activities (affecting the integrity of the production database information)
going undetected by management. The aforementioned DoIT Information
Security Policy states that information systems must generate audit
records for all security-relevant events and procedures must be developed
to routinely review audit records for indications of unusual activities or
suspected violations. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
 The server hosting the financial and payroll/human resources systems
was not configured to log critical security events in accordance with the
recommendations of the server operating system’s vendor. Accordingly,
critical events such as account logon failures were not logged. As
previously mentioned, the aforementioned DoIT Information Security
Policy requires logging and monitoring of such security events. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Three employees had unnecessary user security access capabilities which
allowed these employees the ability to update, modify, change, or add user
access. None of these employees required this access to perform their
routine job duties. We also found a generic user ID (not assigned to a
specific employee) with access capabilities that also allowed the ability to
update, modify, change, or add user access. As a result, these users
could create an improper user account or improperly modify existing user
accounts.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that KCPS establish appropriate monitoring and
authentication controls. Specifically, we recommend that KCPS
a. establish appropriate account and password controls over the student
information system application,
18

--- Page 21 ---
b. log the student information system database security events and monitor
such events (repeat),
c. log financial and payroll/human resources systems’ critical security events
and monitor such events (repeat), and
d. establish user security access capabilities commensurate with the users’
routine job duties.
Finding 8
The KCPS network was not properly secured.
Analysis
The KCPS network was not properly secured. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 Eight publicly and widely accessible servers were located on the KCPS
internal network rather than isolating these servers in a separate
protected network zone. These servers, which could potentially be
compromised, exposed the internal network to attack from external
sources. Recommended security procedures, per the National Institute of
Standards and Technology Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy
include placing publicly accessible servers in an external protected zone
so as to protect those servers as well as an entity’s internal network.
 KCPS did not adequately secure its internal network from improper
network level access from KCPS high school computer lab workstations or
school system laptops used by students. KCPS did not use network
access control software or network level traffic filtering to protect its
network from activity emanating from these computer lab workstations
and school system issued laptops. Such access should be limited to
devices and ports necessary for students to perform required tasks.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that KCPS
a. segregate publicly and widely accessible servers in a separate protected
network zone, and
b. implement controls to limit network level student access to only
authorized local school and headquarters network resources.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 9
Controls over disaster recovery planning, backup of critical data and devices,
and anti-virus protection of critical devices were not sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over disaster recovery planning, backup of critical data and devices,
and anti-virus protection of critical devices were not sufficient. Specifically,
we noted the following conditions:
 KCPS did not have a complete information technology disaster recovery
plan (DRP) for recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for
example, a fire or flood). The State of Maryland Information Technology
(IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines provide information on the minimum
required elements needed for a complete information systems’ DRP.
KCPS’ DRP did not address several of these minimum requirements. For
example, the DRP did not contain listings of hardware and software
components or prioritize applications for recovery. Without a complete
DRP, a disaster could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period
of time) in restoring information systems operations above and beyond the
expected delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario.
 Procedures for backing up the financial and payroll/human resources
database and application server and critical network device configurations
were not adequate. For example, the daily backups for the financial and
payroll/human resources database and the configurations of critical core
switches and the KCPS firewall were stored at the home of an employee
rather than being stored in a secure, environmentally-controlled facility as
specified by the aforementioned Guidelines.
 All of the KCPS’ workstations and servers running a certain operating
system did not have any anti-virus software installed. In addition, the
server hosting the financial and payroll/human resource application did
not have any anti-virus software installed. Finally, another important
server had not had its virus definitions updated since December 31, 2009.
Best practices identified in the aforementioned DoIT Information Security
Policy, state that agencies, at a minimum, must protect against malicious
code by implementing protections such as anti-virus software.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that KCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that is in accordance with
the State of Maryland Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery
Guidelines (repeat);
b. store all backups of data and device configurations at an off-site, secure,
environmentally-controlled location (repeat); and
c. maintain current anti-virus definitions and software on all computers that
connect to its network and enable real-time virus scanning protection on
all of its computers (repeat).
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
KCPS maintains 7 schools (totaling 504,000 square feet) with a staff of 5
maintenance and 23 custodial personnel. Fiscal year 2012 expenditures for
maintenance and operations totaled $2.7 million based on the audited
financial statements. According to the fiscal year 2012 Capital Improvement
Plan, the estimated cost of construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements that were needed for KCPS facilities over the next six years
totaled $15.8 million.
KCPS Reorganized its Schools to Address Student Capacity and Improve
Efficiency
In fiscal year 2010, the Board of Education approved a school reorganization
plan effective for the 2010–2011 school year. The reorganization
consolidated three existing middle schools into one, created an additional
elementary school and moved the existing administrative offices into a former
elementary school. The existing administrative offices were declared surplus
and transferred to the Kent County Commissioners after approval by the
Board of Public Works. The primary reasons for the reorganization included a
more efficient use of resources for middle school students, the creation of
community-based elementary schools, and expansion of grades at all
elementary schools (pre-kindergarten through fifth grade).
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
KCPS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. For example, KCPS
contracted with a vendor to implement an energy conservation program over a
four-year period ending December 2011. The agreement was designed to
reduce energy costs through the conservation and monitoring of energy
usage. Energy usage would be monitored by a KCPS employee who also
performs energy audits at KCPS facilities. According to reports prepared by
21

--- Page 24 ---
the program coordinator (which we did not audit), KCPS avoided $1.5 million
in energy costs during the contract period. In addition, KCPS participates in a
consortium with other Eastern Shore entities to pool their buying power to
purchase energy at the best possible prices and has entered into an
agreement with a utility to purchase solar power.
KCPS Generally Performed Preventive Maintenance in Accordance with
Predetermined Intervals
KCPS generally performed preventive maintenance in accordance with
intervals specified in its Comprehensive Maintenance Plan. Our review of the
automated work order system used to document performance of routine
preventive maintenance, which we tested and found to be accurate, disclosed
that KCPS completed a significant portion of the required tasks.
Finding 10
KCPS entered into a long-term agreement to purchase solar energy but did
not establish sufficient procedures to verify the related billings.
Analysis
KCPS entered into a long-term agreement to purchase solar energy but did
not ensure the propriety of the related billings. In October 2011, the Kent
County Commissioners, on behalf of the County and KCPS, entered into an
agreement with a utility that authorized the utility to build a solar power array
on KCPS property. Under the agreement, the County and KCPS agreed to
purchase all power generated by the array for a 20-year period commencing
with the completion of the construction and initiation of power generation.
The agreement includes the price per kilowatt hour over the duration of the
agreement. Under the agreement, the power will be used for three KCPS
facilities and two county facilities. All costs of construction were borne by the
utility and the utility is responsible for all future maintenance.
The construction was completed, and the array was dedicated on July 10,
2012. The array will generate an estimated 1,600 megawatt hours per year.
An analysis prepared by the utility estimated that anticipated savings resulting
from the use of solar energy at the three KCPS facilities would total $2.3
million over the life of the contract.
Although the array began operation in July 2012, KCPS had not been charged
the rate for the solar power on its utility invoices through August 27, 2012.
That is, the utility bills received by KCPS since the array began operation (two
invoices) reflected the regular electricity rate, but KCPS had not been charged
for any of its electricity usage at the potentially lower solar contract rate. We
22

--- Page 25 ---
were advised by KCPS’ existing utility that separate meters had not yet been
installed to accurately record usage from the solar array for each separate
facility; therefore, usage could not be verified.
We contacted the County and were advised that it had received invoices that
included the solar power at the agreed-upon contract price but that the usage
appeared excessive compared to the County’s historical usage for the
locations included in the agreement. The County invoices appeared to include
all electricity being generated by the array including power that should have
been provided and billed to KCPS facilities. County personnel advised us that
they were reviewing the invoices with the electric and solar utilities to
determine the proper distribution of costs.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that KCPS work with the utilities and County to ensure that
a. meters are installed to accurately record electric usage at each KCPS
facility included in the contract,
b. solar power usage since the array started generating power is properly
allocated to each facility, and
c. KCPS receives appropriate credit from the existing electricity utility for
solar power usage since the installation of the array.
Transportation Services
Background
KCPS has approximately 2,000 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on one of 31
contractor-owned buses. According to KCPS records, fiscal year 2011
transportation costs totaled $2.2 million, with 92 percent representing
payments to contractors. Of the 713,000 reported route miles for the 2011 -
2012 school year, 14 percent represented miles traveled to transport
disabled students.
Bus Contractor Payment Methodology Appeared Reasonable and Payments
Were Properly Controlled and Supported
KCPS payment methodology for its bus contractors, as contained in the
related contracts, appeared reasonable. In addition, adequate controls over
the payment process were established. Contractors receive payments based
on automated routing system reports that include driving time and mileage.
In addition, KCPS personnel periodically verify this information to contractor
prepared manifests (primarily when the contractor requests an increase
based on additional time or mileage). Our tests of payments made to all
23

--- Page 26 ---
contractors for the month of February 2012 disclosed that payments agreed
to routing software reports, contractor manifests, and contractually agreed
upon rates.
KCPS Uses Automated Routing Software to Assist In Bus Routing Decisions
KCPS continually reviews bus routes and uses its automated routing software
to assist in this process. We sighted documentation that KCPS regularly
reviewed its bus routes with staff, parents, and bus contractors in order to
attempt to develop efficient bus routes.
Food Service Operations
Background
KCPS has a cooking cafeteria at six of its seven schools. Food and related
supplies are received and stored in a central warehouse and transported to
schools weekly. In fiscal year 2011, KCPS had 28 food service positions
(consisting of 25 cafeteria positions and 3 administrative positions).
According to the audited financial statements, food service operations
revenues exceeded expenditures by $22,000 for fiscal year 2012.
Controls Over Food Ordering and Payment of Related Invoices Were Adequate
Our review of KCPS procedures over food ordering and usage disclosed that
cafeteria managers monitor food usage on a daily basis and that this
information is reviewed periodically by food service management. We also
tested contracts procured for food supplies in fiscal year 2011 and 2012 and
related invoices, and found that KCPS properly procured the contracts and
that payments made to vendors were in accordance with the terms of the
related contracts.
KCPS Had Processes in Place to Encourage Participation in the Free and
Reduced Price Meal Programs
KCPS uses appropriate processes to help ensure that eligible students
participate in the free and reduced price meal programs. For example, KCPS
uses family applications (instead of individual student applications) to qualify
more students. In addition, all students are assigned individual personal
identification numbers for use with KCPS’ automated point-of-sale system so
that the system can identify all eligible students without any stigma of
participating in the program. Based on KCPS records, for fiscal year 2011, 87
percent of KCPS students eligible to receive free lunches and 74 percent of
the students eligible to receive reduced-price lunches actually participated in
the programs.
24

--- Page 27 ---
School Board Oversight
Background
The KCPS Board of Education is composed of five elected members and one
non-voting student representative. In its oversight responsibilities, the Board
contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent audits of
the KCPS financial statements and federal programs. Due to the size of KCPS
and the limited membership of the Board, a committee structure is not used,
but rather, individual members are periodically informed of and become
involved in all aspects of operations and governance.
KCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Meets the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure.
Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all KCPS
employees. KCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of three members
who are not subject to the authority of the Board of Education to interpret
ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent,
Assistant Superintendents, and a number of other administrators (such as
supervisors of human resources and transportation) by April 30th of each year.
Finding 11
KCPS financial disclosure forms were not always filed as required and the
forms were not sufficiently comprehensive as required.
Analysis
Our review of calendar year 2010 and 2011 financial disclosure statements
revealed that not all supervisory employees and Board members submitted
financial disclosure statements as required. Specifically, for both years, 3 of
10 school officials required to submit the statement had not done so as of
June 2012.
Furthermore, although KCPS modified their financial disclosure requirements
to include additional information in May 2012, as of September 2012, the
financial disclosure form had not been revised to reflect the changes to the
ethics policies. The form KCPS used to report financial disclosures only
required the reporting of gifts if received, and did not include any requirement
to report additional information such as interests in business entities doing
25

--- Page 28 ---
business with KCPS, or certain outside employment which could disclose
potential conflicts of interest.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that KCPS
a. ensure that all applicable school officials file annual financial disclosure
statements in a timely manner, and
b. revise the financial disclosure statement form to ensure that requested
information is consistent with the requirements of its policy (such as the
requirements to disclose certain interests).
Other Financial Controls
Finding 12
KCPS did not ensure that claims paid were reviewed for propriety or verify the
eligibility of health care coverage participants.
Analysis
KCPS did not ensure that health care claims paid were reviewed for propriety
or verify the eligibility of health care coverage participants. KCPS provides
health care coverage to employees and eligible dependents through the
Eastern Shore of Maryland Educational Consortium Alliance. However, the
Alliance and KCPS did not ensure that claims paid by the health care provider
were reviewed for propriety. In addition, KCPS did not always verify the
eligibility of enrolled program participants' dependents. As of June 2012,
KCPS provided health care coverage to 857 employees, retirees, and their
dependents.
The Alliance contracts with a health care provider and each local entity which
is a member of the Alliance pays premiums directly to the provider. As KCPS
is self insured, to the extent that premiums paid each year exceed actual and
anticipated claims, KCPS is eligible for a refund (KCPS would reimburse the
provider if claims exceeded premium payments for the year). According to its
records for fiscal year 2012, KCPS paid the health care provider and the
Alliance $3.1 million and $853,000, respectively. Based on the Alliance's
year-end settlement, KCPS received a refund (that is, premium payments
exceeded actual and expected claims payments) of $496,400 applicable to
fiscal year 2011. According to KCPS personnel, refunds are credited to KCPS'
account to offset costs for the following year.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Recommended practices published by the Government Finance Officers
Association state that health care cost containment, which include verification
of enrolled participants, is a critical component of long-term financial planning
and budgeting.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that KCPS institute processes to
a. verify the propriety of claims paid by the health care provider, at least on a
test basis; and
b. verify the eligibility of enrolled health care program participants and their
listed dependents.
27

--- Page 30 ---
28

--- Page 31 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Kent County Public
Schools (KCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the KCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the KCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of KCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on KCPS dated May 11, 2007, was limited to those findings that
were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the KCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by KCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at KCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
29

--- Page 32 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).3
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of KCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from January 1, 2011 through April 30,
2012. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits KCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
KCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to KCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from May 2012 to September 2012. The KCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise KCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
3 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies or
practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
30

--- Page 34 ---
 level. Total cash collections for fiscal year 2012 amounted to less than 1% of total
revenue. Over 99% of the local and restricted fund revenue is electronically
deposited and does not require the handling of cash. Additional measure put into
place is the deposit ticket is compared to the journal by finance secretary.
Finding #3­
User Access to the Financial System was not Restricted for Certain Employees and
Proper Controls Were Not Established Over Disbursements and Wire Transfers
 KCPS just upgraded to a newer financial system at the end of April 2012. The
legislative auditors arrived late May to begin their audit. In the short period of time
with the upgrade we did not have time to review the controls adequately with
security settings for individuals. All security settings had to all be re‐set with the
upgrade. However, the three individuals that had the access and the abilities to
create purchase orders and add vendors would not have been able to initiate any
transactions through the proper approval process as there are other check points in
place. The accounts payable secretary initiates the disbursements of checks which
are approved by the accountant and overseen by the supervisor of finance. These
security settings have been modified to restrict access to the three named
individuals.
 Although the accountant has online approval and review authority she now verifies
the check payment with the data presented to the accounts payable secretary before
approving. Again, these data are also verified through the monthly bank statement.
 Wire transfers are initiated by the accountant and are only wired to a specific list of
approved vendors with Chesapeake Bank and Trust. In the event a transfer is
requested to anyone other than the list of approved vendors the bank will call the
supervisor of finance to verify the transaction. The accountant initiates the wire
transfers and the supervisor of finance now signs the request before faxing to
Chesapeake Bank and Trust. The supervisor of finance also signs the journal
voucher immediately after the wire transfer. This process has always been in place
and is not a reflection of this finding.1
1 Auditor’s Comment: Although KCPS indicated that other procedures were in place (such as transfers only being
wired to a specific list of approved vendors) to mitigate the risks associated with such transfers, we were advised
by the bank that those procedures had not been instituted. Specifically, the bank advised that any of the
individuals authorized to wire funds from KCPS accounts could solely initiate a wire transfer to any payee as long as
sufficient vendor account information was provided to the bank. We were also informed that the wire agreement
contains no restrictions to wire funds only to specified vendors or call‐back requirements.
SUCCESSFUL LEARNING FOR ALL STUDENTS

--- Page 35 ---
Finding #4­
KCPS Did Not Analyze the Cost Benefit of Continuing to Outsource Certain Facility
Management Services
 KCPS did not bid out the renewal contract with Aramark because Aramark offered
KCPS a full facilities assessment (valued in the amount of $60,000) as well as no
increase in the contract other than the general CPI increase. Management felt it was
in the best interest to renew the contract with Aramark.
 KCPS will conduct a cost benefit analysis before the renewal of the next Aramark
contract.
Finding #5­
Certain System Users Had Been Assigned Incompatible Functions and Reports of
Payroll Changes Were Not Generated
 KCPS is very challenged with the separation of duties in the payroll department.
KCPS currently has two employees that are involved in the payroll process who also
perform other day to day duties. However, KCPS believes that we have adequate
controls in place in regards to the processing of payroll. All payroll journals are
reviewed before employees are paid by the supervisor of finance. Bank statements
are reviewed by the accountant. There were two other employees that had the
capabilities to add and delete employees and information, and also process payroll
adjustments and those security settings have been adjusted.
Finding #6­
Finding: KCPS Policies and Physical Inventory Procedures Need Improvement to
Safeguard Equipment
 All technology purchases will be inventoried using our Filemaker Pro database by
the technology department to include number and date of purchase order, date of
last inventory, and unit cost of equipment. An annual physical inventory will be
conducted by the technology department on a building by building basis.
SUCCESSFUL LEARNING FOR ALL STUDENTS

--- Page 36 ---
Finding #7­
Proper Monitoring and Authentication Controls Were Not Established Over a critical
Database, Application and Server
 KCPS has addressed this finding by requiring password complexity and establishing
a lifetime for administrators and teachers based on DOIT guidelines in August 2012.
We plan to implement password complexity and lifetime for students and parents in
the summer of 2013. In addition, we will enable account lockout after four attempts
for teachers, administrators, students and parents. KCPS chose not to implement
some of the recommendations during the school year since we had not given these
groups sufficient notification of the required changes.
 KCPS will implement configuration changes so that our finance and student
information system will generate audits of database activity for potential security
threats in the summer of 2013. We will establish a procedure for timely review of
these reports as well. We chose to do this in the summer once we have virtualized
our finance system and configured its physical backup.
 Proper security access for the finance system has been given to employees based on
based on their job duties.
Finding #8­
The KCPS Network Was Not Properly Secured
● Certain publicly accessible servers will be placed in secure network area in the
summer of 2013.
● Students will be placed in separate VLANS in the summer of 2013 when installation
of our new fiber network is expected.
SUCCESSFUL LEARNING FOR ALL STUDENTS

--- Page 37 ---
Finding #9­
Controls Over Disaster Recovery, Backup of Critical Data and Devices, and Anti­Virus
Protection Were Not Sufficient
 A complete DRP (Disaster Recovery Plan) will be completed in the summer of 2013.
 KCPS’ student information system backup server has already been purchased and
configured. It will be placed in an off‐site location as soon as possible. KCPS plans
to virtualize the finance application server and database. The current server will
become the physical backup and placed off‐site. Currently there are daily backups
of the SIS and finance database stored offsite.
 All Windows servers and client workstations currently have updated virus
protection. KCPS plans to install virus protection on all Apple servers and client
workstations in the summer of 2013. KCPS will conduct research to determine
whether there is a need to install virus protection on iPads.
Finding #10­
KCPS Entered Into a Long­Term Agreement to Purchase Solar Energy But Did Not
Establish Sufficient Procedures to Verify the Related Billings
 KCPS has ensured that the meters have been installed properly. Choptank Electric
installed the meter on September 22, 2012. Since then the supervisor of finance,
supervisor of environmental services and the accountant have had numerous
meetings with the County, Choptank Electric and Standard Solar to ensure that the
costs are being distributed adequately. KCPS and the County have also consulted
with legal counsel in regards to the credits with Choptank Electric. KCPS and the
County believe they have resolved the billings issues and errors as of this date.
Finding #11
KCPS Financial Disclosure Forms Were Not Always On File and Were Not Sufficiently
Comprehensive
 KCPS recognizes the oversight of the filing of the forms and will file the annual
financial disclosure forms in a timely manner moving forward. KCPS will also revise
the financial disclosure statement to ensure that requested information is consistent
with the requirements of State law.
Finding #12
KCPS Did Not Ensure that Claims Paid Were Reviewed for Propriety or Verify the
Eligibility of Health Care Coverage Participants
SUCCESSFUL LEARNING FOR ALL STUDENTS

--- Page 39 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Menachem Katz, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eoghan J. Doherty, CPA
Roger E. Jaynes III, CFE
Staff Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Christopher D. Jackson
Information Systems Staff Auditor