Title: Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Division of Parole and Probation - Probation Intake and Fee Assessment Processes
Date: 11/30/2015
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509da
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:01:36.572512
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Division of Parole and Probation
Probation Intake and Fee Assessment Processes
Procedures and Controls Were Not Sufficient to Ensure All Fees
Were Properly Assessed
Applicable Fees Were Not Assessed in Numerous Probation Cases
November 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Agency Responsibilities and Reorganization 4
Probation Intake Process 4
Drinking Driver Monitor Program (DDMP) Fund 6
Audit Scope, Objectives, Methodology 9
Findings and Recommendations 13
Probation Intake Process
Finding 1 – The Division of Parole and Probation (DPP) Lacked 13
Policies to Guide the Offender Intake Process at Field Office
Locations
Finding 2 – DPP Had Not Established Adequate Procedures and 15
Controls to Ensure that All Fees and Restitution Were
Properly Assessed
Offender Case Management System User Access
Finding 3 – Procedures and Controls Over User Access Were Not 18
Sufficient, System Roles Were Not Appropriately Restricted,
and Data Input Validation Controls Were Not Comprehensive
Data Match Test Results
Finding 4 – DDMP and Supervision Fees Were Not Properly Assessed 21
in OBSCIS II for 32 of the 45 Cases Judgmentally Selected for
Review
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities and Reorganization
The Division of Parole and Probation (DPP) of the Department of Public Safety
and Correctional Services (DPSCS) supervises the conduct of individuals on
parole and probation to ensure these offenders are upholding requirements set
forth by the courts and the Parole Commission. DPP also conducts investigations
for the Commission and the courts, and performs probationary services for the
Circuit and District Courts of Maryland. Furthermore, DPP administers the
Drinking Driver Monitor Program (DDMP), a specialized monitoring service for
individuals convicted of driving while intoxicated or driving under the influence
of alcohol or drugs. Finally, DPP is responsible for assessing fines, costs, fees,
and restitution (FCFR) in certain court cases including those of offenders in the
DDMP.
DPSCS initiated a Departmental reorganization on November 28, 2011. While
the reorganization was initiated in fiscal year 2012, for budgetary purposes, the
reorganization was implemented via a budget amendment, effective July 1, 2012.
The reorganization established three regions within the State (North, Central, and
South) for the purpose of creating a regional approach to providing inmate-related
functions, including incarceration, probation, parole, and reentry into society.
From a budgetary standpoint, this reorganization transferred the responsibility for
certain functions previously performed by DPP to the DPSCS Office of the
Secretary and the three regions. While DPP ceased to exist as a separate
budgetary unit after the reorganization, it continued to exist under State law. In
March 2015, DPSCS announced it would be moving to restore its legislatively
mandated leadership structure and, accordingly, a new Director of DPP was
appointed. We have been informed by DPSCS management that it intends to
again reorganize its budgetary programs, effective fiscal year 2017, consistent
with its legislatively mandated leadership structure. In the interim, DPP is
operationally functioning as it did prior to the July 1, 2012 reorganization.
Probation Intake Process
Statewide, DPP has 44 field offices within the three DPSCS regions, of which 20
offices handle DDMP cases. Each region has a designated regional director who
monitors and supervises the operations of the field offices. DPP uses two
automated systems to monitor offenders’ compliance with court-ordered
probation and payment terms.
4

--- Page 7 ---
 Offender Case Management System (OCMS) is a server-based multi-
module system that contains case data on parolees and probationers. The DPP
module, which is used for the supervision, monitoring, and investigative
functions of the DPP, was implemented in December 2012. Data are entered
into OCMS by field office staff during the offender intake process and as
needed throughout the probationary period. Prior to the implementation of
OCMS, these case management data were recorded in a module of OBSCIS
II.
 Offender-Based State Correctional Information System II (OBSCIS II) is
used to account for FCFR due from offenders and payments received from
offenders. While certain offender demographic data are automatically
transferred through an interface between OCMS and OBSCIS II, the interface
capability does not extend to FCFR data. Consequently, field office staff must
manually enter FCFR data into OBSCIS II, generally during the offender
intake process.
When an offender is sentenced to probation by a court, the related court order
specifies to which field office the offender is to initially report. During the intake
process, DPP field office staff record offender data into both OCMS (case and
certain FCFR data) and OBSCIS II (FCFR data) and issue payment instructions to
offenders. However, in Baltimore City, offenders report to the Guilford field
office where intake personnel record case data into OCMS and may record FCFR
into OBSCIS II but do not issue payment instructions to offenders. For those
offenders, personnel in the field office to which the offender is transferred must
handle the preparation and issuance of payment instructions to offenders and
ensure that the related FCFR are properly recorded in OBSCIS II, in agreement
with those instructions.
Even though DDMP and supervision fees are generally paid by the offenders on a
monthly basis throughout the terms of probation, the full amount of these fees is
assessed and recorded in OBSCIS II during the intake process. Generally, the
intake staff must manually calculate each offender’s DDMP and supervision fees,
based on the period of probation, and enter these total amounts into OBSCIS II.
For example, if an offender is ordered to serve two years of probation to be
monitored under DDMP, fees calculated would be based on 24 months of DDMP
fees and 24 months of supervision fees. In this example, total DDMP fees
assessed would be $1,320 ($55 per month for 24 months) and total supervision
fees assessed would be $1,200 ($50 per month for 24 months).
Field office staff are required to review with each offender the court-ordered
amount of fines, costs, fees (including DDMP and supervision fees), and
5

--- Page 8 ---
restitution owed and issue each offender a payment instruction form that provides
the full amounts owed and instructions for payment. The offender is instructed to
report to a specified field office for future monitoring based on the criminal
offense and the offender’s residence.
Staff within the DPSCS’ Deputy Secretary for Administration collects FCFR from
the offenders, generally through a lockbox, and places the funds into a non-
budgeted fund. Periodically, DPSCS distributes these funds to the courts and to
crime victims (for restitution), and allocates fees to the State’s General Fund or,
for DDMP fees, to a special fund established in law.
At any time during the offender-monitoring period, a case could be abated by the
courts if the offender meets specific court-ordered terms of his or her probation.
This abatement results in certain fees, such as supervision fees, being waived
during the offender’s remaining probationary period. DPP field office staff
complete an adjustment form and adjust the court-ordered amounts as recorded in
OBSCIS II. In addition, DPP may exempt offenders from paying the DDMP fee,
as allowed under State law, if the offender is disabled and unable to work. An
offender could be exempt under this provision at initial intake or at any point
during the probation period. If the exemption is granted after the initial intake, an
adjustment form is completed by the monitoring field office.
According to State and DPP records, as of June 30, 2014, there were
approximately 103,000 cases under DPP’s jurisdiction. Based on information
obtained from OCMS, as of July 2015, there were approximately 14,000 open
DDMP cases. There were approximately 46,000 new probation cases processed
statewide in fiscal year 2015.
DDMP fees collected, which are credited to the DDMP fund, totaled $6 million in
fiscal year 2014. Supervision fees collected, which are credited to the State’s
General Fund, totaled $7.5 million in fiscal year 2014. During fiscal year 2014,
DPP also disbursed $9.5 million in restitution to victims.
Drinking Driver Monitor Program Fund
State law, effective July 2005, established the DDMP fund as a special, non-
lapsing fund to be used for all DDMP costs and imposed a $45 monthly program
fee on all DDMP offenders to be effective for the period from July 1, 2005
through June 30, 2010. Chapter 487, Laws of Maryland 2009 increased the
monthly fee to $55, effective June 1, 2009, and removed the June 30, 2010
termination date for the fee. According to the Fiscal and Policy Note for the
6

--- Page 9 ---
related legislation, sufficient DDMP fund revenues had not been attained to cover
expenditures in fiscal years 2006 through 2008, thereby requiring deficiency
appropriations for each of those years. The DDMP fund had a deficit balance at
June 30, 2008, resulting in the need for a $1.5 million deficiency appropriation in
fiscal year 2008. The Fiscal and Policy Note also estimated that DDMP fund
revenues would increase $1.4 million in fiscal year 2010, and $7.5 million each
year thereafter due to the fee increases.
While these anticipated increases in revenue were not achieved, State accounting
records indicate that annual DDMP revenues exceeded expenditures during fiscal
years 2010 and 2011. However, beginning with fiscal year 2012, expenditures
have exceeded revenues each year through fiscal year 2015.
Consequently, the surplus created in the DDMP fund in previous years was
exhausted during fiscal year 2014. In addition, DPSCS used $447,248 of
budgeted general funds and a deficiency appropriation in the amount of $400,000
to fund the $847,248 of expenditures in excess of the DDMP fund balance for that
year.
In fiscal year 2015, DDMP revenues continued to be inadequate to fund all
DDMP expenditures. In a significant change for fiscal year 2015, DPSCS
charged only DDMP payroll-related expenditures to the DDMP special fund and
charged all DDMP non-payroll expenditures directly to general funds (even
though $223,451 was available in the DDMP fund). This practice allowed
DPSCS to avoid a deficiency appropriation. We discussed this change in practice
with Department of Budget and Management personnel who stated that DPSCS’
decision to account for DDMP expenditures in this manner was allowable.
Historically, non-payroll DDMP expenditures have totaled approximately
$880,000 annually. Assuming fiscal year 2015 non-payroll expenditures
remained consistent, charging these additional expenditures would have resulted
in fiscal year 2015 DDMP expenditures exceeding revenues by approximately
$650,000.
7

--- Page 10 ---
DDMP Fund Activity
Fiscal Years 2010 – 2015
Fiscal DDMP DDMP Fund Balance at
Year Revenues Expenditures Fiscal Year End
2010 $7,428,761 $6,448,788 $979,973
2011 $7,272,784 $6,782,295 $1,470,462
2012 $6,884,040 $7,032,325 $1,322,177
2013 $6,667,599 $7,335,883 $653,893
2014 $6,045,344 $7,546,4851 $0
2015 $6,729,282 $6,505,8312 $223,451
Source: State Budgetary Records
1 During fiscal year 2014, $447,248 in general funds and a $400,000 deficiency
appropriation were used to cover expenditures in excess of the DDMP fund
balance.
2 During fiscal year 2015, only payroll costs were allocated to the DDMP fund.
Considering the DDMP fund’s status, it is imperative that DPP ensure that DDMP
fees are properly assessed for all non-exempt cases and that effective collection
efforts are employed. The fee assessment process is the subject of this report; we
did not address the collection efforts as part of this audit.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
We conducted an audit of the probation intake and fee assessment processes
within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) for
certain offenders monitored under the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP).
The audit was conducted in response to an allegation that we received through our
fraud hotline regarding possible deficiencies in the recording and abatement of
certain fees that are required to be paid by offenders on probation who are
monitored under the DPSCS Drinking Driver Monitor Program (DDMP). While
the allegation received related primarily to the DDMP fee, the DDMP fee
assessment is just one part of the offender intake process that includes the
recordation of all fines, costs, fees, and restitution assessed to offenders monitored
under probation. The scope of our audit addressed other facets of the intake
process as described below but was limited to the most significant sources of
collections, specifically fees (both DDMP and supervision fees) and restitution.
We conducted the audit under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
Objectives
The objectives of this audit were
1. To evaluate the effectiveness of the procedures and controls over the
probation intake and related assessment and recordation processes, and
2. To identify DDMP cases for which applicable fees and restitution may not
have been properly assessed and recorded.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Methodology
Our audit consisted of tests, data analyses, inspections of documents and records,
observations of DPSCS operations, and discussions with DPSCS personnel and
others, as we deemed necessary, to achieve our objectives.
For the first audit objective, we reviewed the intake processing guidance provided
by DPP to the field staff. In addition, based on details in the allegation and the
activity levels of the field offices, we selected the six field offices noted below,
which handle DDMP cases, to conduct field visits and to review procedures and
controls over the intake and fee assessment and adjustment processes. These six
field offices, which were within four jurisdictions, accounted for more than 40
percent of all offender intakes processed statewide. The Baltimore City –
Guilford Central Intake and Rockville Intake field offices only perform intake
procedures; offender cases are immediately transferred to other offices around the
State for monitoring compliance with probation terms.
Field Offices Selected for Review
Field Office Location Region Procedures Reviewed
Baltimore City –
Central Intake Process - OCMS only
Guilford
Payment Adjustment Processes and
Baltimore City –
Central Intake Transfer Process - OBSCIS II
Northwest
only
Rockville Intake North Intake Process
Payment Adjustment Processes and
Gaithersburg North Intake Transfer Process - OBSCIS II
only
Intake, Transfer, and Payment
Annapolis South
Adjustment Processes
Intake, Transfer, and Payment
Upper Marlboro South
Adjustment Processes
In addition, we judgmentally selected cases processed for intake by the six field
offices during fiscal year 2015 (a total of 20 cases) in which the offenders were
responsible for a variety of fees and restitution. We confirmed our understanding
of the intake and assessment and recordation processes and determined if fees and
10

--- Page 13 ---
restitution were properly assessed and recorded. We also reviewed and assessed
the sufficiency of procedures and controls over OCMS user access. We did not
assess user access to OBSCIS II since that audit procedure was performed during
our separate audit of the DPSCS – Office of the Secretary and no significant
matters were identified as relates to this audit’s objectives. Finally, we reviewed
DPP’s policy for reducing DDMP fees for abated cases, and we tested 23 cases
that were in abatement status from seven field offices to determine if DDMP fee
assessments were being consistently handled.
For our second objective, we judgmentally selected 45 test cases from 16 field
offices from the results of an automated match we performed using data from
DPSCS’ OCMS and OBSCIS II systems. Those 45 cases were selected because
the related data exhibited certain characteristics that suggested a high likelihood
for errors with respect to the assessing and recording of DDMP fees.
Specifically, our data matching included DDMP cases opened during the period
from July 2012 through April 2015 for which we matched the case information in
OCMS with the related DDMP fee information in OBSCIS II based on the
common case number field that exists in both systems. After excluding DDMP
cases identified in OCMS as being exempt from the DDMP fees, the match
identified cases for which, based on the probation period recorded in OCMS, the
DDMP fees appeared to be either understated or not assessed at all. For those
cases, we performed automated calculations of the amount of DDMP fees that
should be assessed by multiplying the number of months of probation (based on
the probation starting and ending dates as reflected in OCMS) by the monthly
DDMP fee of $55. We then determined the difference between the expected
amount of DDMP fees based on this calculation and the actual amount of DDMP
fees assessed in OBSCIS II to identify the amount of DDMP fees that may not
have been fully assessed.
The match identified 3,983 cases of potential DDMP fee under-assessments,
including 1,540 DDMP cases for which there were no assessments. The
maximum potential under-assessment for these cases totaled $2.1 million. This
potential under-assessment of DDMP fees assumes all information in OCMS
(such as the non-exempt status, probation period) is accurate. However, as noted
in our findings, our tests disclosed many data errors in OCMS, as well as certain
data limitations that affected the match results. Therefore, the accuracy of the
OCMS data cannot be assured and a reasonable estimate of total DDMP fee
under-assessments is not determinable from our work. Furthermore, the match
did not specifically target potential over-assessed cases.
11

--- Page 14 ---
From the identified cases for which DDMP fees were not assessed or were not
fully assessed in OBSCIS II, we selected 45 cases for testing. For the selected
cases, based on our review of supporting documentation (such as court orders) in
the paper files, we verified the under-assessment amounts determined by our
automated calculation, and made any necessary adjustments. While reviewing
those cases, we also determined whether supervision fees had been properly
assessed and recorded. Since we did not use statistical sampling to select the 45
cases, the results of our testing cannot be projected for the entire 3,983 test
population.
Our audit was primarily conducted during the period from March 2015 through
September 2015. The response from DPSCS to our findings and
recommendation, on behalf of the DPP, is included as an appendix to this report.
As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our review of
its response. In addition to the conditions included in this report, other less
significant findings were communicated to DPSCS that did not warrant inclusion
in this report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Probation Intake Process
Background
An offender sentenced to probation by the court is ordered to report to a specific
field office in one of the State’s three regions for intake purposes. The Division
of Parole and Probation (DPP) uses two automated systems to record offender
data during the intake process and to monitor each offender’s compliance with
court-ordered probation and payment terms. The DPP module of the Offender
Case Management System (OCMS) is used to record offender case data –
including demographics, probation terms, and a unique identification number
(known as a SID) —and to monitor offender compliance with probation terms.
The Offender-Based State Correctional Information System II (OBSCIS II) is
used to account for fines, costs, fees, and restitution due from offenders and
payments received from offenders.
Before the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS)
implemented the DPP module of OCMS in December 2012, all offender
information was entered into one system (OBSCIS II) during the probation intake
process. Specifically, OBSCIS II was previously used as a case management
system as well as to record and account for fines, costs, fees, and restitution due
and payments received from offenders. As mentioned in the Scope section of this
report, our audit focused on the most significant sources of collections (fees and
restitution) received from offenders.
Finding 1
DPP lacked policies to guide the offender intake process at field office
locations.
DPP’s Operations Manual was not revised to reflect the new intake process after
the implementation of OCMS in December 2012, and adequate training was not
provided to intake staff. Also, a formal policy addressing whether Drinking
Driver Monitor Program (DDMP) fees should be reduced for court-ordered case
abatements was lacking.
Adequate guidance was not provided to intake staff although the use of two
systems substantially changed and added more complexity to the intake process.
Previously, all data were entered into OBSCIS II which guided the intake worker
through a logical screen sequence for data entry. Since the implementation of
OCMS, intake workers are required to establish the case in OCMS and, through
an interface, transfer basic case data into OBSCIS II. Intake workers then
13

--- Page 16 ---
separately record fees and restitution into a specific screen in OBSCIS II. The
Operations Manual was not updated to guide this multi-step data entry process.
In addition, DPP could not provide us with any documentation of the training
provided to staff when OCMS was implemented. Intake staff at the field offices
informed us that the one-half day of training provided, which was only on OCMS,
was not sufficient and the frequent changes and updates to functionality within
OCMS continue to cause confusion.
In some cases, lack of guidance resulted in inconsistent treatments between the
field offices. For example, the intake processing staff at two of the six field
offices were unaware that the exemption flags should be recorded in OCMS for
offenders who are determined to be exempt from paying DDMP fees, as specified
by State law (for example, due to a qualifying disability). The failure to properly
flag exempt cases would not affect the assessment process but it does create
inconsistencies since fees would not be assessed in OBSCIS II even though an
exemption was not recorded in OCMS. These inconsistencies could hinder case
monitoring efforts and DPP’s ability to perform effective data matches against the
fees and restitution recorded into OBSCIS II to identify potential data entry
errors. Furthermore, because DPP performs audits of DDMP exemptions for
propriety and selects exemptions to review from an OCMS report, the failure to
record the DDMP exemption prevents these exemptions from being selected for
audit. Based on OCMS records as of July 2015, there were 24 cases opened
statewide since January 2013 with the exemption flag. Based on discussions with
field office personnel and analysis of available data, we identified five exemptions
in the aforementioned two field offices that were not flagged in OCMS.
Additionally, DPP had not established a formal policy regarding whether DDMP
fees should be reduced when an offender’s case is abated by the courts, and our
testing disclosed inconsistent treatment among the field offices. When a case is
abated (for example, the offender meets the specific court-ordered terms of his or
her probation), DPP policy allows for supervision fees to be waived for the
offender’s remaining probationary period. However, DPP policies were silent as
to whether DDMP fees should also be waived, although DPP management
believes, based on an informal communication from its Assistant Attorney
General, that the DDMP fees should be reduced when a case is abated.
We noted inconsistencies in that some field offices were reducing DDMP fees
when a case was abated while others were not. Our interviews with field office
personnel and tests of selected abated cases from six field offices within all three
regions disclosed that three field offices (two offices in the South Region and one
office in the North Region) were reducing DDMP fees when cases were abated.
For the 10 cases tested at these offices, the DDMP fee reductions totaled
14

--- Page 17 ---
approximately $8,910, representing a 71 percent reduction to the $12,540 in fees
originally assessed in these cases. Conversely, three other offices (two offices in
the Central Region and one office in the South Region) were not reducing DDMP
fees.
During our review, DPP advised us that it is currently working on specific
guidance on the intake process but that it is still in process. In January 2015, DPP
did establish written guidance that outlines a step-by-step process for how to close
a case in OCMS.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPP
a. establish comprehensive intake guidance that addresses all critical
processes;
b. institute additional training for field office staff, as needed, to enhance
their ability to perform their jobs properly and efficiently; and
c. in consultation with its legal counsel, establish a formal policy on the
handling of DDMP fees when a case is abated, and ensure the policy is
appropriately communicated and enforced.
Finding 2
DPP had not established adequate procedures and controls to ensure that all
fees and restitution were properly assessed to offenders.
Analysis
Procedures and controls at the four field offices selected for review that prepared
offender assessment documents were insufficient to ensure all fees and restitution
were properly assessed and recorded. Consequently, our test of 20 cases
processed for intake in fiscal year 2015 at these field offices disclosed instances
where fees and restitution were not properly assessed and recorded and payment
instructions were not timely issued to offenders. For these 20 cases, DDMP fees,
supervision fees, and restitution assessed in OBSCIS II totaled $14,575, $12,950,
and $56,403, respectively.
Procedures and controls at the four field offices were insufficient to ensure all
fees and restitution were properly assessed and recorded.
 Initial accountability was not established over probation orders received at the
four field offices where we reviewed the intake process. None of the field
offices maintained a log to record the receipt of the probation orders (such as,
court orders). Generally, on a daily basis, the courts delivered paper copies of
15

--- Page 18 ---
probation orders to the field offices, along with a summary listing of all the
court orders included in the delivery. Although field intake offices reviewed
the summary listings to ensure all court orders were included in the delivery,
the summary listings were not used to ensure that all court orders were
processed for intake and recorded. Consequently, our tests identified
instances in which cases were not properly assessed and certain restitution
amounts were incorrectly recorded in OBSCIS II.
 As of May 2015, none of the field offices reviewed had established a
documented supervisory review for the intake process to ensure that all fees
and restitution were properly calculated, recorded in OBSCIS II, and reflected
on the payment instructions form (COL-1) provided to the offenders. Prior to
the implementation of OCMS, the COL-1 was signed by the offender and the
intake staff. A separate document reflecting all case data entered into
OBSCIS II, including the fines, costs, fees, and restitution data, was reviewed
and signed by the supervisor as documentation that the intake information was
properly recorded and all fees and restitution were assessed.
DPP staff advised us that, while the COL-1 should still be completed and
provided to the offender, the associated supervisory review process was
discontinued when OCMS was implemented in 2012 and no supervisory
review process was established in its place. During our review of the 20
selected cases, we confirmed that there was no evidence of a documented
supervisory review. In June 2015, one of the field offices implemented a
supervisory review as a result of our audit.
 A documented supervisory review process was not in place at the four offices
reviewed to ensure fees and restitution had been properly assessed and
recorded in OBSCIS II for cases transferred from other field offices.
Generally, the intake process includes entering case data into both OCMS and
OBSCIS II and issuing payment instructions to offenders. However, because
of the volume of activity, while the Baltimore City – Guilford intake office
does record case data into OCMS, the office does not always record fines,
costs, fees, and restitution data in OBSCIS II and issue the payment
instructions. The Baltimore City – Guilford office relies on the monitoring
office to issue the payment instructions to offenders and ensure the fees and
restitution are properly recorded in OBSCIS II in agreement with the payment
instructions. Cases processed for intake at the Baltimore City – Guilford
office could be transferred to any monitoring office throughout the State
depending on the nature of the offense and the offender’s residence.
However, field office staff at these monitoring locations advised us that they
relied on the intake field office to have already recorded all the fees and
16

--- Page 19 ---
restitution and that any review would be informal and not documented.
During fiscal year 2015, the Baltimore City—Guilford intake office processed
8,449 cases for intake.
Our review of 20 cases opened during fiscal year 2015, which included cases
from the four field offices reviewed that were responsible for recording fees and
restitution, disclosed instances in which fees and restitution were not properly
assessed and recorded in OBSCIS II and payment instruction forms were not
timely issued to offenders.
 For 9 of the 20 cases tested, the following errors were identified:
 For 1 case, DDMP fees totaling $990 were not assessed.
 For 2 cases, DDMP fees totaling $1,980 were not assessed until June 2015
when DPP initiated a follow-up project as a result of our audit.
 For 2 cases, supervision fees were over-assessed by a total of $650.
 For 3 cases (including 1 of the aforementioned cases in which supervision
fees were over-assessed), DDMP fees were over-assessed by a total of
$2,035.
 For 2 cases, restitution was over-assessed by $1,367.
Generally, the problems identified for these nine cases, which were applicable
to three field offices, resulted from clerical errors in calculating the
assessment amounts and in recording the information in OBSCIS II that did
not agree with the related court documents.
 The payment instruction form (COL-1) was not timely issued to the offenders
in 4 of the 20 cases tested. In 2 cases, the COL-1 was not issued for more
than four months after the start of the offender’s probation, and in 2 other
cases, the COL-1 was not issued at all. The COL-1 is important as it provides
instructions to the offender as to the fees they are required to pay, how
payment is to be submitted, and how frequently payments are required to be
made.
We believe that consideration should be given to enhancing the existing interface
between the data in OCMS and the data in OBSCIS II. In this regard, while
OBSCIS II is the official record of fines, costs, fees, and restitution transactions,
we noted that fines, costs, fees, and restitution data are also initially recorded into
OCMS to generate the payment instructions form. We believe that an interface of
fines, costs, fees, and restitution data between the two systems would significantly
increase efficiencies and reduce the number of errors from data entry.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPP
a. establish initial accountability for all probation orders to ensure that all
orders are processed for intake and recorded in OCMS and OBSCIS II;
b. establish an independent documented supervisory review of the intake
process to ensure all fees and restitution are properly assessed and
recorded in OBSCIS II, including cases transferred from other field
offices, and that exempt cases are flagged in OCMS;
c. take immediate action to correct the aforementioned errors in OBSCIS
II;
d. ensure payment instructions forms (COL-1) are issued timely to
offenders; and
e. determine the feasibility of developing an electronic data transfer process
(interface) of assessment information from OCMS to OBSCIS II.
OCMS User Access
Finding 3
Procedures and controls over OCMS user access were not sufficient and
many users had excessive access. Defined system roles were not
appropriately restricted, and data input validation controls were not
comprehensive.
Analysis
Procedures and controls over user access in the DPP module of OCMS were not
sufficient to ensure that only appropriate and necessary access was granted and
such access was not periodically reviewed. Furthermore, the capabilities defined
to certain critical system user roles were not appropriately restricted. The State of
Maryland Information Security Policy states that agencies are responsible for,
"ensuring separation of duties and assigning appropriate system permissions and
responsibilities for agency system users." In addition, input validation controls
were not comprehensive. Based on agency records, there are 1,696 users with
access to the DPP module of OCMS as of May 2015.
DPP had established essentially two levels of edit access in OCMS. The agent
role is generally assigned to field office staff for the entry of offender case data,
including demographics and probation terms, into OCMS during the intake
process. The case supervisor role is generally assigned to field office supervisors
who subsequently review and approve each case in OCMS. Of the 1,696 users
with access to the DDP module of OCMS, 1,359 users had the agent and/or
supervisor role.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Each offender has a unique State identification number (known as a SID). For
repeat offenders, the offender’s SID is typically recognized by the fingerprint
scanner, which is integrated into OCMS; for new offenders, the SID is
automatically generated by the fingerprint scanner. The SID can also be manually
created by the case supervisor in certain instances (such as when an offender does
not appear for intake). Once all the offender data, including the SID, are
recorded, the intake worker transfers, via an automated interface, basic case data
to establish the case record on OBSCIS II. After the case has been established,
intake workers can manually record fees and restitution into OBSBIS II.
Granting and Modifying User Access
Procedures for granting and modifying user access roles in OCMS were not
sufficient. DPP had designated two individuals, called Site Security Coordinators
(SSCs), to review and approve requests to establish and modify OCMS access for
DPP employees and to notify DPSCS Information Technology and
Communications Division (ITCD) to update the user access in OCMS. The
electronic request system used to establish initial user access did not reflect the
names of the individuals who submitted the requests and, therefore, the SSCs
processed the requests without determining if the requests were submitted by the
employees’ supervisors. Requests made by supervisors to modify user access
were submitted informally through email and, therefore, the SSCs could
determine if the requests were submitted by appropriate supervisory employees.
However, the SSCs did not maintain documentation of these email requests.
Our judgmental selection of 14 users who had agent and/or case supervisor access
disclosed that DPP could not provide any documentation to support the roles
granted. We were advised these 14 users, who were assigned to 9 different
locations, were granted access to OCMS when it was implemented in December
2012 and that no documentation was maintained that supports supervisory
authorization of the roles granted at that time and how the levels of access granted
to existing employees were determined. The number of employees granted access
when OCMS was implemented was not available.
DPP also did not perform periodic documented reviews of the propriety of
existing users’ access roles. For example, reports of employee access roles were
not periodically generated and distributed by the SSCs to applicable supervisors
for review of the continued need for that access. Instead, DPP primarily relied on
individual supervisors to notify the SSC if access needed to be changed.
Assigned User Access and Defined System Roles
Our test of the same 14 users, as of May 2015, disclosed that 11 users were
granted a level of access that was improper or unnecessary. Specifically, 2 users
19

--- Page 22 ---
had not been employed with DPSCS since June 2013, 4 users required only read
access based on their job duties, and the remaining 5 users were granted both the
agent and case supervisor roles. While these 5 users needed agent level access to
perform their job duties, they did not need the DPP case supervisor role.
Furthermore, this combined access allowed these employees to manually create a
SID, a function which should only be performed by a supervisor, and to approve
cases initiated by other intake workers. (This combined access did not allow
workers to approve their own cases.) This excessive access could result in errors
in offender records. For example, an agent could potentially record criminal data
to the wrong offender or erroneously merge offender records. Our review of the
DPP’s user records disclosed 67 users had both the agent and supervisor roles.
DPP did not appropriately restrict certain capabilities defined to the agent and
case supervisor roles. Any user granted either role could edit critical information
(such as probation start and end dates, and name of offender) in any case within
OCMS and such access was not restricted to his or her own cases. Furthermore,
although DPSCS ITCD advised us that users with the agent and case supervisor
role also needed to be separately granted access to the DPP module level
designation in OCMS to edit OCMS data, we noted 2 users without the DPP
module designation who were able to edit OCMS data. Based on the OCMS user
file, as of May 2015 there were 618 users who did not have the DPP module level
designation but did have DPP roles that may provide edit access. Consequently, a
better understanding of system access features and capabilities, including the
related control implications, appears necessary.
Changes to critical OCMS data were not reviewed for propriety. Although
OCMS maintained an audit trail of all data changes, there was no regular
documented review of the audit trail to determine the propriety of changes made,
and reports of the most critical data changes were not produced to aid in such a
review. ITCD management advised that the audit trail would only be provided for
review upon request from DPP management.
Input Validation Controls
Input validation controls were not comprehensive to ensure all critical information
was properly entered into OCMS for all critical fields for each case during the
intake process. While input validation controls were used for basic case data,
such as offender name and SID, OCMS did not require other critical fields to be
completed before further processing. Our review disclosed, for example, that the
collection and accounting fields used to prepare the payment instruction form
(COL-1) to be provided to the offenders were not required to be recorded in
OCMS. As noted in Finding 2, our review disclosed that the COL-1 forms, which
provide instructions regarding required fees and how to remit payments, were not
20

--- Page 23 ---
always provided timely to the offenders. In addition, the probation period ending
date in OCMS was not a required field. Although DPP began requiring the
completion of this field in June 2015, it was only required for new cases entered.
Our review of OCMS data as of July 2015 disclosed approximately 212 existing
active cases for which the expiration date was not recorded. Similar to our
comment regarding the recordation of the exemption flag in OCMS (Finding 1),
these fields do not directly impact OBSCIS II fines, costs, fees, and restitution
assessments. However, proper recording and subsequent verification promotes
system data integrity, which could improve case monitoring and enhance DPP’s
ability to perform effective data matches against the fees and restitution recorded
into OBSCIS II to identify potential data entry errors.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPP
a. establish a formal, documented process for granting and modifying
OCMS user access and ensuring the related requests are authorized by
appropriate supervisory personnel;
b. perform periodic documented reviews of user access to ensure that
assigned access is appropriate;
c. take corrective action to appropriately restrict user access for those users
we identified with improper or potentially improper access to OCMS;
d. redefine system roles to ensure edits to critical case information are
controlled;
e. identify and produce OCMS reports of critical data changes and ensure
such changes are independently reviewed for propriety; and
f. enhance OCMS input validation controls to ensure all critical
information is properly recorded.
Data Match Test Results
Finding 4
DDMP and supervision fees were not properly assessed in OBSCIS II for 32
of the 45 cases judgmentally selected for review.
Analysis
Our review of 45 cases from the data match previously described in the
Methodology section of this report disclosed numerous instances within all three
regions where fees were not properly assessed. Generally for the remaining cases,
other data problems in OCMS or OBSCIS II, as well as certain data limitations,
caused the cases to be identified as potential under-assessments by our match
21

--- Page 24 ---
when the assessment was in fact proper in OBSCIS II. The DDMP fees and
supervision fees that had been assessed and recorded in OBSCIS II for these 45
cases totaled $6,600 and $15,210, respectively. As a result of our review of the
supporting documentation for these 45 cases, we noted errors in OBSCIS II for 32
cases within the three regions. Collectively, DDMP fees totaling $42,625 and
supervision fees totaling $11,300 were not assessed in these 32 cases. In certain
of those cases, fees totaling $12,030 were over-assessed. In some cases, as
described below, DDMP fees were incorrectly recorded as other fees and,
therefore, once collected, would be improperly credited to the General Fund
rather than to the DDMP special fund.
For the other 13 of the 45 cases, although the fees assessed as recorded in
OBSCIS II were correct (assuming the reduction of DDMP fees is correct for
abated cases), the cases were identified as potential under-assessments by our
match due to other data problems in OCMS or OBSCIS II. For example, in some
of these cases, the DDMP exemption flag was not recorded in OCMS although it
should have been, while in other cases the probation period was inaccurately
recorded in OCMS. We also identified data limitations pertaining to certain
closed cases that affected our match results.
The proper assessment and recordation of fees in OBSCIS II is critical as
OBSCIS II accounts for the assessments and triggers collection efforts for unpaid
amounts. Unpaid fees result in lost revenue to the State and particularly for the
DDMP Fund, which is used to pay the related costs. As previously mentioned in
the Background Information of this report, there have been significant deficits in
the DDMP Fund resulting in a fee increase in June 2009 and requiring general
funds to cover those shortfalls in fiscal years 2014 and 2015. The 32 cases in
which fees had been improperly assessed can be categorized as follows:
 For 21 cases, DDMP fees and/or supervision fees were not assessed in
OBSCIS II but should have been. Collectively, fees totaling approximately
$38,360 were not assessed ($27,060 in DDMP fees and $11,300 in
supervision fees) in these cases. As of our review in May 2015, these cases
had been open for periods ranging from 6 to 32 months.
 For 7 cases, DDMP fees totaling $10,230 were incorrectly recorded in
OBSCIS II as either supervision fees ($8,910) or testing fees ($1,320).
Accordingly, the collections would be credited to the General Fund rather than
to the DDMP Special Fund.
22

--- Page 25 ---
 For 1 case, DDMP fees totaling $1,980 were mistakenly waived rather than
the $1,800 in supervision fees. Specifically, after initial recordation in
OBSCIS II, these supervision fees were subsequently waived by the courts.
 For 3 cases, actual DDMP fees were under-assessed by a total of $3,355.
Specifically, DDMP fees assessed totaled $1,760 rather than $5,115, primarily
due to errors in manual calculation of assessment fees (for example, wrong
number of months used to calculate the assessment).
Finally, in addition to the failure to properly assess fees in OBSCIS II during the
intake process, we observed that processes designed to potentially identify fee
assessment errors at the time a case is closed did not appear to be effective.
Specifically, we reviewed 5 of the 32 cases with errors that had been closed. Our
test disclosed, for all 5 cases, corrections had not been made to the assessed fees
in OBSCIS II. At the time a case closes, DPP checks OBSCIS II to ensure all
fees have been properly paid by the offender, providing a final opportunity to
record any remaining fees owed prior to closing the case and transferring
remaining balances to the State’s Central Collection Unit for collection.
It is important to note that, during the course of our field work, as we brought
errors to DPP’s attention, personnel took action to begin to correct the errors in
OBSCIS II. In addition, as a result of our review, DPP initiated in June 2015 a
review of all open cases in OBSCIS II to ensure the fees and restitution were
properly recorded in OBSCIS II. Each regional director was responsible for
overseeing these efforts.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPP
a. take immediate corrective action on the aforementioned cases for which
fees were not properly assessed,
b. investigate the remaining cases disclosed from our data matching for
which DDMP fees may not have been assessed or fully assessed,
c. ensure adequate efforts are made when cases are closed to verify that all
fees have been properly assessed, and
d. determine the feasibility of enhancing controls by periodically performing
data matches between OCMS and OBSCIS II to identify case data
inconsistencies and potential instances of improper fee assessments.
23

--- Page 27 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Division of Parole and Probation
6776 REISTERSTOWN ROAD • SUITE 212 • BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 21215
410-585-3566 • FAX 410-318-8645 • TOLL FREE 877-379-8636 • V/TTY (800) 735-2258 • www.dpscs.maryland.gov
STATE OF MARYLAND
November 30, 2015
LARRY HOGAN
GOVERNOR
BOYD K. RUTHERFORD
LT. GOVERNOR Stephen T. Moyer, Secretary
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
STEPHEN T. MOYER
SECRETARY 300 East Joppa Road, Suite 1000
Towson, Maryland 21286-3020
WILLIAM G. STEWART
DEPUTY SECRETARY
ADMINISTRATION
Dear Secretary Moyer:
WAYNE A. WEBB
ACTING DEPUTY
SECRETARY OPERATIONS The following is the Division of Parole and Probation’s (DPP) response to the
Legislative Audit regarding the Division’s intake and fee assessment processes for
RHEA L. HARRIS
ASSISTANT SECRETARY the period beginning March 15, 2012 through June 30, 2015. The Division of
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES
Parole and Probation will aggressively pursue implementation of the agreed upon
DAVID N. BEZANSON recommendations and collaborate with the Information Technology and
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
CAPITAL PROGRAMS Communications Division (ITCD) where appropriate.
JUDITH SACHWALD
DIRECTOR Probation Intake Process
PAROLE AND PROBATION
Finding 1
DPP lacked policies to guide the offender intake process at field office locations.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPP
a. establish comprehensive intake guidance that addresses all critical
processes;
b. institute additional training for field office staff, as needed, to enhance their
ability to perform their jobs properly and efficiently; and
c. in consultation with its legal counsel, establish a formal policy on the
handling of DDMP fees when a case is abated, and ensure the policy is
appropriately communicated and enforced.
We agree. The Division will:
a. publish an Offender Case Management System (OCMS) Intake Users’ guide and
will update intake policies and procedures in the Operations Manual to reflect
the operational changes that resulted from the implementation and upgrade of
the case management system. Anticipated Completion: January 31, 2016
b. institute additional training for field office staff, as needed, to enhance their
ability to perform their jobs properly and efficiently. Anticipated Completion:
June 30, 2016
Page 1 of 5

--- Page 28 ---
c. in consultation with Principal Counsel assigned to the Department, establish a
formal policy on the handling of DDMP fees when a case is abated, and ensure
the policy is appropriately communicated to field staff and enforced.
Anticipated Completion: January 31, 2016
Finding 2
DPP had not established adequate procedures and controls to ensure that all
fees and restitution were properly assessed to offenders.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DPP
a. establish initial accountability for all probation orders to ensure that all
orders are processed for intake and recorded in OCMS and OBSCIS II;
b. establish an independent documented supervisory review of the intake
process to ensure all fees and restitution are properly assessed and recorded
in OBSCIS II, including cases transferred from other field offices, and that
exempt cases are flagged in OCMS;
c. take immediate action to correct the aforementioned errors in OBSCIS II;
d. ensure payment instructions forms (COL-1) are issued timely to offenders;
and
e. determine the feasibility of developing an electronic data transfer process
(interface) of assessment information from OCMS to OBSCIS II.
We agree. The Division will:
a. establish processes locally to ensure that all supervision orders received by the
field offices are processed for intake and recorded in OCMS and OBSCIS II.
The Division will explore whether the courts can provide automated reports of
individuals sentenced to probation. Anticipated Completion: March 31, 2016
b. establish and enforce an independent documented supervisory review of the
intake process to ensure all fees and restitution are properly assessed and
recorded in OBSCIS II, including cases transferred from other field offices, and
that exempt cases are flagged in OCMS. Anticipated Completion: January 31,
2016
c. finalize its ongoing efforts to correct the aforementioned errors in OBSCIS II.
Anticipated Completion: December 31, 2015
d. ensure that the Form COL-1 is issued timely to offenders. Anticipated
Completion: January 31, 2016
e. study the feasibility of developing an electronic data transfer process of
assessment information from OCMS to OBSCIS II and, if feasible, establish an
electronic data transfer process from OCMS to OBSCIS II. Anticipated
Completion: December 31, 2016
Page 2 of 5

--- Page 29 ---
OCMS User Access
Finding 3
Procedures and controls over OCMS user access were not sufficient and many
users had excessive access. Defined system roles were not appropriately
restricted, and data input validation controls were not comprehensive.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPP
a. establish a formal, documented process for granting and modifying OCMS
user access and ensuring the related requests are authorized by appropriate
supervisory personnel;
b. perform periodic documented reviews of user access to ensure that assigned
access is appropriate;
c. take corrective action to appropriately restrict user access for those users
we identified with improper or potentially improper access to OCMS;
d. redefine system roles to ensure edits to critical case information are
controlled;
e. identify and produce OCMS reports of critical data changes and ensure
such changes are independently reviewed for propriety; and
f. enhance OCMS input validation controls to ensure all critical information
is properly recorded.
We agree. The Division will:
a. revise its process for granting and modifying OCMS user access and maintain
documentation of the process. The Division will continue to ensure that the
related requests are authorized by appropriate supervisory personnel.
Anticipated Completion: December 31, 2016
b. perform periodic documented reviews of user access to ensure that assigned
access is appropriate. Anticipated Completion: Completed and will be
conducted on a monthly basis thereafter.
c. take corrective action to appropriately restrict user access for those users
identified by the auditors with improper or potentially improper access to
OCMS. Anticipated Completion: December 31, 2015
d. redefine system roles to ensure edits to critical case information are controlled.
While OCMS provides only two possible roles for DPP employees (agent or
supervisor), we will continue to ensure that there is no overlap in user role
assignments. Anticipated Completion: Completed.
e. OCMS reports will be identified and produced on an annual basis to ensure
critical data changes are reviewed. The DPP’s Quality Assurance Unit will be
responsible for auditing the reports. Anticipated Completion: December 31,
2016
f. OCMS user roles will be redefined to validate and enhance user roles to ensure
all critical information is recorded. Anticipated Completion: December 31, 2016
Page 3 of 5

--- Page 31 ---
cc: William Stewart, Deputy Secretary, Administration
Wayne Webb, Acting Deputy Secretary, Operations
Steven F. Geppi, Director, Secretary’s Office of Investigation, Intelligence
and Fugitive Apprehension
Christopher McCully, Director of Financial Services
Kevin Combs, Chief Information Officer
Joseph M. Perry, Inspector General
Joseph Clocker, Executive Deputy Director
Page 5 of 5

--- Page 32 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
David R. Fahnestock
Senior Auditor
Andrew S. Bien
David O. Mauriello
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA
Staff Auditors