Title: Washington County Public Schools
Date: 08/06/2007
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d38cc9d72404c150a40
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:49:48.702721
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Washington County Public Schools
June 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2011 Activity 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle
* Finding 1 – Internal Controls Over Cash Receipts Received and 10
Recorded at the Central Business Office Were Not Adequate
Federal Funds 11
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 2 – WCPS Procurement Policies Did Not Require Competitive 12
Procurements For Purchases Less Than $20,000
* Finding 3 – Adequate Procedures and Controls Had Not Been 12
Established For Blanket Purchase Orders and Board Approval Was
Not Always Obtained
Finding 4 – WCPS Did Not Properly Secure Vendor Bids and Certain 13
Bid Opening Controls Were Lacking
Finding 5 – WCPS Lacked Procedures and Controls to Ensure the 14
Propriety of Employee and Retiree Health Care Costs
Finding 6 – WCPS Did Not Always Use a Competitive Process to Procure 15
Stop-Loss Insurance Coverage For Its Health Care Claims
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 7 – Access to the Automated Human Resource and Payroll 16
System Was Not Adequately Restricted
Finding 8 – WCPS’ Practice of Certifying Unused Sick Leave to the 17
Maryland State Retirement and Pension System Was Questionable
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 9 – Proper Accountability Had Not Been Established Over 18
Capital Equipment
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 10 – Certain System Access, Monitoring, and Authentication 19
Controls Were Not Adequate
Finding 11 – WCPS’ Network Was Not Properly Secured 20
Finding 12 – WCPS Did Not Have a Complete Disaster Recovery Plan 21
and Backups of Critical Network Devices Were Not Current
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 13 – WCPS’ Energy Management Program Was Not Sufficiently 22
Comprehensive
Transportation Services
* Finding 14 – Certain Payments to Bus Contractors Were Not Based 24
on Market Conditions or Actual Costs
Finding 15 – WCPS Did Not Verify Certain Payment Information 26
Provided by Bus Contractors
Finding 16 – WCPS Did Not Fully Utilize Its Automated Routing 26
Software Capabilities
Finding 17 – Current Bus Service Operations Have Not Been 27
Established As Cost Beneficial
Finding 18 – Fuel Purchases Were Not Always Properly Supported 28
or Verified Prior to Payment
Food Services 29
School Board Oversight 29
Other Financial Controls 30
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Washington County Public Schools (WCPS)
June 2013
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
WCPS ranks 11th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems
in Maryland. In fiscal year 2012, WCPS had a total full-time regular and
special education pupil population of 22,240 at its 46 schools. WCPS’
operating and capital expenditures totaled $303 million during that year.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of WCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated August 6, 2007. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for WCPS to improve internal controls, to adopt more cost
effective processes, and to enhance policy direction.
WCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability in Certain
Financial Areas
Although proper internal controls had been establish in certain financial
areas, such as federal grants and food service operations, WCPS needs to
improve internal controls and accountability in certain financial areas. For
example, WCPS needs to establish initial accountability and segregate
employee duties over certain types of cash receipts received at various
headquarter locations and forwarded to the Central Business Office for
deposit processing. WCPS also needs to restrict access to its automated
human resources and payroll system and implement adequate security
measures and monitoring procedures to protect its network and related
critical devices from security risks. For example, certain firewall rules allowed
unnecessary access from external sources to critical portions of WCPS’
network, thereby placing various network devices at risk. Password controls
over network access were not sufficient to properly protect critical resources
and sensitive data. In addition, WCPS did not have a complete information
technology disaster recovery plan in place.
WCPS needs to verify the propriety of billings for health care services and
student bus services provided by contractors. Health care claim billings were
not verified to supporting documentation of actual claims activity. WCPS is
self-insured for employee medical benefits and uses a third-party
administrator to process related claims. Payments to the administrator
totaled $23.1 million in fiscal year 2011, including $2.6 million for the
administrator’s fee. In addition, WCPS did not ensure the accuracy of bus
5

--- Page 8 ---
contractor reported time and mileage information that was used to pay certain
operator costs.
WCPS Should Consider Implementing Certain Steps to Improve Cost
Effectiveness
Certain procurements were not subject to competitive procurement methods
to ensure that WCPS received the best value for goods and services. For
example, it was WCPS’ practice to establish blanket purchase orders with
specific vendors without competitive bidding.
WCPS should establish payment rates to bus contractors in a manner that
ensures that the amounts are reasonable, considering market conditions and
actual costs. For example, we estimated potential cost savings of $1.1 million
over the estimated 12-year life of 25 buses owned by contractors if a
particular payment component was based on market rather than negotiated
rates.
WCPS did not fully utilize its automated bus routing software to ensure the
efficiency of bus routes. Furthermore, although WCPS had periodically
assessed the cost effectiveness of contracting and directly operating buses
for certain specific routes, it had not performed a system-wide cost benefit
analysis to determine the cost efficiency of contracting and directly owning
and operating its student bus transportation system. For example, two recent
analyzes concluded that savings could be realized by transferring certain
WCPS operated routes to contractors. According to WCPS records, in fiscal
year 2011 transportation costs totaled $11.1 million with 32 percent paid to
contractors.
WCPS Needs to Enhance Certain Policies
WCPS needs to enhance existing procurement and equipment policies. The
procurement policies did not address the need to use competitive
procurement methods for purchases under $20,000. The equipment policies
did not require that all sensitive items be recorded in the equipment records
or tagged for identification purposes.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Washington County Public Schools (WCPS)
ranks 11th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. From fiscal year 2002 to 2012, the total full-time student
population has increased 11 percent from 19,961 to 22,240 students. Since
the 2009 – 2010 school year, WCPS has had 46 schools, consisting of 27
elementary, 7 middle, 7 high schools, 1 combined middle/high school, 1
technical high school, 1 outdoor education center, 1 evening high school
and 1 special education center.
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements, operating and capital
expenditures totaled $303 million in fiscal year 2011. The largest
expenditure category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which
accounted for 84 percent of total operating expenditures during fiscal year
2011. According to MSDE records, during the 2010 – 2011 school year,
WCPS had 2,959 full-time equivalent positions which consisted of 2,038
instructional and 921 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
WCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and
the Washington County government provide the vast majority of WCPS
funding. In addition, MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the
establishment and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and
regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. MSDE also works with WCPS to comply with the requirements and
mandates of federal law. Washington County government exercises authority
over WCPS, primarily through review and approval of WCPS’ annual operating
and capital budgets.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2011 Activity
WCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what
is referred to as a Single Audit of WCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). The resulting financial statement and single audit
reports for fiscal year 2011 were issued in September 2011. Neither report
7

--- Page 10 ---
included any material weaknesses1 or deficiencies2 in WCPS’ record keeping,
processes, and controls.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited WCPS’ financial statements and the risks and
scope of our audit in certain areas, we relied on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2011 financial statements to reduce the
scope of our audit work related to revenues, accounts receivable, and federal
grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 21 of the 26 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated August 6, 2007 (the 26 findings
resulted in 17 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed up on
these 21 findings based on our current assessment of significance and risk
relative to the audit objectives. We determined that WCPS satisfactorily
addressed 18 of these findings. The remaining 3 findings are repeated in this
report.
1 A material weakness in internal control is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, such that there is
a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Board’s financial statements (or, with respect to
Single Audit, material noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program) will
not be prevented or detected and corrected, on a timely basis.
2 A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent or
detect misstatements on a timely basis. With respect to Single Audit, a deficiency is a control deficiency,
or combination of control deficiencies, that does not allow management or employees, in the normal
course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct noncompliance with a type
of compliance requirement of a federal program on a timely basis.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
WCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Washington County,
the State, and the federal government. According to the WCPS audited
financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled $301.4 million during
fiscal year 2011. In addition to these revenue sources, schools also collect
funds for various purposes, such as for student activities, clubs, and school
publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these student
activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and are reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. Although this revenue is raised
through student-related activities, WCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard
these funds. For fiscal year 2011, school activity fund collections totaled
$4.85 million and the June 30, 2011 balance was $2.8 million.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the WCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the
results of that audit for certain revenues and accounts receivable (for
example, amounts due from other governments). The auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or deficiencies
regarding material revenue types or accounts receivable, the majority of which
related to electronic fund transfers from other government entities and food
service cash receipts.
Student Activity Funds Were Subject to External Review
WCPS engaged a consultant to review the student activity funds at each of the
schools on an annual basis. This review consisted of evaluating and testing
internal controls over cash receipts and disbursements. The results of the
consultant’s reviews were provided to the Chief Financial Officer. Our review
of the consultant’s procedures for one elementary, one middle, and one high
school disclosed that the reviews were conducted in accordance with Board
policies and the School Accounting Manual. The Manual establishes a
uniform method for reporting all receipts, expenditures, and balances related
to school sponsored activities. Furthermore, the consultant’s reports we
reviewed did not identify any improprieties or prevalent control weaknesses.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
Internal controls over cash receipts handled at the Central Business Office
were not adequate.
Analysis
Internal controls over cash receipts, such as Medicaid reimbursements and
facility rental fees, received at various departments in the WCPS headquarters
building and forwarded to the Central Business Office (CBO) for subsequent
deposit processing were not adequate. Specifically we noted the following
conditions:
 Cash receipts were not recorded and checks were not restrictively
endorsed until the related deposit slip was prepared by the CBO rather
than upon initial receipt. Also the transfer of funds from receiving
departments to the CBO was not documented to establish the chain of
custody for the funds.
 Duties were not properly segregated in that the CBO employee responsible
for the deposit verification also received collections from the various
departments. Further, two CBO employees involved with the cash receipt
and deposit process also had access to the related accounts receivable
records. For example, the employee who took the deposits to the bank
also had the ability to create and modify the related accounts receivable
records.
 Although cash receipts were stored in a locked safe before being recorded,
access to the safe was not adequately limited. Specifically, we noted at
least five CBO employees had routine access to the safe key.
As a result of these conditions, collections could be misappropriated without
detection. According to WCPS records, cash receipts processed by the CBO
totaled approximately $7.2 million during fiscal year 2011.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCPS
a. record collections immediately upon receipt;
b. restrictively endorse all checks immediately upon receipt;
c. document the chain of custody when transferring collections to other
departments;
d. ensure proper segregation of duties over the cash collections, deposit
preparation, and accounts receivable (repeat); and
10

--- Page 13 ---
e. ensure all collections are adequately secured prior to subsequent
processing and deposit.
We advised WCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Federal Funds
Background
WCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of Federal
Awards, Fiscal Year 2011 expenditures of federal award funds totaled $32
million.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to the work performed by the independent certified public accounting
firm that conducted the Single Audit of the WCPS federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results.
Besides expressing an opinion on WCPS compliance with the terms of several
grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure's impact on compliance and audited the Fiscal Year 2011 required
Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant-
related expenditures). The related report stated that WCPS complied, in all
material respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal
programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance with major
federal programs, the auditor did not identify any material weaknesses.
Procurements and Disbursements
Background
According to WCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled $77 million
during fiscal year 2011. Requisitions for goods and services are manually
generated by the requesting department and must be approved by
supervisory personnel (such as the respective department head or principal).
The Procurement Department creates all purchase orders from approved
requisitions. Board approval is required for purchases of goods with a cost
exceeding $25,000 and for service contracts exceeding $50,000. All invoices
are submitted by vendors directly to the finance office. The receipt of goods
and services is confirmed by the requesting department before payments are
11

--- Page 14 ---
processed by the finance department using an automated system that prints
vendor checks and also posts the payments to the financial records.
Finding 2
WCPS procurement policies did not require competitive procurements for
purchases that cost less than $20,000.
Analysis
WCPS’ policies did not require the use of competitive procurement methods
for any purchases less than $20,000. While formal bidding may not be
appropriate for smaller procurements, competitive procurement methods
(such as obtaining quotes from multiple vendors over the phone) should
generally be required except for small procurements. For example, State
procurement regulations require competitive procurement methods for
procurements over $5,000.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WCPS amend its existing policies by lowering the
monetary threshold (for example, to $5,000) for which competitive
procurement methods must be used.
Finding 3
Blanket Purchase Orders (BPOs) were processed without obtaining bids,
documenting prices, and obtaining required Board approval.
Analysis
WCPS’ practice was to establish BPOs without competitive bidding and certain
BPOs were not submitted to the Board for approval, as required. In essence,
the BPOs directed individual purchases to specific vendors for certain
supplies and services but the benefit of this process was not evident. The
BPOs we reviewed did not identify items nor include quantity limits prices to
,
be charged, or discounts. For example, one BPO simply stated that it was
issued to cover automotive parts and services and that no single transaction
may exceed $1,000. Generally, the purpose of State BPOs is to establish an
agreement with a vendor for recurring purchases of goods and services at a
competitively procured fixed price or discount. Similar conditions were
commented upon during our prior audit.
Our test of 10 vendor BPOs with total fiscal year 2011 expenditures of
approximately $402,000, with total purchases charged against each BPO
exceeding $20,000, disclosed that none of the tested BPOs were
12

--- Page 15 ---
competitively procured and none of the 9 for which total purchases exceeded
$25,000 were approved by the Board, as required by Board policies. Board
policies require that expenditures exceeding $20,000 require competitive
procurement and expenditures exceeding $25,000 require Board approval.
Additionally, none of the 10 BPOs tested contained a formal written
agreement for agreed-upon pricing, discounts, and delivery terms for items to
be purchased. Accordingly, there was no assurance that the best price was
obtained.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that WCPS
a. comply with its existing policies and procedures regarding competitive
procurements (repeat); and
b. prepare and retain sufficient contract documentation including agreed-
upon pricing, discounts, and other relevant terms (repeat).
Finding 4
WCPS did not properly secure vendor bids and certain bid opening controls
were lacking.
Analysis
WCPS did not comply with Board policy by adequately securing vendor bids
prior to bid opening. Specifically, a purchasing office employee stored vendor
bids in an unlocked desk drawer that was accessible to several employees.
Also, the Board policy did not address certain aspects of the process for
opening bids. Although the policy on bid openings addressed matters such as
location and timing, it was silent on the number of people to be present as
witnesses or documentation to be maintained. For 6 of 12 procurements
reviewed that occurred between 2008 and 2011, we noted problems with the
bid opening process. For example, in four cases WCPS could not provide bid
opening documentation (such as a tabulation of the bids received) and in two
cases only one employee, such as the procurement director was present for
the bid openings. Consequently, the integrity of the bid process and the
contract award could be compromised. According to WCPS’ records,
contractual services expenditures, including small procurements that do not
require bids, totaled approximately $13.9 million for fiscal year 2011.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that WCPS
a. adequately secure all vendor bids prior to opening; and
b. enhance its policy for bid openings by requiring that bid openings be
witnessed and documented by at least two individuals, and related bid
13

--- Page 16 ---
opening documentation (such as a tabulation of bids received) is
maintained.
Health Care Contracts
Background
WCPS self-funds all health care costs and uses a third-party administrator to
pay claims on behalf of plan participants and authorized dependents.
Providers submit claims to the administrator who pays them on behalf of
WCPS and then obtains reimbursement from WCPS for actual costs of claims
paid. WCPS pays an administrative fee for these services. For fiscal year
2011, according to WCPS records, amounts paid for health care totaled $23.1
million, including administrative fees of approximately $2.6 million.
Furthermore, as of July 2011, there were approximately 3,820 employees,
retirees, and dependents receiving benefits under the health care contract.
Finding 5
WCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and retiree
health care costs.
Analysis
WCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that amounts paid to the
third-party health care administrator were proper. Our review of WCPS’
procedures and controls over the contract and related payments for medical
claims and administrative fees disclosed the following conditions:
 WCPS’ policy was to pay the claims reimbursements invoiced by the
vendor without performing any verification that the invoiced amounts were
proper. Specifically, WCPS did not conduct or contract for comprehensive
claim reviews to ensure that the vendor paid claims only for eligible
individuals in accordance with the contract terms, and did not review
claims documentation to ensure the appropriateness of billed services (for
example, were actually provided and medically necessary). In this regard,
the Maryland Department of Budget and Management, which has similar
claims processing contracts for State employees, contracts with a third-
party vendor (other than the vendor processing claims) to conduct reviews
of claims paid.
 WCPS did not ensure that administrative fees were appropriately billed or
were only paid for eligible individuals. WCPS paid a monthly
administrative fee of $35 per participant and a slightly lower fee for
participants with Medicare.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that WCPS establish a process to verify the propriety of
claims and administrative fees paid to the health care administrator. For
example, comprehensive claims reviews should be conducted to ensure that
only valid claims were paid for services actually provided for covered
members.
Finding 6
WCPS did not always use a competitive procurement process to obtain stop-
loss insurance coverage for its employee health care coverage.
Analysis
WCPS did not use a competitive procurement process to procure stop-loss
insurance coverage for employee health claims for fiscal years 2010 and
2011. (Stop-loss coverage indemnifies WCPS against health insurance claim
amounts that exceed a certain threshold for a member.) Payments to the
insurer for stop-loss coverage totaled $1.9 million during these fiscal years.
During fiscal year 2008 WCPS competitively procured a health care
administrator contract, which included stop-loss insurance coverage for fiscal
year 2009. However, for all years after fiscal year 2009, WCPS negotiated
stop-loss insurance coverage with the incumbent provider, who is also the
third-party administrator. Without a competitive process to procure the
insurance coverage, WCPS lacked assurance that it obtained the coverage at
the best possible price. Since the initial competitively procured contract for
the stop-loss insurance, the premiums paid to the stop-loss provider have
increased and the coverage has decreased. Specifically, the initial stop-loss
contract for fiscal year 2009 provided coverage for all claims above $250,000
per member for an annual premium of $24.51 per employee while the
contract for fiscal year 2011 provided coverage for losses above $300,000 at
an annual cost per employee of $33.80.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that WCPS competitively procure its stop-loss insurance for its
employee health care coverage.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the WCPS
budget. Fiscal year 2011 salary, wage, and benefit costs totaled $208
15

--- Page 18 ---
million. According to MSDE reports, during the 2010 - 2011 School Year,
WCPS had 2,959 full-time equivalent positions, including 921 non-
instructional positions.
Finding 7
WCPS did not adequately restrict access to its automated human resources
and payroll system.
Analysis
WCPS did not establish adequate internal controls over its automated human
resources and payroll system and related processes. Specifically, our review
disclosed the following conditions:
 Four employees had the ability to change pay rates, including their own,
without supervisory review or approval. Although WCPS was capable of
generating output reports identifying pay rate changes, such reports were
not generated. As a result of this condition, improper or erroneous
transactions could be processed without detection.
 WCPS did not periodically review system access to ensure that critical
capabilities assigned to employees were proper. In this regard, we
identified 11 employees whose access allowed them to prepare payments
for other than regular earnings, which was not a requirement for their job.
Our tests of payroll change and adjustments did not disclose any
inappropriate or erroneous transactions.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that WCPS ensure adequate controls are in place over payroll
processing. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. generate and retain output reports identifying all pay rates changes made,
b. perform documented independent supervisory reviews of pay rate
changes,
c. periodically (such as annually) review and evaluate the human resource
and payroll system capabilities assigned to all individuals and initiate
appropriate changes, and
d. only assign critical system functions to employees who need those
capabilities to perform their job duties.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 8
WCPS certified sick leave to the Maryland State Retirement and Pension
System as unused for the portion that was previously paid to employees upon
separation, resulting in increased pension benefits.
Analysis
It was WCPS’ policy to pay employees for their accumulated sick leave upon
retirement, but also to certify that this sick leave was unused to the Maryland
State Retirement and Pension System (MSRPS), resulting in increased
retirement service credit for these employees. For example, upon retirement
WCPS paid one employee $38,000 in fiscal year 2011 for the employee’s
unused sick leave balance at a rate specified in the applicable union
agreement, and certified to MSRPS that all of this employee’s accumulated
sick leave was unused. Accordingly, MSRPS increased the annual retirement
benefit for the reported unused sick leave, resulting in an additional annual
retirement benefit of $2,077. Based on WCPS records, sick leave payouts
totaled approximately $458,000 and $708,000 in fiscal years 2011 and
2012, respectively.
We were advised by WCPS personnel that reporting the full unused sick leave
balance to MSRPS has occurred for many years. Furthermore, although a
joint advice of counsel from legal counsels assigned to the Maryland General
Assembly and MSRPS indicated that the law in this area is ambiguous, the
advice concluded that the better interpretation of the law would be to not
report leave to the MSRPS for which employees have been paid upon
retirement. Unlike the State’s personnel policies, which do not allow for sick
leave balance payments upon retirement, the practice of making payments to
retirees for a portion of their unused sick leave, yet reporting the entire
accumulated sick leave balance to MSPRS for retirement service credit
purposes, appears common among the school systems.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that WCPS Board reevaluate the accumulated sick leave
payment practices and consider discontinuing the practice of certifying
unused sick leave to MSRPS while making a payment to employees for
unused sick leave at retirement.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to WCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled approximately $40.6 million as of June
30, 2011. WCPS maintains centralized automated records to track
equipment inventory with a cost of $1,000 or more (including items
capitalized for financial statement purposes).
Finding 9
Internal controls and record keeping over equipment were not adequate.
Analysis
WCPS lacked sufficient policies to safeguard its sensitive equipment, and did
not establish proper accountability and control over its capitalized equipment.
For example, our review disclosed the following conditions:
 WCPS did not have a sufficient policy or procedures to control sensitive
items below the $1,000 threshold, primarily technology equipment such
as cameras, laptops, tablets, and other electronic devices. Items below
the $1,000 threshold were not recorded in the centralized automated
records nor were they required to be labeled to identify them as WCPS
property. While WCPS indicated electronic tracking software was used to
monitor the location of certain sensitive equipment, reports of this
monitoring were not maintained. The Government Finance Officers
Association (GFOA) recommends that an entity establish controls over non-
capitalized equipment that is marketable and susceptible to theft.
 The physical inventory counts were not subject to an independent
verification. Physical inventories were performed near the end of the
school year by a representative at each school who was essentially the
property custodian (and thus not independent), but WCPS had not
established a procedure to verify the accuracy of the inventory counts
reported by the custodians on the property lists. The property lists were
used by the central office record keeper to update the equipment
inventory records and report disposals, transfers, and missing items.
Under similar circumstances, State inventory controls require a test count
of a reasonable number of items.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that WCPS put the necessary policies and procedures in
place to ensure accountability and control over its equipment inventory.
Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. establish a policy requiring all sensitive items to be recorded in the
inventory records and tagged for identification purposes, and
b. implement a process to periodically and independently verify the results of
the physical inventories taken by the schools.
Information Technology
Background
WCPS’ Information Management and Instructional Technology Department
maintains and administers the WCPS computer network, computer
operations, and information systems applications. WCPS operates a wide
area network, with Internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools
to the computer resources located at the WCPS Board of Education building.
This building hosts critical devices including the Internet firewall and
computer servers, which support WCPS’ critical applications including the
student management system, finance management system, and human
resources and payroll system.
Finding 10
Certain system access, monitoring, and authentication controls were not
adequate.
Analysis
Controls were not adequate over network authentication and a critical server
that hosts a number of the WCPS critical systems (for example the student
management system). Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 Password controls over network access and the aforementioned server
were not sufficient to properly protect critical resources and sensitive data.
Password length, complexity, maximum age, history, and account lockout
were not in accordance with best practices prescribed by the State of
Maryland Department of Information Technology (DoIT) Information
Security Policy. For example, required password length for network access
was set at two characters, instead of the minimum of eight characters
required by the aforementioned Policy, and 572 user accounts with access
to the server had passwords that never expired. In addition, we identified
three user accounts that had unnecessary modification access to this
server’s production data files, programs, and logs.
19

--- Page 22 ---
 Direct changes to critical files on the aforementioned server were not
logged. Furthermore, although WCPS reviewed audit reports of security
activity for this server, we were advised that these reviews did not include
verification of key security events (for example, user creation) to
supporting documentation. In addition, these reviews were not
independent, since they were performed by the individual with complete
authority over this server.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that WCPS establish appropriate network and server access,
monitoring and authentication controls. Specifically, we made detailed
recommendations to WCPS, which if implemented, would provide for
adequate controls in these areas.
Finding 11
The WCPS network was not properly secured.
Analysis
The WCPS network was not properly secured. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 An intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) was not used on the
WCPS network. An IDPS gathers and analyzes network traffic to identify
and/or prevent network security breaches and attacks, and alerts network
administrators of these situations. Best practices prescribed by the State
of Maryland Department of Information Technology (DoIT) Information
Security Policy require the use of an IDPS.
 Eleven publicly and widely accessible servers, including email related
servers, were located on the WCPS internal network rather than isolating
these servers in a separate protected network zone. These servers, which
could potentially be compromised, exposed the internal network to attack
from external sources. The National Institute of Standards and Technology
Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy recommends placing publicly
accessible servers in an external protected zone so as to protect those
servers as well as an entity’s internal network.
 WCPS did not adequately secure its internal network from improper
network level access from WCPS high school computer lab workstations or
school system laptops used by students. WCPS did not use network
access control software or network level traffic filtering to protect its
network from activity emanating from these workstations and laptops.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Such access should be limited to devices necessary for students to
perform required tasks.
 Insecure connection protocols which transmitted userids and passwords in
clear text were enabled on two critical firewalls for remote administration
of the firewalls. In addition, remote administrative access to these
firewalls was not restricted to only those users who required such access.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that WCPS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identify how IDPS coverage should be best applied to its network,
and implement IDPS coverage for all critical portions of its network as
appropriate;
b. segregate publicly and widely accessible servers in a separate protected
network zone;
c. implement controls to limit network level student access to only
authorized local school and headquarters network resources; and
d. restrict remote firewall administrative access to use of only encrypted
protocols and limit such remote access to only those users requiring such
access.
Finding 12
WCPS’ information technology disaster recovery plan was not comprehensive
and backups of several critical network devices were not current.
Analysis
WCPS did not have a comprehensive information technology disaster recovery
plan (DRP) and backups of several critical network devices were not current.
Specifically, WCPS did not have a comprehensive DRP for recovering from
disaster scenarios (such as fire). For example, the DRP did not contain
listings of hardware and software components or prioritize applications for
recovery. We also noted that the configurations of several critical network
devices, including two firewalls, either were not backed up or were not backed
up on a consistent basis. Without a comprehensive DRP and timely back up
of critical files and settings, a disaster could cause significant delays (for an
undetermined period of time) in restoring information systems operations. The
State of Maryland Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines
provide information on the minimum required elements needed for a DRP
(including listings of hardware and software) and the creation and off-site
storage of critical back-up files.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 12
We recommend that WCPS develop and implement a comprehensive disaster
recovery plan that is in accordance with the State of Maryland Information
Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines. We also recommend that
WCPS perform regular backups for all of its critical network devices and
appropriately store all backups.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
WCPS maintains a total of 48 facilities (including schools and other
administrative and support offices) with a staff of 196 custodial and 35
maintenance personnel. According to the Capital Improvement Plan (CIP)
prepared in fiscal year 2012, planned construction, major renovations, and
systemic improvements to WCPS facilities over fiscal years 2013 through
2018 are estimated to cost $205 million ($110 million in State funds and
$95 million in local funds).
An Inclusive Process is Used to Plan for School Facility Construction, Major
Renovation, and Repair Projects
WCPS uses a comprehensive process, which includes the solicitation of input
from various sources, to plan for future school construction, major renovation
and repair projects. For example, WCPS uses public meetings, student
demographic data, and other internal sources (such as current curriculum
mandates) to develop its six-year CIP. The CIP is presented to and approved
by the Board, as well as elected local officials. In addition, the Educational
Facilities Master Plan that is used to guide overall WCPS operations
incorporates certain CIP objectives and strategies related to school facilities.
Our review of the aforementioned fiscal year 2012 CIP disclosed that it
appeared to address the needs of WCPS based on items such as student
demographics and facility assessments. In addition, projects reviewed during
the audit met the needs of the WCPS as determined in these plans.
Finding 13
WCPS’ energy management program was not sufficiently comprehensive.
Analysis
Although, WCPS implemented certain energy management procedures in
order to reduce energy costs, it did not have a documented comprehensive
energy management program that detailed the procedures to be conducted,
expected results, and specific monitoring to be performed. Specifically our
review noted the following conditions:
22

--- Page 25 ---
 WCPS had not developed specific goals or strategies for its energy
management program such as reducing energy consumption by a
specified percentage.
 WCPS conducts periodic site visits to monitor energy usage but did not
document these visits. We were advised by WCPS management that site
visits are conducted on an on-going basis based on need. However, WCPS
was unable to provide a comprehensive listing of visits or actions taken or
recommended as a result of the visits and, consequently, we could not
determine if all locations had been evaluated. In addition, results of these
visits and appropriate recommendations for reducing energy usage were
not summarized for management review or other programmatic oversight.
WCPS has a dedicated energy manager program coordinator who is
responsible for monitoring energy practices at the facilities, as well as
advising personnel on energy conservation practices. According to WCPS
records, energy costs totaled $6 million during fiscal year 2011.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that WCPS
a. develop a comprehensive energy management program that includes
specific goals and strategies; and
b. maintain documentation of site visits, and track the recommendations
made and actions taken as the basis for reporting to management.
Transportation Services
Background
WCPS has approximately 19,000 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on one of 68
contractor-owned buses or 126 school system-owned buses. For contractor
owned buses, WCPS assumes nearly all of the risks for bus operations while
essentially guaranteeing a profit to the contractors each year for the expected
12-year3 life of a bus. Specifically, contractors are paid a per vehicle
allotment (PVA) that repays the bus contractors the full acquisition cost of the
bus over a 12-year period with the assumption that there is no residual value.
The PVA also provides an additional annual payment as a return on
3 In Maryland, conventional school buses operated in certain jurisdictions, including Washington County,
have a useful life of 12 years as established by Maryland law. Under prescribed maintenance and
inspection conditions, the State Superintendent of Schools can grant approval to operate a conventional
school bus beyond 12 years.
23

--- Page 26 ---
investment (ROI) to the contractors, which is established when a bus is
purchased and remains fixed over the bus’ life.
Furthermore, the bus contractors are paid a per mile rate for bus operating
and maintenance costs, a driver per hour allotment to cover the contractor’s
labor costs, a fixed percentage of labor costs for benefits, and for fuel usage
at market rates. Additionally, WCPS pays for the liability insurance, including
personal injury and property damage, for all buses operated for WCPS,
including contractor buses.
According to WCPS records, fiscal year 2011 transportation costs totaled
approximately $11.1 million, with $3.5 million (32 percent) paid to bus
contractors. Of the 2.3 million reported route miles for the 2010-2011 school
year, 31 percent represented miles traveled to transport disabled students.
Finding 14
Certain payments to bus contractors were not based on market conditions or
actual costs.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine contractual rates were negotiated without
considering market conditions and actual operating costs. Our review of the
contract terms disclosed the following conditions:
 WCPS negotiates the PVA amount with contractors based on contractor
requests without considering market conditions relating to the ROI portion.
To estimate the financial impact to WCPS of using a negotiated ROI rate
rather than the prime interest rate,4 we recalculated the PVA for each of
the 25 new buses placed into service from fiscal years 2009 to 2012.
These calculations show that the WCPS annual PVA payments per bus
were $3,268 to $4,137 higher than the payments would have been had
the prime rate that existed at the time of purchase been used in the
calculation. For example, in fiscal years 2010 to 2012, the prime rate was
3.25 percent and the ROI rate used by WCPS was 7.76 percent. The
effect is that, over the 12-year life of these 25 new buses put into service
by contractors since 2009, WCPS will pay out approximately $1.1 million
more than if the prime rate was used for the ROI. This analysis does not
include the effects for any new bus purchases that may be made after
fiscal year 2012 and the lost interest income that could have been earned
by WCPS on the excess amounts paid. Although WCPS could not provide
4 We used the prime rate since this rate was recommended in a November 1999 study commissioned by
another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study recommended the prime rate as a
reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a lending rate that nearly always exceeds the
available market investment rate: therefore, it is deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation.
24

--- Page 27 ---
documentation, it maintains that contractors suffer losses in other areas
to offset the negotiated PVA amount.
 WCPS payments to contractors for operating costs pertaining to bus
maintenance were not supported (based on documented maintenance
and other repair costs, for example). Furthermore, WCPS had not formally
evaluated why maintenance payments to contractors were much higher
than in-house maintenance costs. According to WCPS records, per mile
costs for maintenance on WCPS-owned buses were $0.43 per mile for
fiscal year 2010 and $0.44 per mile for fiscal year 2011. However, bus
contractors were paid $0.69 per mile during these fiscal years for
maintenance. WCPS maintains, but could not readily support, that using
their maintenance costs as a basis for maintenance payments to
contractors is not appropriate because WCPS benefits from volume
discounts and lower labor rates than what is charged by commercial
vehicle repair facilities.
 Additionally, WCPS did not exclude from payments to bus contractors the
federal fuel excise taxes. In this regard, WCPS pays contractors for fuel
usage using a monthly average for diesel fuel prices (as established by an
independent source) and dividing by an established miles per gallon (mpg)
rate of 7mpg.5 However, according to federal law, WCPS contractors are
exempt from the $0.244 per gallon excise tax for diesel fuel and are able
to receive a credit for federal fuel taxes paid when they file their income
tax returns.6 As a result, if WCPS had considered this exemption in their
calculation, payments to the contractors would have been lower (for
example, a total of $80,000 less during school years 2010 and 2011).
Recommendation 14
We recommend that WCPS establish payment amounts to bus contractors in
a manner that ensures all costs are reasonable and necessary. Specifically,
we recommend that WCPS
a. use market investment rates as the basis for establishing contractor rates
for the annual per vehicle allotment (repeat),
b. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs (repeat), and
c. exclude federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
5 The American School Bus Council reported that the national average usage for a large school bus with a
diesel engine is 7 miles per gallon.
6 We were advised by a Comptroller of Maryland representative that there is no exemption from State fuel
excise taxes for buses operated by WCPS or contractors.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 15
WCPS did not verify contractor provided operational data that formed the
basis for certain payments to the contractors.
Analysis
WCPS did not ensure the accuracy of self-reported contractor information that
was used by WCPS to formulate payments to the bus contractors for certain
maintenance and operational costs. Specifically, payment amounts for driver
time and certain maintenance and operational costs were calculated using
information provided by bus contractors (manifests including time and
mileage) that was not verified by WCPS. Consequently, WCPS lacks assurance
that payments to contractors for driver salaries, which are based on drive
time, and maintenance and fuel costs, which are based on route mileage,
were accurate.
Our test of route mileage for 10 buses, with annual payments for
maintenance and operational costs totaling approximately $250,000,
disclosed that for 7 of the tested buses, route mileage billed during fiscal year
2011 appeared overstated in amounts ranging from 6 to 14 miles per day.
Applying the fiscal year 2011 contract’s mileage maintenance and operations
factor to these potentially overstated miles, we estimate that WCPS could
have overpaid these seven bus contractors by $14,500 in fiscal year 2011.
Based on total miles driven by bus contractors during fiscal year 2011, of the
$3.5 million WCPS paid contractors during that year, approximately $1.4
million was for maintenance and operation costs.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that WCPS
a. independently verify bus contractors’ manifests, at least on a test basis, to
ensure that the payments to the contractors accurately reflect the actual
bus services provided; and
b. document the verification process and any required payment adjustments,
including the recovery of the aforementioned $14,500.
Finding 16
WCPS did not fully use its automated routing software capabilities to develop
more efficient routes or formalize certain ridership goals.
Analysis
WCPS did not fully use its automated bus routing software capabilities to
develop more efficient routes. Although, WCPS’ automated routing software
has the capability to generate reports of bus routes with student ride times
26

--- Page 29 ---
and average bus occupancy, in practice, WCPS uses existing bus routes and
makes manual modifications to accommodate students’ school assignment
without periodically reviewing all routes for efficiency on a system-wide basis.
In addition, WCPS had not established formal bus occupancy or student ride
time goals.
The lack of a system-wide route analysis could have a potentially negative
impact on route efficiency. For example, our review of WCPS’ fiscal year 2011
bus manifests (which are used to record student ridership) for 503 bus routes
disclosed that 300 routes were below 75 percent of WCPS’ informal bus
occupancy goals. On 115 of these 300 routes, actual student ridership was
less than 50 percent of the goals.
The use of routing software is a recognized best practice that can reduce the
time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce student ride times, help ensure
that routes utilize existing bus capacity, and minimize the number of buses
needed to transport students.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that WCPS take steps to determine if buses can be used
more efficiently. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. fully utilize its automated routing software to develop system-wide efficient
bus routes, and
b. develop formal policies documenting WCPS goals for bus occupancy and
student ride time.
Finding 17
WCPS had not performed a system-wide cost benefit analysis of outsourcing
bus services. Results of WCPS analyses of the cost to operate certain buses
indicate that potentially significant cost savings could be identified from the
preparation of a system-wide analysis.
Analysis
WCPS has not prepared a current cost-benefit study to determine the cost
efficiency of contracting and directly owning and operating its transportation
services system-wide. Currently, 35 percent of the transportation services are
provided by outside contractors, while the remaining 65 percent are directly
owned and operated by the school. The periodic review of costs associated
with transportation functions and tasks is a recognized best practice that
should be documented to help with future decision making.
27

--- Page 30 ---
WCPS performs a cost-benefit analysis when a multi-year contractor
agreement is set to expire or in the event an owner or county driver retires.
For example, two WCPS analyses, performed prior to the start of the 2012
academic year, when county drivers retired concluded that WCPS would save
approximately $6,000 annually per bus in operating costs by transferring the
related routes to contractors and consequently the routes are now operated
by contractors. The projected cost savings are primarily due to higher labor
costs for WCPS bus drivers (including health insurance, retirement, and paid
holidays) compared to contracted drivers. WCPS stated that although no
formal system-wide analysis of using contractors versus directly owning and
operating certain buses had been prepared, WCPS believed that the current
practice is efficient for providing bus services throughout the county. We
believe that periodically conducting a system-wide cost benefit analysis, in
conjunction with the use of automated routing software (see Finding 16),
could identify additional opportunities for potentially significant cost savings.
Recommendation 17
WCPS should periodically prepare a documented system-wide analysis to
determine the most beneficial mix of outside bus contractors and directly
owned buses.
Finding 18
Fuel purchases were not always supported or verified prior to payment.
Analysis
WCPS contracted with four vendors to provide various fuel types (heating,
diesel, and gasoline) to the school system. In each instance, contract
specifications indicated that pricing would be based on the average price of
the fuel type, as published by a commercial service that tracks fuel prices,
plus the bidder’s factor, per gallon. The bidder’s factor is comprised of certain
costs such as freight, overhead, and federal, State, and local taxes and fees.
Our test of 10 fuel purchases made during fiscal year 2011, totaling
approximately $213,000, disclosed the following:
 WCPS could not provide documentation to support the amounts charged
for any of the 10 tested invoices. For example, industry reports of average
fuel costs to be charged, as specified in the contracts, were not verified by
WCPS. We were able to generally confirm that the prices billed by the
vendors were based on the appropriate average price.
 Although we were able to generally confirm the average pricing, further
review of 5 of the invoices tested from one vendor totaling approximately
28

--- Page 31 ---
$117,500 disclosed that WCPS overpaid the vendor approximately $600.
The cause of the overpayment was due to the vendor including applicable
taxes twice. The contract with this vendor has been in effect since August
2010 and, according to its records, during fiscal year 2011, WCPS paid
the vendor approximately $676,000.
As a result of these items, there was a lack of assurance that WCPS was
properly verifying the propriety of fuel purchases prior to payment. According
to its records, during fiscal year 2011, WCPS made payments totaling
approximately $1.6 million for fuel purchases.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that WCPS
a. obtain and retain pricing information and use this information to verify the
accuracy of prices on vendor fuel billings; and
b. take appropriate action to recover any overpayments, including the
aforementioned $600.
Food Services
Background
WCPS has a cooking cafeteria at 23 of its schools. Food and related supplies
are received and stored in each school. In fiscal year 2011, WCPS had 222
cafeteria positions (comprised of 216 cafeteria positions and 6 administrative
positions). According to the fiscal year 2011 audited financial statements,
food service operation revenues totaled $11.1 million, exceeding food service
operation expenditures by approximately $423,000.
Cash Handling Procedures for Cafeteria Sales Were Established
WCPS’ Board of Education has a responsibility to ensure that cafeteria sales
are appropriately controlled, recorded, and safeguarded. In response to a
recommendation in our preceding audit, WCPS developed the Food &
Nutrition Services Cash Register Procedures manual to establish a uniform
policy for the handling of all cafeteria sales. The Procedures outline
responsibilities for meal counting, collections and reporting, and deposits that
are applicable to every school.
School Board Oversight
Background
WCPS’ Board of Education is composed of seven elected members and one
non-voting student representative. In its oversight responsibilities, the Board
29

--- Page 32 ---
contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent audits of
the WCPS financial statements and federal programs. The Board is organized
into five committees having oversight responsibilities for specific functional
areas: Curriculum, Facilities, Finance, Human Resources, and Policy.
Additionally, the Board is supported by several citizen advisory committees
which provide the Board with recommendations related to their areas of
specialty including Budget, Calendar, Technology, Ethics, Facilities and
Enrollment, Family Life, Finance and Audit Review, and Safe Schools.
WCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosures.
Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all WCPS
employees. WCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of citizen members
who are not subject to the authority of the Board of Education to interpret
ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent,
Assistant Superintendents, and a number of other administrators (such as
school principals and agency buyers) by January 31st of each year. Our
review of employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for calendar
year 2010 indicated that the forms were submitted as required for all
employees.
Other Financial Controls
As previously mentioned, WCPS self-funds health care costs. WCPS uses a
third party administrator to pay claims on behalf of plan members and their
dependents and pays an administrative fee for these services. Our findings in
the area of health care are addressed in Findings 5 and 6 of this report. Our
other work in this area disclosed that WCPS had established reasonable cash
investment and risk management practices.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Washington County
Public Schools (WCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the WCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the WCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of WCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on WCPS dated August 6, 2007, was limited to those findings that
were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the WCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by WCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at WCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
31

--- Page 34 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).7
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of WCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2011.
For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits WCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
WCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to WCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from November 2011 to July 2012. The WCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise WCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
7 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
32

--- Page 36 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 1
Recommendation #1: With regard to recording collections immediately upon receipt,
in FY2012, WCPS received approximately 98% of its revenues directly into its bank
account via ACH credit. Of the remaining 2%, only $27,000 was currency. The
balance was checks, which are extremely hard to misappropriate. Nevertheless, in an
effort to further strengthen control for this remaining 2%, WCPS will develop a cash
receipt spreadsheet to record collections upon receipt. This log will replace the
current practice in which an independent staff person runs an adding machine tape of
the day’s receipts to compare to the deposit total. However, WCPS would point out
that internal control manuals generally indicate that running an adding machine tape
of the day’s receipts (WCPS’s current practice) serves the same purpose as such a
spreadsheet or log.
With regard to restrictively endorsing checks immediately upon receipt, WCPS will
provide endorsement stamps to the various departments that have historically
received checks. This will ensure that the checks can be endorsed immediately upon
receipt. It will also eliminate the need for such endorsement once the checks are
delivered to the central business office.
With regard to the chain of custody, when checks and/or cash are received by another
department and subsequently delivered to the central business office, business office
personnel now issue a receipt for the amount received.
With regard to segregation of duties, it should be noted that WCPS has a very small
business office staff. This severely limits the number of individuals available to effect
maximum segregation of duties for all functions of the central business office. Many
staffers must be cross trained in multiple functionalities. Nevertheless, management
will determine how cash receipts, deposit preparation and related accounts receivable
duties can be further segregated as WCPS migrates to its new back office software
system. It is important to note that WCPS does have compensating controls in place.
These include 1) supervisory review of revenue accounts to compare recorded activity
to expectations and budgets, 2) following up on billings to outside individuals and
organizations, and 3) regularly performing timely bank reconciliations. Finally, with
regard to the auditors’ statement that they had advised WCPS on accomplishing the
necessary separation of duties using existing personnel, the WCPS staff does not recall
this discussion. We would appreciate a copy of this valuable advice.
With regard to the securing of funds, WCPS currently secures funds received in a
locked safe before they are recorded and deposited. However, to enhance controls,
access to the safe has now been restricted to two employees, one of whom is a director
level.
Recommendation #2: Section II-B of Board Regulation DJF-R specifically delineates
the competitive procurement method to be used for purchases in each of three
progressive dollar amount categories. These three categories cover the gamut of all
possible purchases. This regulation complies with Maryland law as defined in Section
5-112 (Bids) of the Education Article of the Annotated Code. It is also consistent with

--- Page 37 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 2
Section 13-109 (Small Procurement) of the State Finance and Procurement Article of
the Annotated Code. Regulation DJF-R applies to all purchases of goods and services
except professional services, the procurement of which is addressed in a separate
Board policy and exhibit.
Though not required by either policy or Maryland law, the Purchasing staff routinely
invites and encourages multiple price quotes for goods and services under the $20,000
quote threshold, if such goods and services are conducive to competition. This occurs
either when the Purchasing personnel are screening requisitions for legal and
regulatory compliance or when they are providing procurement instructions to the
requisitioning department. Though not normally documented, Purchasing personnel
also routinely use the internet to check requisitions for competitive pricing.
Maintaining such flexibility and discretion for purchases up to $20,000 by an
experienced Purchasing staff member not only meets the intent of Maryland law, it is
an efficient use of the Board’s resources.1
Recommendation #3: This recommendation pertains to the use of blanket purchase
orders (BPO’s), which are issued annually to pre-qualified vendors for unplanned,
routine purchases that do not exceed $1,000 per transaction. These purchases are
necessary to expedite workflows within the Maintenance Department and the
Transportation Department. Due to the nature of these purchases, which changes
from year to year, WCPS cannot accurately project annual purchase amounts or even
prospectively determine the specific items to be purchased. As an alternative to
issuing a BPO, the Purchasing Department could require a separate requisition and
PO for each of these purchases as they occur throughout the year. If WCPS opted for
this alternative, none of these purchases would require a bid, because individual
purchases of $1,000 or less would be below the $25,000 bid threshold.2
Unfortunately, such a process would significantly slow down departmental workflows.
WCPS still does not understand why simply aggregating these individual purchases (of
$1,000 or less) together under a single, pre-qualified, annual BPO should change the
level of bid scrutiny required.
1 Auditor’s Comment: The WCPS response confirms our finding that Board policy does not require competitive
procurements for goods and services under the $20,000 threshold. Specifically, the response states that policy does
not require competition, although it states that purchasing personnel routinely invites and encourages multiple price
quotes, the results of which are not normally documented. Our position remains that without a written policy
directing WCPS to purchase goods and services valued at less than $20,000 via competitive procurement methods
(and documentation of the bids or quotes received), the Board lacks sufficient assurance that the lowest cost and/or
best value is being obtained for WCPS’ purchases.
2 Auditor’s Comment: Our issue pertains to how blanket purchase orders (BPO) were being established and used by
WCPS. WCPS’ BPOs were essentially open ended directives to purchase a broad range of commodities from
specific vendors without any competitive procurement and generally did not specify the items eligible for purchase,
discounts to be provided, and were not approved by the Board when it was reasonable to expect purchases would
exceed $25,000 (a dollar threshold requiring Board approval). The process described above is contrary to the
manner in which BPOs are established by State government agencies. Generally, State BPOs are executed after a
competitive procurement process and they provide set prices, discounts, and/or quantities over the duration of the
BPO.

--- Page 38 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 3
Another alternative to the blanket purchase order model is a procurement card (P-
Card) model. Unfortunately, P-Cards do not eliminate the holder’s option to purchase
repeatedly at the same establishment, certainly without the benefit of any bidding and
possibly without the benefit of vendor pre-qualification. Additionally, a P-Card
program presents a host of internal accounting control issues.
Recommendation #4: WCPS concedes that unopened bids have been kept in a
lockable, but unlocked, file cabinet. However, WCPS does believe that the level of
security that it is currently providing over unopened bids is adequate because, during
the workday, the area is continually staffed by Purchasing Department personnel who
routinely need access to other information that is stored in the file cabinet in question.
The department has changed its procedure to ensure that the cabinet is locked each
evening prior to departure.
Additionally, from time-to-time, there have been bid openings that were attended by
only one representative from the Purchasing Department. As bid openings are open to
the public and the results are immediately posted on the Purchasing website for public
viewing, WCPS believes that there is minimal risk when, on occasion, only one
Purchasing staffer conducts a bid opening. Nevertheless, WCPS is now providing two-
deep representation from the Purchasing staff for each bid opening.
WCPS also agrees that certain bid documentation could not be located for several of
the bids that the auditors sampled. However, Purchasing Department management
had previously recognized this problem and implemented corrective action.
Subsequent to the dates of the bids in question, but prior to the auditor’s review, staff
had already implemented a new tabbed bid file system. This new system provides
better organization of the bid file as well as immediate recognition of missing
documentation.
Recommendation #5: WCPS has maintained controls to ensure the propriety of
payments for employee and retiree healthcare costs. Each year, WCPS obtains copies
of the SAS70 report from each of its plan administrators. These statements, rendered
by independent certified public accounting firms, attest to the sound internal controls

--- Page 39 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 4
that the respective administrators exercise over their processing of claims, stop-loss
insurance and administrative fees. Additionally, SAS70 reports can be relied upon to
provide assurances that claims are being paid in accordance with WCPS plan
documents and that WCPS is being billed for only those patients who are members of
WCPS plans.3
Notwithstanding the above mentioned controls that are already in place, WCPS will
investigate the cost to the taxpayers of engaging a firm to perform a comprehensive
claims review. Staff will provide this information to the Board of Education so that it
can determine whether or not to proceed, i.e., if the proposed fee is reasonable in
relation to the amount of additional risk mitigation. In this regard, it should be noted
that the Office of Legislative Audits, in its seven-month review of the Washington
County Public Schools, did not determine that WCPS had been improperly billed by its
claims administrators for any costs.
Recommendation #6: In 2008, WCPS did issue a health benefit Request for Proposals
(RFP), or bid, that included, among other products and services, stop–loss insurance.
This RFP was for a five-year term. It should be noted that, fully insured products,
such as WCPS’s stop loss coverage, are subject to adjustment after the first year in
response to factors like inflation, advances in medical technology, and group
experience. Each year, the WCPS benefits team and its benefits consultant discussed
the stop loss market inflation rates in detail to ensure that any proposed annual
increases were reasonable and that taxpayer funds were being spent in the most cost
effective way.
Furthermore, in Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code,
Maryland law requires that only school buildings, improvements, supplies and
equipment costing over $25,000 must be bid. As this coverage in question was
originally bid and increases were annually reviewed for reasonableness, WCPS believes
that it has exceeded the due diligence requirement in the law.
Nevertheless, in the fall of 2012, WCPS re-bid its stop loss coverage. The low bid for
this coverage was awarded to the incumbent provider. This reinforces the efficacy of
the annual review by the school system and its benefits consultant as to the
reasonableness of the proposed cost increases to the stop loss coverage.
3 Auditor’s Comment: Our review of a report referenced by WCPS disclosed that a comprehensive review of
WCPS’ health claims was not performed as asserted by WCPS, and in fact, the WCPS’ third party health care
administrator was not the subject of the report. Rather, the SAS70 report reviewed pertained to a service
organization used by the administrator to process the claims, which did not include a comprehensive review of the
propriety of the claims paid, as we have recommended. Furthermore, SAS 70 reports typically cannot be relied
upon to provide assurances to the extent WCPS has asserted in its response.

--- Page 40 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 5
Recommendation #7: With regard to verification of changes to pay rates, WCPS has
begun to generate and retain reports that identify all pay rate changes. These reports
will be reviewed and approved by appropriate supervisory personnel.
With regard to the review of payroll system access, it is important to note that the
auditor’s test of payroll changes and adjustments did not disclose any inappropriate or
erroneous transactions. Nevertheless, we agree that a periodic review of payroll
system access should be performed to ensure that assigned system functionalities
match each individual’s job requirements. WCPS recently completed a review of its
payroll system access. As a result, the access level of four employees was reduced.
WCPS will continue to complete these reviews on a periodic basis and will continue to
assign system functions to employees based upon the capabilities they need to
perform their job duties.
Recommendation #8: The payment that is afforded to WCPS employees upon
retirement is a negotiated terminal employee benefit that was implemented to
encourage employees to maintain good attendance and was not intended to be a
payout of unused sick days. Nevertheless, “unused sick days” is clearly the most
logical gauge of an employee’s effort to consistently be on the job. Therefore, that is
the measurement that was chosen. However, the unions and management could have
selected a different standard upon which to base this calculation. Additionally, we
submit that any mandated change would fall under the purview of the Public School
Labor Relations Board (PSLRB) and not the State Retirement Agency. It is very
important to note that, as this is a negotiated employee benefit, WCPS cannot agree to
change it unilaterally. However, WCPS will discuss this negotiated terminal benefit
with its unions to ascertain if an alternative that is acceptable to both parties can be
determined.
Recommendation #9: WCPS has now established controls over sensitive electronic
items below the $1,000 capitalization threshold. In order to provide sufficient detail
and checks and balances separate from the school personnel, WCPS has launched
Microsoft’s SCCM information management tool for desktops, laptops, and software
inventory management. This system collects detailed information about every item on
the WCPS network, tracks each device’s location, and, unlike the old Computrace
system, will generate reports by school. These reports will be sent to each tech
coordinator (independent central office IT staffers) annually to verify that the physical
inventory matches the electronic inventory. Similarly, the Airwatch inventory
management tool was also recently launched to manage all mobile devices and
applications. This tool, which provides additional functionalities not available on the
old Mobile Iron system, also tracks where each device is located and provides reports
by location. WCPS will maintain documentation that the reports from these systems
have been independently reviewed and verified by the IT staff on a random sample
basis. For added physical security, WCPS continues to store all laptop computers in
locking carts
With regard to the annual physical inventory count of non-sensitive items, each year
the business office provides an asset listing to the respective building administrators.
Site personnel then verify the location of each piece of equipment and return the asset

--- Page 41 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 6
listing to the Fixed Asset Specialist with any additions, deletions, or location changes.
To strengthen these existing controls, beginning in the 2013-2014 school year, the
Fixed Asset Specialist will independently confirm the results of inventories taken by
school personnel using a random sample of items and locations.
Recommendation #10: WCPS has implemented appropriate system access,
monitoring, and authentication controls per DoIT standards for network access and
password controls. In addition, an Active Directory self-service password reset system
has been implemented.
Recommendation #11: WCPS is currently implementing all audit recommendations
related to network security. A new Juniper firewall, which includes all functionality
required to meet DoIT network security standards, was installed. In addition, Plan B
Technologies was contracted to access all levels of network security and to modify, as
needed, to meet or exceed DoIT network security standards.
Recommendation #12: With the assistance of Plan B Technologies, WCPS is currently
updating its disaster recovery plan to meet DoIT standards. Plan B Technologies has
created additional automated backups and documentation for all critical components
of the WCPS network. The new disaster recovery plan follows the State of Maryland’s
Information Technology Disaster Recovery Guidelines.
Recommendation #13: WCPS is currently developing a comprehensive maintenance
and operations department procedure that describes the goals and initiatives that
support the Board’s policy and regulation. This procedure formalizes and documents
the Maintenance and Operations Department’s established energy audit practices that
will be conducted at all 49 buildings. The audit process will be completed by the end of
2013.
The Energy Management Analyst will be responsible for conducting energy audits and
maintaining a record of site visits. The focus of the audit will be to collect and record
the current, conditions, deficiencies, utility usage, and follow-up of corrective actions.
Data collected and documented from the audit procedure will be used to set goals,
establish benchmarks, and develop strategies. Realistic benchmarks will be
established for all buildings to reduce overall energy usage across the school system.
Recommendation #14: The WCPS Department of Transportation (DOT) will review the
calculation for contractor compensation. The formula previously used by WCPS is the
formula that was established by the State of Maryland in 1982 and has been used by
counties across Maryland to pay contractors. The DOT has made changes to the
calculation of the per vehicle allotment payment to contractors using the current
average interest rates from two local banks and two school bus dealers who offer
financing to contractors. It is important to note that the prime rate is a rate that is
generally available to large corporate customers and is seldom available to small
business owners. Their rates are based on their personal credit history and their
presumed ability to repay the loan. It should be noted that WCPS’s compensation to
contractors is currently the third lowest in the state.

--- Page 42 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 7
WCPS’s contracted routes are those located in the outlying areas of the county,
bordering the county and state lines. If WCPS assumed those routes, it would incur
costs related to significant deadhead miles, the need for additional fleet technicians to
perform maintenance and inspections, and potential rental fees for securing parking
locations for buses. Additionally, WCPS would incur an increase in labor costs for
employees resulting from payment for sick and personal leave, for substitute bus
drivers, health benefits, and the expense of an additional supervisor to directly oversee
those employees who currently are the employees of the contractor. To that end,
WCPS believes that the contractors provide a valuable service to the school system
and the current compensation to contractors is reasonable and necessary.
WCPS will continue to evaluate the calculation of compensation to contractors and will
give consideration to pursuing a competitive bid process.
WCPS recognizes that there is a difference in the per mile maintenance rate for in-
house repairs, as compared to the rate paid to contractors. This is a cost of doing
business for the services provided to WCPS by the school bus contractor. The school
system operates an eight bay repair facility for buses with technician labor rates at an
average of $40.00 per hour. It is also able to buy parts and supplies in bulk at
discounted prices. To demonstrate the extent of this differential, WCPS recently
completed a survey of three garages in the area to determine hourly labor rates. The
average of six hourly rates for various types of repairs and diagnostics is $123.00 per
hour. Another example of cost differences is repair parts. The price of a backup
alarm for WCPS is $14.00, but, when a contractor purchases the same part from a
retail vendor, the price is $25.00. The DOT will use the in-house per mile
maintenance rate as a base, survey local repair shops to obtain current rates for parts,
repairs and labor, and will use the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as a reference when
making adjustments.
WCPS agrees to exclude federal fuel excise tax from payments to contractors and made
the change effective January 1, 2013.
Recommendation #15: WCPS DOT agrees that a formalized process for verification of
routes is necessary to ensure that payments to contractors are based on the actual
services provided. In order to verify actual route time and mileage payments to
contractors, WCPS installed Zonar GPS units on all contractor buses in January 2013.
The DOT used the data from the GPS to verify the information submitted on the March
2013 manifest for all contractor routes, and identified and corrected discrepancies.
The DOT will continue to utilize the live GPS data to verify routes. The DOT will use
information gleaned from the integration of routing software and GPS to determine
payments to contractors. WCPS will maintain documentation of time, mileage, and
adjustments to contractor payments.
Recommendation #16: WCPS DOT agrees that further utilization of the computer
assisted routing software will provide opportunities to analyze and develop more
efficient routes. To that end, the DOT has installed an additional software module to
integrate the GPS on buses with the routing software. This integration will allow

--- Page 43 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 8
WCPS to compare the live routes with the current designed routes. The DOT will
utilize the routing software to monitor the number of eligible riders, and, when
possible, adjust routes to meet the established targets for capacity.
It is important to note that some buses transport more students than the targeted
capacity because students reside in a densely populated area in close proximity to the
school. This allows WCPS to maximize the use of all available seats during very short
rides to school. On the other hand, in areas of the county where students are sparsely
dispersed along a road or entire route, a bus will not meet the targeted capacity before
it exceeds the targeted ride time for delivery of students to schools. Certain road
conditions, which may be hilly or narrow, and those in various states of disrepair, also
contribute to the amount of time required for a bus to cover a given area to safely pick
up or deliver students.
In addition, a number of buses in the WCPS fleet may not meet the targeted rider
capacity as a result of staggered bell times and the number of schools that one bus
will service. When transporting students to schools on multiple tiers, a single
resource can provide transportation to three to five schools; however, the window of
time available between tiers is minimal; therefore, the bus may not reach the targeted
capacity for some routes, but could provide transportation for up to five schools. The
following example details how such tiering, while not filling a bus to capacity on each
tier, actually saves the system money:
A certain bus transports students to and from a first tier middle school, a
second tier elementary school, a third tier high school and a fourth tier
elementary school. This bus may only transport 30 elementary students
on a 66 passenger bus for one of those tiers during a 25 minute window
of time. If this bus spends more time on the route in order to fill the bus
to capacity, then one of the schools in the tier would have to be removed
from that route and assigned to another resource. As a result, more
resources (buses and drivers) would be required to provide
transportation to students.
The DOT has created a written procedure that establishes both targeted bus capacities
and length of ride time for students.
Recommendation #17: The DOT agrees that a system-wide analysis, performed
periodically, is an effective method for determining the most beneficial mix of outside
contractors and public owned buses. To that end, the DOT has created a County vs.
Contractor Cost Comparison analysis document. The DOT has now used that cost
comparison document to analyze every county and contracted bus route. These
comparisons demonstrate that the health benefit package that WCPS provides to
eligible county drivers increases the cost of certain county routes. However, it is
important to note that these longer, benefitted routes serve as a retention incentive to
county drivers who continue their employment in hopes of eventually moving into a
route that will make them eligible for benefits. Given the results of the analysis,
WCPS does not believe it is a good business decision to implement an immediate,
system-wide change that would potentially put contractors out of business or put

--- Page 44 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 9
county employees out of work. More importantly, as the largest employer and
corporate citizen in Washington County, WCPS has an ethical obligation to its current
employees and bus contractors that outweighs the recommendation to immediately
achieve an optimal mix of contractors versus county runs. Therefore, in an effort to
phase in this analysis, the DOT now analyzes every open contract route and every
open county route using the cost comparison document to make the best business
decision. The DOT recognizes that the payments to some contractors may appear,
from the cost comparison calculations, to be slightly higher than what the cost would
be for the county to operate the route. However, the location of the route in relation to
current WCPS bus parking facilities, and the fact that every bus added to the county
fleet increases the ratio of fleet technicians to equipment, will factor into the cost for
the county to operate the route. Adding buses to the county fleet will eventually
require additional parking facilities, additional fleet technicians and potentially
additional buildings to maintain, repair and operate those routes.
If the DOT uses cost as the only determining factor for route operations and the
county assumes more routes, the current shortage of certified school bus drivers will
become a much larger concern for WCPS. For much of the current school year, DOT
staff and fleet technicians have been required to drive routes due to high absenteeism
and limited number of qualified substitute drivers. However, under the current
arrangement, the contractors are responsible for finding their own drivers for routes
and for substitute coverage. The DOT has tried many driver recruitment efforts with
minimal results. Therefore, WCPS believes that there is a cost benefit to the current
mix of outside contractors and directly owned buses.
Recommendation #18: We agree with the need to keep OPIS pricing information on
file and use it to verify invoice prices. WCPS does this on an ongoing basis. However,
in an effort to save the taxpayers money, WCPS (a component unit of the county
government) and the county government had a long-standing practice of sharing the
county’s OPIS subscription. The county received the OPIS reports and provided OPIS
pricing summaries to WCPS via e-mail. The Supervisor of Purchasing then retained
these OPIS summaries in electronic format. Regrettably, subsequent to the period
that was audited, WCPS changed e-mail vendors and a series of archived 2008 OPIS
price summaries could not be retrieved from the archive files of the previous e-mail
system. Consequently, at the time of the audit in 2012, certain OPIS pricing
summaries were not available in WCPS files for the auditors to verify 2008 prices.
WCPS subsequently found that the county government staff retains all OPIS reports
and that they could have been available at any time for audit purposes. This was
communicated to the auditor.
In response to this finding, WCPS has purchased its own OPIS subscription at a cost
of nearly $1,500 per year and now maintains all of the OPIS reports in-house. WCPS
continues to use these reports to verify the accuracy of billings for all fuel types prior
to paying invoices. The Energy Management Analyst and the Accounts Payable
Department are working closely to ensure that all invoices have been verified prior to
payment.

--- Page 45 ---
Washington County Public Schools
Responses to Financial Practices Performance Audit
Page 10
With regard to the billing error noted by the auditor, the Purchasing Supervisor is
working with the company in question to obtain the $600 refund/credit. Staff also
checked past invoices for similar errors and found none.

--- Page 46 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
John F. Nogel, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Cristen M. Ervin
Kevin J. Mercer
Ryan P. Stecher
Staff Auditors
Christopher D. Jackson
Information Systems Staff Auditor