Title: Calvert County Public Schools
Date: 07/20/2016
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d34cc9d72404c1509fa
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:04:16.498083
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Calvert County Public Schools
July 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities.
The Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Finding 1 – Adequate accountability and control had not been 9
established, as collections were not recorded and checks
restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt, collections
were not properly secured, and certain collections were not
subject to independent deposit verification.
Federal Funds 10
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 2 – CCPS had not established a process to periodically 12
assess the propriety of the capabilities assigned to users on its
automated procurement and accounts payable system;
consequently, several employees had incompatible or
unnecessary system capabilities.
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 3 – Human resources and payroll system user access 14
capabilities were not monitored, and payroll transaction review
procedures were inadequate, as certain necessary automated
or manual controls to ensure the propriety of transactions
processed were not in place.
Finding 4 – Personal service contracts that provided unique 15
employment benefits to five executive employees valued at
$500,000 were executed without Board approval as required
by State law.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability
* Finding 5 – CCPS equipment policies were not comprehensive 17
because they did not address requirements for tagging
equipment, specify the frequency of physical inventories, and
account for all non-capitalized sensitive equipment.
Information Technology
Finding 6 – CCPS network domain account and password controls 18
did not meet certain best practice standards and certain
accounts unnecessarily had full access to the student
information database. Security event monitoring was
insufficient.
Finding 7 – The CCPS intrusion detection prevention system was 20
not used to scan all appropriate network traffic and 20
publically accessible servers were improperly located in the
internal network.
Finding 8 – Workstations and servers were not sufficiently 21
protected against malware.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 22
Transportation Services
Finding 9 – Certain elements used to determine payments to bus 23
contractors did not consider market conditions, actual costs, or
available discounts, resulting in higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
Food Services
* Finding 10 – Cashiers in school cafeterias could void transactions 25
on their automated cash register systems without independent
review and approval.
Finding 11 – CCPS lacked documentation to substantiate that the 26
cash register closeout process was subject to supervisory
review.
School Board Oversight 27
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Other Financial Controls
* Finding 12 – CCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and 28
retiree health care claims paid, nor verify that stop-loss
insurance was correctly applied and plan administrative fees
were properly charged.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Calvert County Public Schools (CCPS) ranks
13th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2015 full-time student enrollment was 16,031 students. CCPS
has 24 schools, consisting of 12 elementary, 6 middle schools, 4 high
schools, a vocational school, and alternative school.
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2015 revenues
and expenditures totaled approximately $235 million. According to MSDE
records, during the 2014 - 2015 school year, CCPS had 2,118 full-time
equivalent positions, which consisted of 1,457 instructional and 661 non-
instructional employees.
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Calvert
County government provide the vast majority of CCPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with CCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Calvert County government exercises authority over CCPS
primarily through the review and approval of CCPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
External Audits
CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is
referred to as a Single Audit of CCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audit and
Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2012 through 2015, and examined the
related work papers for fiscal years 2013 (Single Audit) and 2014 (Financial
Audit), which were the latest available at the time we performed our audit
fieldwork.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The Independent Auditor Reports on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
for fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015 each identified a significant deficiency.
For example, capital asset additions and retirements from prior periods were
not timely identified and recognized, resulting in net adjustments that
decreased 2015 assets by $763,000. CCPS agreed with the auditor’s
findings and recommendations from each year. The findings affected
financial reporting requirements for the year in question, but did not affect our
audit scope or objectives.
Also, the Single Audit report for fiscal year 2015 identified a significant
deficiency related to grant accounting, which is commented on in the Federal
Funds section of this report.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited CCPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we reduced
the scope of our audit work related to state and local government revenues
received via wire transfer, federal grant activity, and capital equipment.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk, our audit
included a review to determine the status of 15 of the 19 findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated July 1, 2009. We determined that CCPS
did not satisfactorily address 5 of these 15 findings and, therefore, these
findings are repeated in this report. We did not address the status of the
remaining four preceding audit report findings.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Calvert County Public Schools (CCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Calvert County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the CCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $235 million during fiscal year 2015. In addition to these
revenue sources, schools collect funds for various purposes, such as student
activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not considered
school revenue, these school activity funds are accounted for separately by
each school and reported in summary in the audited financial statements.
Although this revenue is raised through student-related activities, CCPS has a
fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year 2015, school activity
fund collections totaled $7.8 million and the June 30, 2015 balance was $1.7
million.
Reviews of School Activity Funds
The independent certified public accounting firm contracted by CCPS to
perform its annual financial audit also conducts a limited review of the school
activity funds (SAF). These reviews consist primarily of tests of SAF bank
reconciliations, and receipt and disbursement transactions at selected
schools. The firm’s testing for fiscal year 2015 did not identify any
improprieties or prevalent violations of CCPS policy.
Finding 1
Adequate accountability and control had not been established, as collections
were not recorded and checks were not restrictively endorsed upon receipt,
collections were not properly secured, and certain collections were not subject
to independent deposit verification.
Analysis
CCPS had not established adequate accountability and control over cash
receipts which according to its records, totaled $16.3 million in fiscal year
2015, and consisted primarily of checks received through the mail from
various government sources (such as the Maryland State Department of
Education and individual CCPS schools). As a result, assurance was lacking
that all collections were deposited.
• Several employees initially received collections, but the recordation of
these collections and restrictive endorsement of checks was not
9

--- Page 12 ---
performed immediately upon receipt to establish initial accountability and
control. Rather, they were not recorded and endorsed until the bank
deposit was prepared the following day. The recordation of collections
was performed by the employee who prepared and made the deposit, and
there was no independent verification to validated bank deposits to
ensure all collections were properly deposited.
• Collections were not properly safeguarded, as collections were maintained
in an unsecured room prior to deposit. We were advised that this room
remained unlocked during the day allowing unrestricted access to 19
CCPS employees. Although locked after work hours, a key to the room was
kept nearby in an unlocked desk drawer.
• For those collections received from CCPS billings, the employee that
recorded the payment activity in the accounts receivable records also
made the bank deposits. Further, no independent verifications were
performed to ensure that credit postings to the accounts receivable
records were supported by the bank deposits credited to CCPS. According
to CCPS records, during fiscal year 2015, vendor billings totaled
approximately $1.3 million.
Recommendation 1
We recommend CCPS
a. record collections and restrictively endorse all checks immediately upon
receipt,
b. properly secure collections prior to deposit,
c. ensure that accounts receivable records are maintained by individuals
independent of the cash receipts function, and
d. independently verify that all collections were subsequently deposited.
We advised CCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2015 expenditures totaled $9.5
million, not including federally funded fee for service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Single Audit Reports Disclosed One Significant Deficiency But No Material
Weaknesses Regarding Federal Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of CCPS federal grants and the objectives of
our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results. Besides
expressing an opinion on CCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control structure's
impact on compliance and audited the required Schedule of Federal Awards
(which includes claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years
2012 through 2015. The related reports stated that CCPS complied, in all
material respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal
programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the
operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did identify a significant
deficiency that was not considered a material weakness for fiscal year 2015.
CCPS agreed to take corrective action to ensure that certain grant charges for
employee salaries are supported by the time records.
Medicaid Funds Were Requested for Eligible Services
CCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to CCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants. Our review
disclosed that for eligible services, reimbursements were requested and
verified against actual monies received. According to agency records, fiscal
year 2015 federal reimbursement for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled
approximately $1.5 million.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and CCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $38.8 million during fiscal year 2015. CCPS has a
formal procurement policy and related procedures. The policy sets bidding
requirements and specifies when Board approval is required. CCPS uses an
automated system to process requisitions, purchase orders, invoices, and
payments to vendors. Requisitions, which are created electronically in the
CCPS procurement and accounts payable system, must receive at a minimum,
two levels of electronic approvals; one being the school principal and the
second being the Superintendent or an Assistant Superintendent. Approved
requisitions are then converted to purchase orders on the system by
authorized employees and the purchase orders are either printed or e-mailed
with an approving facsimile signature. In addition to purchase order
11

--- Page 14 ---
preparation, a centralized purchasing department also processes contracts,
solicitations, and bids. The centralized finance office’s accounts payable unit
processes payments after receipt of the goods and services is confirmed by
the unit (for example, central CCPS warehouse, schools) that received those
goods or services.
Finding 2
CCPS had not established a process to periodically assess the propriety of the
capabilities assigned to users on its automated procurement and accounts
payable system; consequently, nine employees had incompatible or
unnecessary system capabilities.
Analysis
CCPS had not established adequate controls over its automated procurement
and accounts payable functions. CCPS had not developed a formal process to
periodically evaluate the compatibility of employee duties, determine the
system capabilities needed to perform their duties, and appropriately restrict
assigned capabilities.
Seven employees had been granted unnecessary access to critical system
purchasing and receiving functions that were not needed to perform their
assigned job duties. Additionally, five employees (including three of the seven
cited above) were assigned system capabilities that allowed them to modify
purchase orders (such as change quantities and unit prices, plus add new
items and change delivery address) after the purchase orders had been
approved. Four of these employees could also record the receipt of the items
ordered, including two management employees who did not perform any
procurement and receiving functions. Finally, two of the four employees had
the ability to add or modify vendors in the automated system. The ability to
make unauthorized changes to approved purchase orders, along with other
incompatible system capabilities, could allow the processing of inappropriate
transactions without timely detection, although our testing found no evidence
of inappropriate transactions.
CCPS advised that certain processes were in place to compensate for the
control weaknesses resulting from these user access problems, but those
procedures were not sufficient. Although we were advised that schools were
to be notified of changes that increased purchase orders by $50 or more, a
report of such changes was not periodically generated for independent
supervisory review. Additionally, while a management employee performed a
periodic post review of the support for vendor payments made on a test basis,
it did not include a comparison of invoice details to related independently
approved requisitions, and therefore would not detect changes made to the
12

--- Page 15 ---
purchase orders based on the aforementioned conditions. Furthermore, the
management employee performing the review was one of the aforementioned
five employees who could modify purchase orders and was therefore not
independent.
Similar conditions regarding the failure to restrict access to critical system
functions, segregate incompatible duties, and perform independent reviews of
payments to supporting documentation were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes. Specifically, we
recommend that CCPS
a. periodically generate reports of assigned user capabilities from the
automated financial system and use them to evaluate the propriety of
those capabilities;
b. restrict users’ capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties, and
eliminate the ability of users to perform incompatible duties (repeat); and
c. establish a process for the independent verification of disbursements
(repeat) to appropriate supporting documentation (such as approved
requisitions), at least on a test basis.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS
budget. According to CCPS records, fiscal year 2015 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled approximately $196 million, or 83 percent of the $235 million
total operating expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of
Education reports, during the 2014 - 2015 school year, CCPS had 2,118 full-
time positions, which consisted of 1,457 instructional and 661 non-
instructional employees.
CCPS uses an automated integrated human resources (HR) and payroll
system to maintain personnel information, record employee time, track leave
usage, and to process and record payroll transactions. The system
automatically generates semi-monthly time records and any adjustments are
processed by central payroll personnel. The system interfaces with an
imaging system to generate payroll checks and direct deposit advices. Payroll
processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave and
13

--- Page 16 ---
running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
Finding 3
Human resources and payroll system user access capabilities were not
monitored. In addition, payroll transaction review procedures were
inadequate, as certain necessary automated or manual controls to ensure the
propriety of transactions processed were not in place.
Analysis
Human resources and payroll system user access capabilities were not
monitored. In addition, payroll transaction review procedures were
inadequate as necessary controls over transactions processed were not in
place.
• Although CCPS had established a procedure for the supervisory approval
for access and capabilities granted to new Human Resources and Payroll
Department system users, CCPS does not perform periodic reviews of the
propriety of users’ existing capabilities. Specifically, CCPS did not
generate periodic system reports, of employee capabilities, for supervisory
review and confirmation of the need for such capabilities. Instead, CCPS
relied on individual supervisors to notify Information Technology staff
when capabilities or access needed to be modified.
• CCPS had not used available online approval requirements for personnel
or payroll transactions processed on the integrated human resources and
payroll system. Our review of user access capabilities disclosed that five
users had unrestricted access to critical payroll functions that allowed
them to unilaterally process changes to leave, overtime payments, and
final payout amounts without any independent online approval. Further,
for the transactions related to these functions there were no effective
compensating manual review procedures in place. For example, a report
was generated each bi-weekly pay period that listed the difference in gross
and net pay for each employee for the current and previous pay period and
differences over a certain amount were reviewed for propriety and support
by one of two different payroll employees. However, these employees
were also responsible for processing payroll transactions on the
automated system (such as recording time worked by hourly employees
eligible for overtime payments) that were the subject of the review, and
were therefore not independent. Furthermore, adjustments to leave
balances processed by these employees were not reviewed by
independent supervisory personnel. Although we found no evidence of
14

--- Page 17 ---
unauthorized transactions for items tested, the above conditions could
result in the processing of unauthorized payroll payments.
Similar conditions regarding the lack of an independent review of assigned
system functions and capabilities and payroll transactions were commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS
a. perform a periodic documented review of users’ accesses and capabilities
to ensure that assigned functions and capabilities are consistent with
employee job duties (repeat);
b. ensure that HR and payroll transaction processing and review
responsibilities are properly segregated; and
c. establish online approval requirements for HR and payroll transactions
processed, which also requires approvers to review documentation to
ensure the transactions are properly authorized and supported (repeat).
Finding 4
Personal service contracts that provided unique employment benefits to five
executives valued at $500,000 were executed without Board approval as
required by State law.
Analysis
Personal service contracts that provided unique employment benefit
packages for five executive employees were approved by the former CCPS
Superintendent without Board approval. Although the succeeding
Superintendent, along with the CCPS Board, took action to rectify this
situation, certain matters remain unresolved due to pending legal and
administrative proceedings.
Between fiscal years 2009 to 2013, 18 one-year personal service contracts
were entered into between the former Superintendent (who left CCPS
following the 2013 school year) and five members of his executive staff.
These contracts provided the employees with significant benefits in addition
to their regular salaries (for example, performance bonuses, additional cash-
out allowances for unused leave, reimbursement of employee-paid retirement
contributions and health insurance premiums, and additional CCPS funded
retirement contributions), yet none were officially submitted by the prior
Superintendent to the Board for review and approval. We determined that the
value of the employee benefit packages these five employees received in
addition to their salaries between fiscal years 2009 and 2013 totaled a
15

--- Page 18 ---
combined $500,000. According to State law, the salaries and benefits of all
school personnel are to be set by the local Board of Education.
When a new interim Superintendent took office at the beginning of the 2014
school year, she advised the four existing executive team members that their
salaries and benefits would remain in place for that year, but then after, their
pay would be reduced to that of other administrators in accordance with
existing union agreements. Additionally, they would not be able to exercise
their rights under the terms of the prior contracts to negotiate the sale of
unused sick leave or cash out unused annual leave. Additionally, she
reassigned three of the employees to new positions effective September
2013, upon which one of the three retired.
The three employees that had been reassigned disputed these actions and
brought their case before the local Board of Education, which upheld the
CCPS decision in January 2014. At that time the fourth employee had
resigned and was not a party to the suit. However, the local Board’s ruling
was appealed to the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), which
ruled against the local Board’s decision and finding in favor of the employees.
CCPS filed suit in the Circuit Court for Calvert County, appealing the State
Board outcome. The Circuit Court ultimately reversed the State Board
decision and remanded the case back to the State Board of Education and
the Office of Administrative Hearings for resolution. The case was heard
before the Office of Administrative Hearings and sent back to MSDE for a final
ruling. As of February 2016, MSDE had not yet issued a final decision in this
matter.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS institute a process that ensures Board approval is
obtained for all employee compensation (salaries and benefits), as required
by law.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS audited financial statements, the un-depreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $9.7 million as of June 30, 2015.
CCPS uses automated records to track its capital equipment inventory, which
are items valued at $5,000 and above. Non-Capital computer related
sensitive items (for example, laptop computers) are identified in a separate
database, but only those connected to the CCPS network.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 5
CCPS equipment policies were not comprehensive because they did not
address requirements for tagging equipment, specify the frequency of
physical inventories, and account for all non-capitalized sensitive equipment.
CCPS could not substantiate it had recently completed a physical inventory.
Analysis
CCPS lacked comprehensive policies and procedures to govern the
accountability and control of its equipment, including non-capitalized sensitive
equipment items prone to theft. CCPS’ current policy sets the threshold for
equipment to be capitalized for financial statement purposes at $5,000 or
greater, and delegates the responsibility for accounting for sensitive
equipment to the individual departments and schools within CCPS.
• CCPS’ equipment policy did not establish system-wide standards to
adequately control and account for its capitalized equipment. Specifically,
requirements were not established for tagging equipment, the frequency
with which physical inventories of capital equipment should be performed,
or for reporting lost and stolen items. In addition, we were advised by
CCPS management that the most recent physical inventory of capital
equipment was conducted in June of 2010; however, CCPS could not
provide documentation of the inventory.
• CCPS lacked a policy to control non-capitalized sensitive equipment items
costing below the $5,000 capitalization threshold, which carry a greater
risk of theft (such as laptop computers, tablets, digital cameras, and other
electronic items) and the procedures in place were not sufficient. The
majority of these items is computer equipment (for example, laptop
computers) maintained by the Department of Information Technology,
which were identified in a separate database, but only when the items
were connected to the CCPS network. In addition, a comprehensive set of
inventory records for these items was not maintained, as the Department
database did not assign an inventory number, an acquisition date, or the
related item cost, or indicate to whom the items were assigned. Finally,
physical inventories of non-sensitive capital equipment were not
conducted. The Government Finance Officers Association recommends
that an entity establish controls over non-capitalized equipment items that
are marketable and susceptible to theft.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report
regarding CCPS equipment policies failing to address the tagging of
capitalized equipment and the inventorying of sensitive equipment, as well as
17

--- Page 20 ---
inadequate record keeping practices for non-capitalized sensitive equipment
items.
Recommendation 5
We recommend CCPS establish policies and procedures, to ensure
accountability and control over its equipment inventories, which address the
following
a. tagging of all capitalized equipment items (repeat);
b. the frequency and documentation of required periodic physical inventories
of capital equipment items;
c. the investigation and reporting of missing items; and
d. the physical inventory and record keeping requirements of sensitive items,
including the data to be maintained in the records for each item (repeat).
Information Technology
Background
The CCPS Department of Information Technology maintains and administers
the CCPS’ computer network and computer operations and supports major
information system applications. CCPS operates a wide area network, with
Internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to
the computer resources located at the CCPS headquarters. The Department
maintains a computer room at the headquarters location in which numerous
computer servers and network devices operate to support CCPS information
system applications including its student information and financial
management systems.
Finding 6
CCPS network domain account and password controls did not meet certain
best practice standards and certain accounts unnecessarily had full access to
the student information database. Security event monitoring over the
database was insufficient.
Analysis
CCPS network domain account and password controls and controls over the
student information database were not sufficient.
• Domain account and password controls did not meet the best practice
standards identified in the State of Maryland’s Information Security Policy.
Specifically, domain password age, complexity, and account lockout were
not enforced. In addition, password length and history did not meet the
18

--- Page 21 ---
minimum standards recommended by the aforementioned Information
Security Policy. These conditions weakened the security over the entire
CCPS network including all CCPS systems (such as the student information
system) that use the domain’s active directory system for user
authentication.
• A default administrative database account unnecessarily had full access
to the student information database, which contains sensitive personally
identifiable information, grades, and medical information. Since this
account includes local server administrators by default, all local
administrators on the server hosting this database had full administrative
access to the database. Also, anyone able to achieve local administrator
privileges would automatically have full administrative access to this
database and could perform unauthorized modifications to critical data.
Because of these conditions, we noted that 10 accounts had unnecessary
full administrative access to the student information database. Best
practices identified in the aforementioned Information Security Policy,
recommend that access to information be strictly controlled, audited, and
that it supports the concepts of “least possible privileges” and “need-to-
know.”
• Security event monitoring over the student information database was not
sufficient. Most security and audit event activity (for example
grant/revoke and deny access) was not logged. In addition, we were
advised that for events that were logged, logs were only reviewed on an
infrequent basis, and that these reviews were not documented. The
aforementioned Information Security Policy states that procedures must
be developed to routinely review audit records for indications of unusual
activity and report findings to appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS
a. implement strong controls over domain passwords and accounts in
accordance with best practices identified in the aforementioned
Information Security Policy;
b. limit access to critical databases to personnel whose job duties require
such access; and
c. log all critical security and audit events, review these logs on a regular
basis with appropriate investigation of unusual activity, document these
reviews and retain the documentation for future reference.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 7
The CCPS intrusion detection prevention system was not used to scan all
appropriate network traffic. In addition, 20 publicly accessible servers were
improperly located in the internal network.
Analysis
The CCPS computer network was not adequately secured.
• CCPS did not use its intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) to scan
traffic entering its network from the Internet. Because of this condition,
the CCPS network had no IDPS protection relative to Internet traffic. The
absence of IDPS coverage for Internet traffic created network security risk
for the entire CCPS network. In addition, best practices identified in the
aforementioned State of Maryland Information Security Policy require
protection against malicious code and attacks by using IDPS to monitor
system events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of
information systems and/or confidential information.
• Although the network-based IDPS utilized by CCPS had the capability to
decrypt and analyze encrypted network traffic received, this feature was
not enabled. Furthermore, we determined that host-based intrusion
protection systems (HIPS) were not in use on 14 of 24 servers that
processed encrypted traffic. The absence of IDPS coverage for such
encrypted traffic created a network security risk as such traffic could
contain malicious exploits that are not detected or dropped. Complete
IDPS coverage includes either the use of a properly configured, network-
based IDPS that analyzes encrypted traffic, or the use of a HIPS on all
critical servers, to aid significantly in the detection and prevention of, and
response to, potential network security breaches and attacks.
• Twenty publicly accessible servers were located in the CCPS internal
network rather than isolating these servers in a separate protected
network zone. These 20 servers, if compromised, could expose the
internal network to attack from external sources. Recommended security
procedures, per the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy, include placing publicly
accessible servers in an external protected zone to protect those servers
as well as the entity’s internal network.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks from Internet traffic and encrypted network traffic to its critical
devices and identify how such traffic should be subject to IDPS. Based on
this review and assessment, we recommend that CCPS implement IDPS
coverage as necessary; and
b. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate neutral network zone
to limit security exposures to the internal network segment.
Finding 8
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
Analysis
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
• Approximately 1,500 of CCPS’ 9,100 computers did not have malware
protection software installed. Per CCPS personnel, a software problem
prevented these 1,500 computers from accessing the available malware
protection software for installation. Consequently, these 1,500 computers
were subject to increased risk of malware infection and compromise.
• Six of eight workstations tested were improperly configured with users
having administrator rights. Administrator rights are the highest
permission level that can be granted to users and it allows users to install
software and change configuration settings. As a result, if these
workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run with
administrative rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of
compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only
user rights. In addition, because of the administrator rights assigned,
these six users had the ability to disable the malware protection software
on their workstations.
The aforementioned State of Maryland Information Security Policy states that
institutions must “protect against malicious code (viruses, worms, Trojan
horses) by implementing protections (anti-virus, anti-malware) that, to the
extent possible, include a capability for automatic updates.” It also states
institutions “using a risk-based approach, implement and document
processes that minimize provisioning of local administrative rights so that only
those employees who require it are given those rights."
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that the current versions of malware protection software are
installed and running properly on all workstations and servers, and
b. ensure that administrative privileges on workstations are properly
restricted.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS employs a staff of 222 employees to maintain its 24 schools and other
administrative and support facilities. According to the fiscal year 2015
audited financial statements, capital outlays for construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to CCPS facilities cost $5.9 million.
CCPS Contracts and Expenditures for Capital Projects Were Proper
Our review of four construction-related procurements during fiscal years 2013
and 2014 totaling $24 million disclosed that CCPS had used appropriate
processes to procure all four contracts, including obtaining Board approval. In
addition, our test of invoices totaling $6 million for these contracts disclosed
that the invoices were properly reviewed and approved and the amounts
invoiced were in accordance with the related contract terms.
Transportation Services
Background
CCPS has approximately 15,600 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on 143 contractor-
owned buses. According to CCPS audited financial statements, fiscal year
2015 transportation costs totaled $14 million, with $12.7 million (91 percent)
representing payments for contracted services. Payments to bus contractors
consist of amounts for the purchase of a bus (known as a per vehicle
allotment or PVA, which consists of a reimbursement for the cost of the bus
through annual depreciation reimbursement and an annual rate of return on
funds used to buy the bus) and for operating costs (such as fuel use,
maintenance costs, and certain administrative costs).
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 9
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did not
consider market conditions, actual costs, or available discounts, resulting in
higher payments than necessary for student transportation services.
Analysis
The majority of the elements used to determine payment amounts to bus
contractors did not reflect market conditions, actual costs, or available
discounts. CCPS bus contracts are for an initial five years with annual
renewals generally granted over the useful life of the bus, which could be up
to 15 years. Our review of the contract payments disclosed the following
conditions:
• CCPS pays contractors an annual PVA for each bus. In accordance with
past studies, the PVA is intended to reimburse the bus contractor for the
cost of the bus with depreciation payments spread over the useful life of
the bus, and provide an annual return on investment (ROI) for using the
bus contractor’s funds to buy the bus. However, prior to fiscal year 2014,
CCPS had not used the methodology and components developed in the
studies to calculate their PVA, but merely increased the prior year’s PVA by
considering the annual purchase price increases for buses. While the bus
cost is one component of the recommended PVA formula, the formula also
requires information on bus life to determine the appropriate depreciation
percentage and the allowed ROI percentage.
Beginning in fiscal year 2014, CCPS established a formula to calculate its
PVA in an effort to establish a supportable basis for the PVA amounts
being paid. The CCPS PVA formula includes an average borrowing rate
(established by obtaining rates from a local bank) for the ROI rate, which
for fiscal year 2014 was 6 percent, instead of an investment rate such as
the prime rate. However, the PVA amount CCPS calculated was less than
desired and thus an ‘operations’ cost element was created to add to the
calculated PVA amount to increase the total to a level equal to the PVA
amounts previously paid. Consequently, any savings from the reduction in
PVA due to using the PVA formula was offset by the additional
reimbursement for operation costs.
To estimate the financial impact of CCPS using an ROI based on a
borrowing rate instead of an investment rate over the life of a bus, we
calculated a PVA for the 122 primary buses being used to transport
23

--- Page 26 ---
students during fiscal year 20151, which included buses placed into
service dating back to fiscal year 2005. Using the prime interest rate2 and
a 12-year estimated useful life in the PVA formula, we compared our PVA
results to the CCPS PVA payments.3 This comparison showed that CCPS’
annual PVA payments per bus were $622 to $6,380 higher than the
payments would have been had the prevailing prime rate been used in the
calculation. The effect is that, over the 12-year life of these 122 buses
that were in service during fiscal year 2015, CCPS would pay out
approximately $5 million more than if a reasonable ROI had been used
($2.8 million having already been paid and $2.2 million to be paid over the
remaining useful life). This analysis does not include the effects for any
new bus purchases that were made after the beginning of the fiscal year
2015 school year (September 2014) and the lost interest income that
could have been earned by CCPS on the excess amounts paid.
• As mentioned above, an ‘operations’ cost element was created to add to
the calculated PVA amount to increase the total to an amount equal to the
PVA amounts previously paid. CCPS could not document the
reasonableness of payments for bus contractor operational costs, such as
taxes, rent, utilities, insurance, substitutes, and management.
Specifically, CCPS lacked evidence it had developed cost estimates for the
individual components. For 24 buses first placed into service during fiscal
years 2014 and 2015, the amount added to the PVA was $5,100 per bus,
per year. For fiscal years 2014 and 2015, payments for operation costs
for these 24 buses totaled $178,500. CCPS used 122 primary buses for
student transportation; the total annual operations cost will increase as
each of the remaining 98 buses are replaced.
• CCPS could not show that payments to reimburse bus contractors for
maintenance costs were reasonable. For example, for fiscal year 2014,
CCPS paid a $0.89 per-mile fee to reimburse the contractors for bus
maintenance costs, without determining the appropriateness of the rate
based on independently derived estimates.
1 We did not include in our calculation smaller buses (4-8 rows), buses older than 2005 but
still in service, or substitute buses.
2 The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study
commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a
lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment rate: therefore, it
is deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation.
3 Since CCPS began using its revised formula in fiscal year 2014, the fiscal year 2014 rate of
6 percent has been the lowest rate used by CCPS. Consequently, for conservatism, in our
calculation we used 6 percent for the comparison to the prime interest rate.
24

--- Page 27 ---
• CCPS did not exclude the exempt portion of federal excise taxes from fuel
payments to its bus contractors. CCPS pays contractors for fuel usage
based on the average diesel fuel prices (as established by CCPS by calling
local gas stations), divided by a miles per gallon rate established by CCPS.
However, according to federal law, CCPS contractors are exempt from the
$0.244 per gallon excise tax on diesel fuel and may receive a credit on
their income tax returns of $0.243 per gallon purchased. As a result,
CCPS’ fuel payments were $247,500 higher than necessary for fiscal
years 2013 and 2014.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. use market investment rates as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for the annual PVA,
b. develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for establishing
reasonable contractor rates for operation costs and per mile maintenance
costs, and
c. exclude federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
Food Services
Background
CCPS has a cooking cafeteria at each of it 24 schools. Food and related
supplies are received at the 8 schools designated as base kitchens and are
redistributed to each of the other schools. In fiscal year 2015, CCPS had 123
food service employees (comprised of 91 cafeteria positions and 32
administrative positions). According to the fiscal year 2015 audited financial
statements, food service operation expenditures ($5,315,536) exceeded
revenues ($5,288,542) by $26,994.
Finding 10
Cashiers in school cafeterias could void transactions on their automated cash
register systems without independent review and approval.
Analysis
CCPS had not established adequate controls over voided school cafeteria
transactions. Specifically, cashiers in school cafeterias could void
transactions on their automated cash register systems without an
independent review and approval. Consequently, cashiers could void
recorded sales and keep the money collected without detection.
25

--- Page 28 ---
A similar condition regarding the ability of school cafeteria cashiers to process
voids without independent review or approval was commented upon in our
preceding audit report. Subsequently, CCPS had prepared a written Protocol
that required school cafeteria managers to review the daily register reports
and contact its Child Nutrition Office to report instances where a cashier had
10 or more voids. Reported instances were to be recorded in a voids log, and
cashiers were to be counseled, given additional training, or disciplined as
appropriate. However, we were advised by CCPS food service officials that the
Protocol was never formally adopted and implemented.
According to CCPS records, over 38,000 void transactions were processed
during fiscal year 2015, which was significantly less than the 53,685 voids
reported for fiscal year 2008 in our preceding audit report. The value of void
transactions could not be readily determined.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS develop formal procedures that ensure that voided
transactions are reviewed and approved by supervisors for propriety (repeat).
Finding 11
CCPS lacked documentation to substantiate that the cash register closeout
process was subject to supervisory review.
Analysis
CCPS lacked documentation to substantiate that the cash register closeout
process was jointly performed by the cashier and the cafeteria manager.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that collections counted agreed
with recorded sales.
Although we were advised that the cafeteria cashier and manager jointly
counted the cash receipts in each cash register drawer, and reconciled it to
the register activity control totals, the closing sheet was only signed by the
cashier. The managers did not sign the closing sheet to document their
participation in the process and approval of the amount of cash counted, and
to be subsequently deposited. According to CCPS audited financial
statements, food service revenue generated from charges for services totaled
approximately $3.2 million in fiscal year 2015.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS require both the cafeteria cashier and manager to
sign the closing sheet for each cash register to document their verification
and agreement of the cash receipts counted and related sales.
26

--- Page 29 ---
School Board Oversight
Background
The Board of Education of Calvert County (the Board) is composed of five
elected members and one non-voting student representative. In its oversight
responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the CCPS financial statements and federal
programs. The Board has not established any special committees.
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In April 2012, the Board amended its detailed ethics policy, which conforms to
State Law and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial
disclosure. Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well
as all CCPS employees. CCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of three
members who are nominated by the Superintendent and appointed by a
majority vote of the Board Members to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. According to the ethics policy, annual
financial disclosure and conflict-of-interest statements are required to be filed
by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and a
number of other administrators (such as the Chief of Fiscal Services and
Human Resources and school principals) by April 30th of each year. Our
review of the records for employees required to submit the aforementioned
forms for calendar year 2014 disclosed that the forms were submitted as
required.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
CCPS self-insured its employee and retiree healthcare costs up to a certain
claim amount, which was $250,000 per plan participant for plan year 2015.
Claims exceeding that amount were covered by stop-loss insurance. CCPS
contracts with a third-party administrator (TPA) for health care claims
processing services for employee and retiree medical (including vision) costs
for which it is self-insured, and dental and prescription insurance. CCPS also
contracts with the TPA carrier for the stop-loss insurance coverage.
In response to our prior audit report, in 2010 CCPS hired a consultant to verify
the propriety of individuals that were covered as dependents under its health
care plans, which identified 102 ineligible dependents. Subsequently, CCPS
instituted a process to verify the eligibility of employee dependents prior to
enrollment in the health care plans.
27

--- Page 30 ---
The TPA bills CCPS monthly subscription charges based on the number of
participants and their medical coverage and medical providers submit claims
to the TPA who pays them on behalf of CCPS. CCPS pays its TPA
administrative fees for these services. In a year-end settlement process, the
TPA nets the amount of medical claims they paid against the monthly
subscription charges billed to and paid by CCPS throughout the year, to
determine any excess amount due from or to be reimbursed to CCPS.
According to the TPA’s settlement document for the plan year ended June 30,
2015, CCPS healthcare expenditures totaled $31 million, including
administrative fees of $1.5 million and stop loss insurance premiums of
$911,000.
During our audit fieldwork, CCPS procured the services of a consultant, to
assist it with developing a request for proposal, to competitively bid its TPA-
provided health services effective for plan year 2016. The consultant also
assisted CCPS with analyzing and evaluating vendor bids received. CCPS
received competitive bids from three vendors, and in consultation with the
aforementioned consultant, awarded a one-year contract with unlimited one-
year renewal options, to the incumbent TPA. CCPS management informed us
that prior to this contract, its health services had not been competitively bid
for at least 10 years.
Finding 12
CCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and retiree health care claims
paid, nor verify that stop-loss insurance was correctly applied and plan
administrative fees were properly charged.
Analysis
CCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that amounts paid to the TPA
were proper. Our review of CCPS’ procedures and controls over payments for
medical claims and administrative fees disclosed the following conditions:
• CCPS did not audit the propriety of the medical claims paid on its behalf by
the TPA to ensure that the services were actually provided, covered by the
health plans, appropriately priced, and accurately reported to CCPS.
Furthermore, CCPS did not receive detailed claims data from the TPA to be
used to verify the propriety of the aforementioned items and the
correctness of the year-end settlement.
• CCPS did not verify that claims exceeding the stop-loss limit were
reimbursed by the TPA under the stop-loss coverage. CCPS relies on the
administrator to notify it of any payments above the stop-loss limit, which
are only reported in total as part of the plan year-end settlement. The
28

--- Page 31 ---
amount computed by the administrator to be in excess of the stop loss
amount reduces the expenditure amount for which CCPS is responsible.
Since CCPS did not receive detailed documentation of all claims paid and
stop-loss reductions are not provided for in detail, CCPS lacks assurance
that it did not pay claims that should have been covered by the stop-loss
insurance. According to the TPA, CCPS paid $911,000 for stop-loss
coverage and received $88,000 for plan year 2015 claims that exceeded
the stop loss limit.
• CCPS did not compare the number of plan participants billed against its
own payroll records to ensure that fees and premiums paid by CCPS were
for enrolled plan participants. Additionally, the monthly rates charged for
the various coverage categories (medical, vision, dental, and prescription
drug) and stop-loss insurance were not verified for agreement with the
related contracts, as copies of the contracts for the related plan years
were not maintained by CCPS.
The State of Maryland contracts with a private firm to audit TPAs of the State’s
health insurance, prescription drug, dental benefit, and mental health benefit
plans, which includes conducting reviews to ensure the propriety of claims
paid. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report
regarding the lack of process to verify the propriety of related claims paid by
health program administrators.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that CCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for
health insurance and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend CCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and ensure
audits of the claims paid by the TPA are conducted (repeat);
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer (in this case the TPA);
c. compare its records of enrolled employees, retirees, and dependents to
invoices from the TPA and determine the propriety of all fees and
premiums billed (repeat); and
d. retain copies of all health care contracts.
29

--- Page 32 ---
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Calvert County Public
Schools (CCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on CCPS dated July 1, 2009, was limited to those findings that
were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at CCPS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
appropriate). Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
31

--- Page 34 ---
records, and observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2012 through
September 30, 2014. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based
on auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which
the test items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit,
we relied on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that
annually audits CCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single
Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the CCPS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to CCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from November 2014 to May 2015. The CCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an Appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
32

--- Page 35 ---
1305 Dares Beach Road
Prince Frederick, MD 20678
Telephone: (410) 535-1700
(301) 855-1834
Daniel D. Curry, EdD. FAX: (410) 535-7298
Superintendent of Schools TDD: (410) 535-6852
www.calvertcounty.educatiQn
APPENDIX
July 19,2016
Me Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
State of Maryland
Office of Legislative Aud its
State Office Building, Room 1202
301 West Preston Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
Enclosed please find the responses to recommendations made in the Financial Management Practices Audit Report
that was issued to Calvert County Public Schools in June 2016.
As requested, an electronic copy was sent to tsides@ola.state.md.us on July 19, 2016. Please do not hesitate to
contact Ms. Edith Hutchins, Director of Finance, at 410-535-7274, if you have any questions or need additional
information regarding this submission.
R~Spe~
~ID.C~'Ed.D.--~~--
Superintendent of Schools
Enclosure
Pamela L Cousins, President • Tracy H. McGuire, Vice President
Kelly D. McConkey • William J. Phalen, Sr. • James C. Piatt. Lucie O. Roach, Student Member

--- Page 36 ---
Legislative Audit
Recommendation 1
We recommend CCPS:
a. Record collections and restrictively endorse all checks immediately upon receipt;
b. Properly secure collections prior to deposit;
c. ensure that accounts receivable records are maintained by individuals independent of the cash
receipts function; and,
d. independently verify that collections were subsequently deposited.
We advised CCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing personnel.
Management’s Response
a. We concur with the recommendation that collections be recorded and checks be
restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt. We will have a staff member
immediately record money received on a cash receipts log prior to dropping the money in
the safe. Checks will be restrictively endorsed upon receipt.
b. We concur with the recommendation that collections be properly secured prior to deposit.
We have installed a safe (which has a drop slot) in the vault which is located in the
Finance Department. All receipts awaiting deposit will be stored in the safe instead of in
the locked fireproof filing cabinet which is currently located in the vault.
c. We concur with the recommendation that accounts receivable records be maintained by
individuals who are independent of the cash receipts function. Specifically, the issue
addressed here is that the employee who processes cash receipts and takes the deposits to
the bank also stamps invoices generated by CCPS as paid. Henceforth, the invoices
generated by CCPS will be stamped paid by someone other than the employee who
handles the cash receipts.
d. We concur with the recommendation that independent verification be made of collections
which are recorded upon receipt and deposited. We will ensure that an employee
independent of the cash receipts process trace transactions recorded on the cash receipts
log to the bank deposit tickets. The employee who performs the verification will make
identifying tick-marks on the documentation as well as initial and date the supporting
documentation upon verifying the collections.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS strengthen its controls over the automated procurement and accounts
payable system and processes. Specifically, we recommend that CCPS:
a. periodically generate security reports from the automated financial system and use them to
evaluate user capabilities;

--- Page 37 ---
b. restrict users’ capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties, and eliminate the
ability of users to perform incompatible duties (repeat); and
c. establish a process for the independent verification of all disbursements (repeat) to
appropriate supporting documentation (such as approved requisitions), at least on a test basis.
Management’s Response
a. We concur with the recommendation that CCPS periodically generate security reports
from the financial system and use them to evaluate user capabilities. CCPS will evaluate
user capabilities using the system generated security reports at least annually.
b. We concur with the recommendation that user capabilities should be restricted to those
needed to perform their job duties and that the ability of users to perform incompatible
duties should be eliminated. However, the financial software system utilized by CCPS is
not designed to narrowly restrict user access. There are instances in which a user who
needs access to a specific function/feature automatically gets access to another
function/feature he/she does not need. We will make every effort to restrict user
capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties to the extent allowed by the
software security. We will identify instances in which unavoidable incompatible system
capabilities exist, and where these capabilities exist for a user, we will establish
mitigating controls to address this issue. Specifically, an independent employee will
generate and review reports that show all transactions initiated by the employee in
question and will compare the transactions to source documents to confirm the validity of
the transactions.
c. We concur with the recommendation that CCPS have a process for the independent
verification of all disbursements to the approved requisitions. CCPS will have an
employee independent of the accounts payable function regularly test accounts payable
disbursements to ensure that disbursements agree to the related supporting documentation
(which will include the purchase order and the originally approved purchase requisition).
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS:
a. perform a periodic documented review of users’ accesses and capabilities to ensure that
assigned functions and capabilities are consistent with employee job duties (repeat);
b. Ensure that HR and payroll transaction processing and review responsibilities are properly
segregated; and
c. Establish online approval requirements for HR and payroll transactions processed, which also
requires approvers to review documentation to ensure the transactions are properly
authorized and supported (repeat).

--- Page 38 ---
Management’s Response
a. We concur with the recommendation that CCPS perform a periodic documented review
of users’ access and capabilities to ensure that assigned functions and capabilities are
consistent with the employees’ job duties and job duties are adequately segregated. The
Finance Department has an established practice of cross-training of duties so that there
are at least two employees in each area (accounting, accounts payable, and payroll) who
have the ability to perform critical functions. It is essential to have proper backup so that
all critical tasks are completed in the absence of the employee who is primarily
responsible for specified tasks. CCPS will evaluate users’ access and capabilities using
system generated security reports at least annually to ensure that assigned functions and
capabilities are consistent with the employees’ job duties. We will also review job duties
at least annually to ensure adequate segregation. CCPS will maintain documentation of
the periodic reviews.
b. We concur with the recommendation that HR and payroll transaction processing and
review responsibilities are properly segregated. We will make every effort to properly
segregate duties and will evaluate job functions to identify instances in which
unavoidable incompatible job functions exist. Where such unavoidable incompatible job
functions exist, we will establish manual controls that specifically address the
incompatibility in an effort to offset risks. Specifically, an independent employee will
generate and review reports that show all transactions initiated by the employee in
question and will compare the transactions to source documents to confirm the validity of
the transactions. CCPS will maintain documentation of the periodic reviews.
c. We concur with the recommendation that CCPS establish online approval requirements
for HR and payroll transactions processed. However, this is not an option because the
financial reporting software used by CCPS does not have built-in capability for online
approval of HR and payroll transactions. In lieu of online approvals, we have created an
employee audit trail report in COGNOS which tracks all changes made by HR and
payroll employees in the financial software system. The supervisors of HR and Finance
will have restricted access to the system, thereby providing the needed independence.
They will select transactions from the audit trail report on a monthly basis and review the
documentation to ensure the transactions are properly authorized and supported. CCPS
will maintain documentation related to the reviews.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS obtain Board approval for all employee compensation (salaries and
benefits), as required by law.
Management’s Response
We concur with the recommendation that Board approval for all employee compensation
(salaries and benefits) be obtained as required by law. However, the matter of whether or not all
members of the Board of Education of Calvert County had knowledge of and approved the
contracts in question is in litigation and is currently pending a decision by the Maryland State
Board of Education.

--- Page 39 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend CCPS establish policies and procedures, to ensure accountability and control
over its equipment inventories, which address the following:
a. tagging of all capitalized equipment items (repeat);
b. the frequency and documentation of required periodic physical inventories of capital
equipment and sensitive items,
c. the investigation and reporting of missing items; and,
d. the physical inventory and record keeping requirements of sensitive items, including the data
to be maintained in the records for each item (repeat).
Management’s Response
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS establish policies and procedures to ensure
accountability and control over its equipment inventories. The purchasing and receiving of the
type of equipment addressed in this finding crosses many departments in Calvert County Public
Schools. Although the most equipment is technology related, in our current purchasing structure,
individual departments and schools order, receive, and inventory much of the equipment. This
process is the case for both items on the approved purchasing list and school-based technology
pilots. Because not all technology purchases flow through the Department of Information
Technology, an interdepartmental committee will be formed to analyze the issue and develop the
policies and procedures to ensure accountability and control over equipment inventories. To
ensure consistency across our school system, this group will be led by the Director of
Information Technology, Director of Finance, and the Director of Procurement, and will include
the Supervisor of Information Technology and other members as determined by the group.
The following will be addressed:
a. classify/define types of equipment (capital, sensitive etc.);
b. identify which equipment in CCPS will be tagged with bar codes;
c. list who is responsible for tagging each type of equipment and the process they will use;
d. decide which application (or method) will be used to collect essential information for the
database;
e. create the procedures for collecting and storing the inventory information;
f. decide when and how often physical inventories of capital and sensitive equipment will be
conducted;
g. specify the data to be maintained in the records for each item; and
h. define the process for investigating and reporting missing equipment.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS:
a. implement strong controls over domain passwords and accounts in accordance with best
practices identified in the aforementioned Information Security Policy;
b. limit access to critical databases to personnel whose job duties require such access; and

--- Page 40 ---
c. log all critical security and audit events, review these logs on a regular basis with
appropriate investigation of unusual activity, document these reviews and retain the
documentation for future reference.
Management’s Response
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS implement strong controls over domain
passwords and accounts in accordance with best practices identified in the Information Security
Policy. CCPS implemented procedures in the spring of 2016 to allow CCPS to have strong
controls over domain passwords and accounts as mentioned in the Information Security Policy.
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS limit access to critical databases to personnel
whose job duties require such access. CCPS has completed the implementation of the
recommended removal of this access.
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS log all critical security and audit events, review
these logs on a regular basis with appropriate investigation of unusual activity, document these
reviews and retain the appropriate documentation for future reference. DIT will conduct a
weekly review of the database logs for that week, and will retain copies of these weekly logs in
an audit directory for one year. These reviews will be documented and the documentation will
be retained for future reference. If any logs that are reviewed result in red flags, they will be
shared with the directors of DIT, Finance, and HR as appropriate.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS:
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks from Internet
traffic and encrypted network traffic to its critical devices and identify how such traffic
should be subject to IDPS. Based on this review and assessment, we recommend that
CCPS implement IDPS coverage as necessary; and
b. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate neutral network zone to limit security
exposures to the internal network segment.
Management’s Response
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS perform a documented review and assessment
of its network security risks from Internet traffic and encrypted network traffic to its critical
devices and identify how such traffic should be subject to IDPS and that CCPS implement IDPS
coverage as necessary based on this review and assessment. Calvert County Public Schools
reviewed and assessed its network security risks on March 19, 2015 in concert with Skyline
Technologies. CCPS has enabled IDPS/Vulnerability Protection on all inbound connections
through our network firewall.
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS relocate all publicly accessible servers to a
separate neutral network zone to limit security exposures to the internal network segment.
Calvert County Public Schools reviewed and assessed its network security risks on March 19,
2015 in concert with Skyline Technologies. CCPS has enabled our network firewall to decrypt
and analyzes all encrypted incoming traffic. The firewall will limit any security exposures.

--- Page 41 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS:
a. ensure that the current versions of malware protection software are installed and running
properly on all workstations and servers; and
b. Ensure that administrative privileges on workstations are properly restricted.
Management’s Response
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS ensure that the current versions of malware
protection software are installed and running properly on all workstations and servers. When the
legislative audit was conducted, CCPS had a known issue and fix for machines that are out of
date as referenced in the IT section of the audit regarding malware protection. Those machines
not receiving the updates had a corrupt cache of a software product agent. We applied the fix to
all workstations after the spring PARCC testing window in May of 2015. Since that date, normal
patch management occurs on a regular basis. Additionally, last year when a vendor announced
that they would no longer support a workstation operating system, CCPS made a major push to
move all systems to a supported operating system. Currently, all machines are running this
supported operating system.
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS ensure that administrative privileges on
workstations are properly restricted. As a practice, administrative privileges are restricted on
many machines. However, many applications, including testing, require administrative privileges
to the workstation. UAC control is recommended to be off or disabled during installation of
some of these programs. A pop up cannot be allowed during testing. This will exit a student
from the testing window.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS:
a. use market investment rates as a basis for establishing contractor rates for the annual PVA;
b. develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for establishing reasonable contractor rates
for operation costs and per mile maintenance costs; and
c. exclude federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
Management’s Response
a. We concur with the recommendation that CCPS consider the use if market investment
rates as a basis for establishing contractor rates for the annual PVA.
b. We concur with the recommendation that CCPS consider developing supportable cost
estimates as the basis for establishing reasonable contractor rates for operation costs and
per mile maintenance costs.
c. We concur with the recommendation that CCPS exclude federal fuel excise taxes from
contractor payments. This exemption will be applied along with the recently legislated
exemption from state motor fuel excise taxes for fuel purchased by bus contractors for
use in school buses used to transport students on approved school system activities.

--- Page 42 ---
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS develop formal procedures that ensure that voided transactions are
reviewed and approved by supervisors for propriety (repeat).
Management’s Response
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS utilize formal procedures to ensure that voided
transactions are reviewed and approved by supervisors for propriety.
The cafeteria manager or designee will review voided transaction activity on a weekly basis.
Excessive voided transaction activity will now require staff to complete a manual void
transaction log for a period of thirty (30) days to help provide more specific information
regarding void activity and to assess whether or not these voids could have been prevented.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS require both the cafeteria cashier and manager to sign the closing
sheet for each cash register to document their verification and agreement of the cash receipts
counted and related sales.
Management’s Response
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS require both the cafeteria cashier and manager
to sign the closing sheet for each cash register to document their verification and agreement of
the cash receipts.
In August of 2015, the Child Nutrition Department revised the form used to close out registers at
the end of each day. This revised version of the closing form includes dual signature lines, one
for the cashier and one for the certifier (manager or designee) of the funds to ensure that money
is verified prior to being deposited. This form is now being utilized in all locations.
The completed forms are maintained at the school. This paperwork is reviewed by the
Supervisor of Child Nutrition or designee throughout the school year.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that CCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for health insurance
and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend CCPS:
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and ensure audits of the claims paid
by the TPA are conducted (repeat);
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the stop-loss limit are
reimbursed by the insurer (in this case the TPA);
c. compare its records of enrolled employees, retirees, and dependents to invoices from the
TPA and determine the propriety of all fees and premiums billed (repeat); and
d. Retain copies of all healthcare contracts.

--- Page 43 ---
Management’s Response
We concur with the recommendation that CCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid
for health insurance and TPA service fees. Given the magnitude of work involved with
implementing the specifics of the aforementioned recommendation, CCPS will investigate the
propriety of contracting with a consultant to perform said tasks in items a., b., and c. above.
CCPS will retain copies of all healthcare contracts.

--- Page 44 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
W. Thomas Sides
Senior Auditors
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
J. Gregory Busch
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
Amanda M. Jones
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Staff Auditors