Title: Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Date: 06/25/2014
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509ee
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:03:14.295437
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
June 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External and Internal Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Federal Funds 10
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
 Finding 1 – AACPS Did Not Use Available Features of its Automated 10
Accounts Payable and Procurement System to Restrict and
Monitor User Capabilities
Finding 2 – AACPS Did Not Adequately Monitor a Contract to Develop 12
an Automated Human Resources and Payroll System
 Finding 3 – AACPS Did Not Thoroughly Evaluate Purchasing Card 13
Assignments to Reduce the Number of Unnecessary Cards
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 4 – AACPS Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Payments for 15
Employee and Retiree Health Care Costs
 Finding 5 – Certain Users Were Assigned Unneeded Capabilities in the 16
Automated Human Resources and Payroll System and Reports of
Personnel and Payroll Changes Were Not Comprehensive
Inventory Control and Accountability
 Finding 6 – The AACPS Equipment Inventory Policies Lacked Specificity 17
and a Complete Physical Inventory Had Not Been Performed
 Finding 7 – The AACPS Detail Equipment Records Were Not Always 18
Accurate and Comprehensive
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 8 – Access and Monitoring Controls Over Critical Databases 20
and Applications Were Not Sufficient to Protect Critical Data
Finding 9 – Administrative Access to the AACPS Network Was Not 21
Adequately Controlled and Audit Policies for Monitoring the
Security of Certain Critical Servers Were Not in Effect
Finding 10 – Malware Protection on the AACPS Workstations Was Not 22
Comprehensive
Finding 11 – The AACPS Network Was Not Properly Secured 23
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 23
Transportation Services
 Finding 12 – AACPS Did Not Have Formal Targets and Goals for 25
Revising Bus Routes or Use Automated Routing Software to
Improve Route Efficiency
 Finding 13 – Procedures and Controls Were Not Sufficient to Ensure 26
that Contractors Were Paid the Proper Amounts
 Finding 14 – Payments to Contractors for Bus Transportation Were 27
Not Always Properly Calculated and Were Not Always in
Compliance With the Contract Terms
Food Service Operations
Finding 15 – Cash Receipt Duties Were Not Properly Segregated Since 29
Transactions Could Be Voided By Cashiers Without Independent
Review or Approval
School Board Operations 30
Other Financial Controls 31
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 33
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Anne Arundel County Public Schools (AACPS)
June 2014
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
AACPS ranks 5th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems
in Maryland. During the fiscal year ending June 30, 2013, AACPS had a total
full-time regular and special education pupil population of 77,700 at its 110
schools. The AACPS operating and capital expenditures totaled $1.1 billion
during fiscal year 2013, and revenues totaled $1.1 billion.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of AACPS’
financial management practices. Our current audit found that AACPS had
established proper controls and oversight in a number of areas, but there are
additional opportunities for AACPS to improve its operations. Many of these
issues were identified in our first audit report issued in September 2007.
AACPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability
AACPS needs to improve internal controls in several critical areas. We noted
that a number of employees were assigned capabilities that allowed them to
process transactions on the automated procurement and disbursement
system without any subsequent review. Non-payroll disbursements processed
through this system totaled $189 million during fiscal year 2013. Other users
of this system as well as the payroll system were assigned capabilities that
were not necessary to perform their job duties. Similarly, we found that a
number of individuals had full administrative access to the AACPS student
information system database that allowed the users to perform unauthorized
modifications to critical student data. We also noted that several employees
entered data into AACPS’ automated bus payment system without any
subsequent review or approval.
AACPS did not verify the propriety of certain vendor payments. Specifically,
AACPS did not verify health care claim payments made to a third-party
administrator, which totaled $89.2 million during fiscal year 2013. Also,
AACPS did not verify that the time and mileage reported by bus contractors
(and used to calculate payments to these contractors) were accurate. We
were advised that fiscal year 2013 payments to bus contractors totaled
approximately $42 million.
5

--- Page 8 ---
AACPS Should Consider Implementing Certain Steps to Improve Cost
Effectiveness
AACPS should take steps to ensure the efficiency of its bus operation, which
transported over 50,000 students on over 500 buses, primarily operated by
contractors. Specifically, AACPS did not utilize automated bus routing
software designed to assist in planning efficient bus routes. We also found
that ridership was often significantly lower than bus capacity.
AACPS needs to take steps to ensure that information system contracts are
properly monitored. Our review of one contract to provide an automated
human resources system found that AACPS made payments under the
contract related to system development, but did not receive a viable product.
AACPS eventually discontinued the contract after paying $4.8 million and
contracted with another vendor to upgrade the current system.
AACPS Needs to Establish Certain Comprehensive Policies
AACPS needs to develop formal policies pertaining to student bus
transportation (such as bus capacity utilization) and physical inventory
requirements for equipment.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) student
enrollment records, the Anne Arundel County Public Schools (AACPS) ranks
5th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2013 full-time student enrollment was 77,770 students. For the
2011-2012 school year, AACPS had 110 schools (not including vocational or
other alternative schools), consisting of 79 elementary, 19 middle, and 12
high schools.
According to the AACPS audited financial statements, fiscal year 2013
expenditures were $1.1 billion and revenues were $1.1 billion. The largest
expenditure category was salaries and wages, which, including benefits,
accounted for approximately 74 percent of total expenditures during fiscal
year 2013. According to MSDE records, as of October 2012, AACPS had
9,634 full-time positions, which consisted of 6,949 instructional and 2,685
non-instructional employees.
Oversight
AACPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of eight appointed
voting members and one voting student member. The State and the Anne
Arundel County government provide the vast majority of AACPS funding. In
addition, MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment
and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with AACPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Anne Arundel County government exercises authority over AACPS
primarily through the review and approval of AACPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
External and Internal Audits
Annually, AACPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently
audit its fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor
conducts what is referred to as a Single Audit of AACPS federal grant
programs (as required by federal regulations). The resulting financial
statement audit and Single Audit reports for fiscal year 2012 were issued
October 11, 2012 and November 11, 2012, respectively, and the reports for
7

--- Page 10 ---
fiscal year 2013 were issued October 22, 2013 and December 13, 2013,
respectively.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the AACPS financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we
relied on the results of the independent audit for fiscal years 2012 and 2013
to reduce the scope of our audit work related to revenues, accounts
receivable, and federal grant activity. In addition, we relied on the results of
the work performed by the AACPS internal auditors related to school activity
funds.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 20 of the 29 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated September 27, 2007 (the 29
findings resulted in 16 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed
up on these 20 findings based on our current assessment of significance and
risk relative to the audit objectives. We determined that AACPS satisfactorily
addressed 11 of these findings. The remaining 9 findings are repeated as 8
findings in this report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Anne Arundel County Public Schools (AACPS) revenues consist primarily of
funds received from Anne Arundel County, the State, and the federal
government. According to the AACPS audited financial statements, revenues
from all sources totaled $1.1 billion during fiscal year 2013. In addition,
AACPS collects funds for various purposes, such as student activity groups,
clubs and school publications. These school activity funds1 are accounted for
separately by each school and reported in summary in the audited financial
statements. Although this revenue is raised through student-related activities,
AACPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year 2013,
school activity fund collections totaled $12.9 million and the June 30, 2013
balance was $5.3 million.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the AACPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the
results of that audit for certain revenues and accounts receivable (for
example, amounts due from other governments). The auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or deficiencies
regarding material revenue types or accounts receivable for governmental
funds, the majority of which related to electronic fund transfers from other
government entities.
Internal Auditor Audits School Activity Funds
The AACPS internal auditor conducts audits of school activity funds. The
internal auditor’s review and testing of the school activity funds at AACPS
schools identified some control weaknesses at certain schools that were
addressed by school management. The internal auditor’s reports we reviewed
disclosed that internal control weaknesses identified were not prevalent. The
internal auditor audits all schools’ activity funds on a rotating basis and
reports its findings to the school principals, central administrative staff, and
the Board.
1 The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that school activity funds are used only for intended
purposes by those to whom the assets belong. Receipts for the school activity funds are not included
in the $1.1 billion revenue total because the Board cannot use these assets to finance its operations.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Federal Funds
Background
AACPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of Federal
Awards, fiscal year 2012 expenditures totaled $55.6 million and fiscal year
2013 expenditures totaled $55.2 million, not including federally funded fee-
for-service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for certain services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of the AACPS federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results.
Besides expressing an opinion on AACPS’ compliance with the terms of
several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal
control structure's impact on compliance and audited the required Schedule
of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant expenditures)
for fiscal years 2012 and 2013. The related reports stated that AACPS
complied, in all material respects, with the requirements applicable to its
major federal programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance
with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did not
identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and AACPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $189 million during fiscal year 2013. AACPS has a
comprehensive procurement policy and related procedures. The policy sets
bidding requirements and specifies when Board approval is required. AACPS
uses a combination of automated and manual processes to process
requisitions, purchase orders, invoices, and payments to vendors.
Finding 1
AACPS did not use available features of its automated accounts payable and
procurement system to restrict and monitor user capabilities.
Analysis
AACPS did not use available features of its automated accounts payable and
procurement system to restrict and monitor user capabilities. The AACPS
10

--- Page 13 ---
automated system allows AACPS to limit user access capabilities to provide
proper internal control over the processing of critical transactions such as
requisitions, purchase orders, and related invoices.
 The access capabilities assigned to six employees allowed them to
process critical transactions (such as recording invoices for payment in the
system) for which there was no subsequent manual review designed to
detect errors or improper transactions. These capabilities could allow an
employee to process erroneous or improper payments.
 Ten userids were assigned capabilities that allowed the user to process
transactions that were not necessary for their job duties. Three of the ten
userids were not assigned to a specific AACPS employee, which makes it
difficult to identify the individual initiating a particular transaction.
 AACPS did not generate and review security reports of assigned user
capabilities to ensure access was properly granted and continued to be
proper. We were advised by AACPS management that a report of user
access was generated during November 2012 which included 507
userids; however, the review of this report was not completed as of August
2013.
 AACPS did not generate a report of changes to vendor information (such
as new vendors or address changes) recorded in the automated financial
system for independent review and comparison to source documentation.
As a result, there was no assurance that changes were proper.
Similar conditions regarding controls over user access were commented upon
in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that AACPS
a. restrict employees’ capabilities on the system to only those needed to
perform their job duties and eliminate incompatible functions (repeat),
b. periodically generate and independently review system reports of user
capabilities to ensure access is properly granted (repeat), and
c. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the system are
verified to appropriate source documentation by an independent
employee.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
AACPS did not adequately monitor a contract to develop an automated human
resources management and payroll system. Payments to the contractor
totaled $4.8 million.
Analysis
AACPS entered into a contract with a vendor to provide an automated human
resources management and payroll system and made payments under the
contract, but did not receive a viable product. The contract, which was
approved by the Board, required AACPS to pay the vendor $4.6 million during
the contract period June 2007 through June 2010. The contract required
AACPS to make payments to the vendor based on time (labor hours) and
materials and payments to the vendor totaled $4.8 million from October 2007
through August 2011. The vendor failed to perform on the contract. In
November 2011, the Board directed AACPS to terminate the contract. After
attempts to rectify the problems failed, the Board authorized legal counsel to
file suit against the vendor. According to AACPS legal counsel, it is expected
that this suit will be filed in the near future.2
We found that (1) the use of a time and materials basis for this and similar
contracts is unwise, involves greater risk to the government, and requires
higher levels of supervision than other contract bases; and (2) that AACPS
failed to provide adequate supervision of this vendor. Federal best practices
note that time and materials based payments present the highest risk to the
government and the lowest risk to the contractor, and they should only be
used if the contracting unit documents its determination that no other
contract type is suitable. These best practices also indicate agencies using
this type of contract should prevent wasteful spending by monitoring
contractor performance to ensure that the contractor is efficiently performing
the work and effectively controlling costs.3
Although the contract contained project milestones with associated
deliverables, payments were not contingent on meeting the milestones or
providing the deliverables. Furthermore, AACPS did not ensure that the
specified milestones were met and deliverables were received, although
future work to be performed by the vendor was contingent upon AACPS
acceptance of deliverables. AACPS could not provide documentation that the
milestones were met and acknowledged that they continued to pay the
2 The Office of Legislative Audits takes no position on the merits of the lawsuit. Liability and, if
appropriate, damages will be determined through the court system.
3 Sources for best practices are the Federal Defense Procurement and Acquisition Policy and a
Government Accountability Office report dated June 2007 “Defense Contracting – Improved Insight
and Controls over DOD’s Time and Materials Contracts.”
12

--- Page 15 ---
contractor for over two years after AACPS realized that system implementation
would be delayed, with the possibility that the vendor would not be able to
deliver the system.
Due to the inability of the vendor to provide a working system, AACPS was
required to contract with another vendor in December 2012 to upgrade the
current system. This contract has an estimated cost of $2.3 million, and
contains a completion date of July 31, 2014. As of October 2013, payments
to this vendor totaled $350,000.
Recommendation 2
We recommend AACPS
a. ensure that provisions in information technology contracts specify a
correlation between payments and the receipt of specific deliverables
and/or the meeting of milestones;
b. ensure that payments are made only when vendors fulfill contractual
obligations; and
c. continue, with the assistance of legal counsel, to assess whether legal
actions against the vendor should be pursued.
Finding 3
AACPS did not thoroughly evaluate purchasing card assignments to reduce
the number of unnecessary cards.
Analysis
AACPS did not thoroughly evaluate corporate purchasing card (CPC)
assignments to determine whether the individuals needed the cards.
According to the issuing bank’s records, CPC expenditures totaled
approximately $5.8 million during the period January 2012 through February
2013. As of May 2013, 1,802 purchasing cards had been issued to 687
cardholders.
 Records provided by the bank disclosed that, as of May 2013, 125 cards
had not been used for periods ranging from 12 to 52 months. Although
AACPS had initiated procedures to review cards for inactivity, not all
inactive accounts were reviewed and adequate action was not taken to
determine if inactive accounts should be closed. A similar situation
regarding the need to conduct periodic evaluations of card usage to detect
unused cards was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Multiple cards were issued to 307 cardholders, including 53 cardholders
that were issued 10 or more cards. AACPS management advised us that
13

--- Page 16 ---
multiple cards are issued to employees in order to allocate costs to
various accounts. AACPS management also advised us that it is in the
process of implementing an online system that will allow cardholders to
use one card for all purchases and subsequently allocate costs to multiple
accounts, rather than assigning multiple cards to one employee.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that AACPS
a. conduct periodic evaluations of card usage and terminate cards that are
determined to be unnecessary (repeat), and
b. discontinue the practice of issuing multiple cards to individual users.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the AACPS
budget. Fiscal year 2013 salary, wage, and benefit costs totaled $832
million. According to MSDE reports, during the 2012 - 2013 school year,
AACPS had 9,634 full-time equivalent positions, including 2,685 non-
instructional positions.
AACPS uses an integrated human resources and payroll computer system to
maintain personnel information, record employee time, track leave usage, and
process and record payroll transactions. The system automatically generates
biweekly time records and any adjustments are processed by central payroll
personnel. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling
leave and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of
new employee information).
AACPS self-insures for health care benefits and contracts with a third-party
administrator to pay health care claims on behalf of plan participants and
eligible dependents. Providers submit claims to the administrator who pays
them on behalf of AACPS and then obtains reimbursement from AACPS for the
actual costs of claims paid. AACPS pays a fee to the administrator to provide
these services based on the number of participants. According to the AACPS
records, during fiscal year 2013 AACPS paid this vendor $89.2 million for
claim reimbursements (not including vision, dental, or prescription) and $5.5
million for administrative fees. Coverage was provided to approximately
28,000 employees, retirees, and dependents.
14

--- Page 17 ---
AACPS Implemented Procedures to Remove Ineligible Individuals Covered
Under its Employee Health Care Plans
AACPS contracted with a consultant to conduct verifications of individuals that
were covered as dependents under its health care plans. The vendor required
employees to submit documentation to prove that each individual covered as
a dependent was eligible under the criteria defined in the AACPS health care
plans. In its report, issued in June 2013, the vendor identified 358 ineligible
dependents and estimated that AACPS would save over $1 million in health
care costs during the first year. We were advised by AACPS management that
as of August 2013, they discontinued coverage for 289 of the 358 individuals.
AACPS management stated that adequate documentation was provided
subsequent to the vendor’s report by the remaining 69 individuals to support
continued coverage.
Finding 4
AACPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and retiree
health care costs.
Analysis
AACPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that health care claims paid
by its third-party administrator were proper.
 AACPS paid the administrator’s invoices without verifying that the amounts
billed were proper. Specifically, AACPS made estimated payments to the
administrator each month and then paid a settlement amount (or received
a credit) based on the subsequently reported actual claims paid for each
month. AACPS did not receive detailed claims data and therefore could
not verify that the settlement amount was proper. In addition, AACPS did
not adequately ensure that administrative fees invoiced and paid to the
vendor were proper by comparing the number of participants from the
invoices to its payroll records.
 AACPS did not conduct or contract for any comprehensive claim reviews to
ensure that the vendor paid claims only for eligible individuals in
accordance with the contract terms, and did not review claims
documentation to ensure that services were actually provided and were
paid in accordance with the terms of the contract.
 AACPS did not ensure that contractual performance measures were met.
The contract defines the measures and how they will be calculated. The
performance measures relate to certain operational areas, such as
network discounts, customer service, and customer satisfaction. The
15

--- Page 18 ---
contract allows for assessment of penalties (up to $889,400 per year) if
these measures are not met. The vendor self-reported its compliance
levels with these measures and we were advised that no penalties were
assessed in plan years 2012 and 2013, however, AACPS did not have a
process in place to verify the reported performance.
Recommended practices published by the Government Finance Officers
Association state that health care cost containment is a critical component of
long-term financial planning and budgeting. The Maryland Department of
Budget and Management, which has similar claims processing contracts for
State employees, contracts with a third-party vendor (other than the vendor
processing claims) to conduct reviews to ensure the propriety of claims paid.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that AACPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid
for health insurance. Specifically, we recommend AACPS
a. obtain detail to support the administrator’s billings;
b. verify the propriety and accuracy of claim payments and administrative
fees; and
c. review documentation related to contractual performance measures to
ensure that mandated measures were met, or if not met, consider
assessing penalties as provided for in the contract.
Finding 5
Certain users were assigned unneeded capabilities in the automated human
resources and payroll system, and reports of personnel and payroll changes
were not comprehensive.
Analysis
AACPS did not establish adequate internal controls over its automated human
resources and payroll system and related processes.
 Nineteen employees had been assigned system capabilities that allowed
them to perform certain incompatible system functions (including the
ability to add employees and process payroll adjustments), even though
these employees did not require such access in order to perform their job
duties.
 AACPS did not generate and review reports of access capabilities assigned
to system users to ensure that employees’ ability to perform critical
functions was properly restricted.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 Although AACPS generated output reports of changes made to the
automated human resources and payroll system for review by
independent supervisory personnel, these reports did not include all
changes to the records. For example, the reports did not include new
hires and payroll adjustments (such as pay adjustments for coaching
sports). As a result, improper or erroneous transactions could be
processed without detection. A similar situation regarding the lack of
controls over additions of new employees to the payroll system was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that AACPS
a. restrict employees’ capabilities on the system to only those needed to
perform their job duties and eliminate incompatible functions,
b. periodically generate and ensure independent review of accurate and
complete reports of access capabilities assigned to system users, and
c. modify its existing reports of changes to include all changes made to the
human resources and payroll records (repeat).
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to the AACPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value
of its capital equipment inventory totaled $49 million as of June 30, 2013.
AACPS uses automated records to track all equipment inventory items with a
cost of $5,000 or more. In addition, AACPS tracks certain other equipment
items costing under $5,000 deemed sensitive to theft, such as information
technology items.
Finding 6
The AACPS equipment inventory policies lacked specificity and a complete
physical inventory had not been performed.
Analysis
The AACPS equipment inventory policies did not specify the frequency for
conducting periodic physical inventories of equipment nor indicate which
items should be included in the physical count. For example, the AACPS
Property Control Manual does not require that all sensitive equipment items
be counted on a routine basis. Board regulations state that physical
inventories shall be conducted by the school’s administrative units. The
17

--- Page 20 ---
regulations also state that physical inventories may be directed by the
Superintendent or designee at anytime.
AACPS has not conducted a complete physical inventory of its capital and
sensitive equipment since 2004. From fiscal year 2010 to 2012, AACPS
performed limited physical inventories of select items deemed to be at greater
risk of loss (such as laptops in fiscal year 2010 and document cameras in
2012). Further, we found that these inventories did not include all items of
record. For example, our review of an inventory of document cameras
performed at one school found that that the inventory count included only 3
cameras while the AACPS records indicated that the school had 35 such
cameras and school staff advised us that they had 143 cameras on site.
AAPCS had not reconciled these differences and could not explain the
discrepancies. Our test of 15 other sensitive equipment items totaling
$26,546 that were recorded on the detail records for that school noted 4
items totaling $11,675 that could not be located.
A similar situation regarding the lack of physical inventories of equipment was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that AACPS
a. enhance its policies by specifying the types of equipment to be inventoried
and the frequency of physical counts; and
b. conduct periodic physical inventories, reconcile these inventories to the
related detail records, and retain the related documentation for review
and verification purposes (repeat).
Finding 7
The AACPS detail equipment records were not always accurate and
comprehensive.
Analysis
The AACPS detail equipment records did not always contain sufficient data to
identify equipment items. In addition, certain items were not properly
recorded in the detail records.
 The detail records did not contain unique identifiers for all equipment
items. Our review found that 15,121 of the 90,789 equipment items did
not have serial numbers or other unique identifiers (for example bar
codes) recorded in the detail records. AACPS management advised us
that they have been in the process of placing bar code tags on all
18

--- Page 21 ---
equipment since 2007 in order to improve accountability of the items.
However, our review noted that as of March 2013 the inventory records
included bar code numbers for only 6,176 of 90,789 equipment items
(6.8 percent). A similar situation regarding the lack of unique identifying
data on the detail records was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 Equipment acquired by using purchasing cards was not always recorded in
the equipment records. We noted that 25 sensitive equipment items
bought using one purchasing card during May and June 2012 totaling
$93,000 were not recorded in the detail records. In addition, our review of
15 monthly purchasing logs for purchases made by others during
September 2012 through February 2013 noted that two other sensitive
equipment items totaling $1,417 were not recorded in the detail records.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that AACPS ensure that
a. detail equipment records include serial numbers or other unique
identifiers for all items (repeat), and
b. equipment items bought via purchasing cards are recorded in the detail
records.
Information Technology
Background
The AACPS Division of Technology, aided by other AACPS offices, maintains
and administers the AACPS computer network, computer operations, and
information system applications. AACPS operates a wide area network, with
Internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to
the computer resources located at the AACPS headquarters. The Division
maintains multiple computer rooms at the headquarters location in which
numerous computer servers and network devices operate to support AACPS
information system applications including its student information system,
finance management system, and human resources/payroll application.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 8
Access and monitoring controls over critical databases and applications were
not sufficient to protect critical data.
Analysis
Access and monitoring controls over critical databases and applications were
not sufficient to protect critical data.
 A default administrative database account unnecessarily had full access
to the student information system database. Since this account includes
local server administrators by default, all local administrators on the
database server had full administrative access to this database. Also,
anyone able to achieve local administrator privileges would automatically
have full administrative access to this database and could perform
unauthorized modifications to critical data. We noted that as a result of
this condition, 20 userids (assigned to 12 unique individuals) had
unnecessary full administrative access to this database.
 Certain critical security and audit events (for example, grant privilege and
stop audit) for the student information system database were not recorded
in audit logs or reviewed. As a result, management lacked assurance as
to the propriety of these events. Furthermore, although failed login
attempts were recorded, AACPS reviews of these events were not
documented.
 Numerous accounts were assigned unnecessary direct modification
access to the human resources/payroll production database files and
certain application programs. For example, numerous accounts (assigned
to numerous unique users) had unnecessary direct modification access to
the aforementioned programs. In addition, the mainframe computer
which hosts the human resources/payroll database and application did
not have the capability to log access to program and data files.
Unnecessary and unlogged direct modification access to these program
and data files could result in improper modifications to human resources
and payroll data without detection by management.
Best practice guidelines from the State of Maryland Department of
Information Technology (DoIT) Information Security Policy recommend that
access to information be strictly controlled and audited.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that AACPS
a. limit access to critical databases and production programs and data files
to personnel whose job duties requires such access,
b. log all critical security and audit events and direct modification access in
audit logs,
c. review audit logs on a regular basis (at least weekly) with appropriate
investigation of questionable or unusual items, and
d. document these reviews and investigations and retain the documentation
for verification purposes.
Finding 9
Administrative access to the AACPS network was not adequately controlled
and audit policies for monitoring the security of certain critical servers were
not in effect.
Analysis
Administrative access to the AACPS network was not adequately controlled
and audit policies for monitoring the security of certain critical servers were
not in effect.
 A shared account was included in one administrator group and we were
advised by AACPS management that six of nine employees who knew the
password for this shared account did not require these administrator
capabilities on the AACPS domain. Accounts that are members of this
group are the most powerful and privileged in the system and should only
be assigned to individuals requiring those capabilities to perform their
assigned job duties. Furthermore, best practice guidelines from the DoIT
Information Security Policy, state that shared accounts are generally
prohibited since the use of a shared account precludes accountability for
actions taken via the account.
 Although the server audit policies were properly enabled on the domain
controller, these policies did not propagate to member servers in the
domain as they should have. In this regard, our test of two critical
member servers disclosed that AACPS local audit policy settings were not
enabled. Accordingly, significant system security-related activities for
member servers were not logged or reviewed, including failed logons and
changes to audit policies. As a result of these conditions, certain
unauthorized or inappropriate activities affecting the integrity of the AACPS
critical production systems could occur and go undetected.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that AACPS
a. assign administrator capabilities on the AACPS domain to only those users
requiring such privileges,
b. appropriately limit the use of shared accounts, and
c. ensure that audit policies enabled on the domain controller propagate to
and are enabled on the member servers.
Finding 10
Malware protection on AACPS workstations was not comprehensive.
Analysis
Malware protection on AACPS workstations was not comprehensive.
 The antivirus software used to protect AACPS workstations was not
properly configured to limit users’ capabilities. Specifically, users of all
AACPS administrative workstations could exclude any files or folders from
malware scans. Additionally, all users were allowed to override and modify
the antivirus software’s default actions to be taken against potentially
malicious discoveries.
 Local administrator privileges were not properly restricted. Our test of
seven regular users noted that all seven users were assigned local
administrative rights to their workstations. As a result, if these
workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run with
administrative rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of
compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only
user rights. In addition, as a result of this condition, these seven users
could disable the antivirus software on their workstations.
Best practice guidance from the DoIT Information Security Policy, states that
agencies should configure security settings of information technology
products to the most restrictive mode consistent with operational
requirements.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that AACPS
a. disable the settings which allow users to exclude files from malware scans
and override and modify default security controls established by
management, and
b. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel that
require such rights for their job duties.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 11
The AACPS network was not properly secured.
Analysis
The AACPS network was not properly secured.
 Ten publicly accessible servers were located on the AACPS internal
network rather than isolating these servers in a separate protected
network zone. These servers, which could potentially be compromised,
exposed the internal network to attack from external sources.
Recommended security procedures, per the National Institute of
Standards and Technology Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy
include placing publicly accessible servers in an external protected zone
so as to protect those servers as well as an entity’s internal network.
 AACPS did not adequately secure its internal network from improper
network level access from AACPS high school students using either
computer lab workstations or media center workstations. AACPS did not
use network access control software or network-level traffic filtering to
protect its network from activity emanating from these workstations.
Student access from these workstations should be limited to devices and
ports necessary for these students to perform required tasks.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that AACPS
a. segregate publicly accessible servers in a separate protected network
zone, and
b. implement controls to limit network level student access to only
authorized local school and headquarters network resources.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
AACPS maintains a total of 110 schools and a number of other facilities (such
as administrative and support offices) with 728 custodial and 111
maintenance personnel. The fiscal year 2013 Capital Improvement Plan (CIP)
estimated that necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to AACPS facilities over the next six years would cost $1.4
billion. AACPS uses various sources to develop its six-year CIP, which is
presented to and approved by the Board. Our review of the fiscal year 2013-
23

--- Page 26 ---
2018 CIP disclosed that it appeared to address the needs of AACPS based on
items such as student demographics and facility assessments.
AACPS contracted for a Strategic Facility Utilization Master Plan (SFUMP) to
provide a comprehensive review of all schools and address the needs for
future construction, renovation, and other facility needs. Our review of 10
contractual procurements for capital projects (totaling approximately $53
million) disclosed that nine of these projects were identified as a high priority
in the SFUMP, while the remaining project was started prior to the issuance of
the SFUMP.
AACPS prepares an annual Comprehensive Maintenance Plan (CMP) which
identifies and prioritizes all maintenance projects, including those that are
backlogged. AACPS reported deferred maintenance projects totaling $238
million in the fiscal year 2013 CMP. During the annual budget request
submitted to the Anne Arundel County Council, AACPS considers the CMP as
well as the potential funding in order to determine the amount requested for
these projects. As part of the fiscal year 2013 budget approval process,
AACPS received approximately $4 million specifically to address deferred
maintenance projects.
AACPS Contracts and Expenditures for Capital Projects Were Proper
Our review of 10 contractual procurements totaling approximately $53 million
disclosed that the contracts were properly bid, awarded, and approved by the
Board. We also tested 10 related invoices totaling $5.2 million and found
that the payments were proper. That is, payments were based on the
percentage of completion as evidenced by formal approved inspection
documentation.
AACPS Had Established Processes to Minimize Energy Costs
AACPS had an approved comprehensive energy policy and was drafting
regulations necessary to implement the policy. In July 2012, AACPS
established an Energy Conservation Office within the Division of Facilities to
identify initiatives to achieve energy savings. The Office began conducting
energy audits of schools using a risk-based approach by focusing on older
schools where greater savings could be expected. Furthermore, AACPS had
consulted with a vendor to analyze lighting fixtures to reduce electrical costs
and the Office was installing energy efficient fixtures in certain high schools
and pursuing utility rebates.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Transportation Services
Background
AACPS has approximately 56,000 students eligible to receive transportation
services. These students were transported on one of 450 contractor-owned
buses or 56 school system-owned buses. AACPS uses a bidding process to
award routes to contractors based on the lowest competitive bid. Prospective
bidders submit proposals that specify several cost components (annual fixed
rate, hourly rates for drivers and aides, and per mile maintenance and fuel
rates). AACPS calculates the lowest bid for the 12-year life of the bus,4 based
on a standard number of hours and miles contained in the request for bids.
AACPS uses an automated bus contractor payment system, which was
implemented in fiscal year 2010, to calculate monthly payments that are to
be based on the contractor bid and actual mileage and driver time. During
fiscal year 2013, according to the audited financial statements, expenditures
for student transportation totaled $50 million of which we were advised that
$42 million represented payments to contractors.
Finding 12
AACPS did not have formal targets and goals for revising bus routes or use
automated routing software to improve route efficiency.
Analysis
AACPS did not have formal targets and goals to guide the decisions made
during the process of reviewing and revising bus routes nor did it use
automated bus routing software to promote more efficiency. Specifically,
AACPS did not have written procedures specifying critical factors used to
determine efficient bus routes such as formal bus capacity guidelines and
maximum student ride times. Further, there were no written procedures for
determining and implementing changes to the existing bus routes. Current
AACPS policies only provide general information regarding bus transportation,
such as distance from school required to ride a bus.
AACPS did not use automated bus routing software capabilities to develop
more efficient routes. Our prior audit report noted that during the period
1994 through 2005, AACPS attempted to obtain computerized routing
software but was unable to obtain a suitable working system. Subsequently,
AAPCS relied on the experience and knowledge of its transportation staff to
manually develop bus routes. For example, when a new housing development
4 In Maryland, conventional school buses operated in certain jurisdictions have a useful life of 12 years
as established by Maryland law. Under prescribed maintenance and inspection conditions, the State
Superintendent of Schools can grant approval to operate a conventional school bus beyond 12 years.
25

--- Page 28 ---
is built the staff will adjust the existing routes to accommodate the students
residing in the new development.
The lack of a system-wide route analysis could impact route efficiency. For
example, our review of the AACPS fiscal year 2013 time and mileage reports
(which are also used to record student ridership) for 1,272 regular bus routes
disclosed that 336 routes were below 50 percent of AACPS’ informal bus
occupancy goals.5
Using routing software is a recognized best practice that can be used to
reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce student ride time
and help ensure that routes minimize the number of buses needed to
transport students. Similar conditions were commented on in our preceding
audit report.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that AACPS
a. develop formal targets and goals for its bus routes to address factors such
as desired bus capacity and student ride times in order to assist in
developing more efficient bus routes (repeat), and
b. improve the efficiency of bus utilization by obtaining and implementing
automated routing software (repeat).
Finding 13
Procedures and controls were not sufficient to ensure that contractors were
paid the proper amounts.
Analysis
Procedures and controls over payments to bus contractors were not sufficient
to ensure the propriety of those payments.
 Data entered into its bus contractor payment system by several employees
to pay contractors were not subject to independent review. Specifically,
reviews were not performed to ensure the accuracy of data entered for the
initial cost components from winning bids, the annual contractually
required cost of living adjustments to labor rates and monthly fuel prices,
the number of miles driven and any related mileage adjustments, as well
as the hours worked by bus drivers.
5 AACPS management advised that they consider student bus capacity as 44 for high school, 48 for
middle school, and 54 for elementary school.
26

--- Page 29 ---
 AACPS did not implement a process to determine if the time and mileage,
including adjustments, as reported by the contractors were accurate (that
is, reflect actual mileage and hours worked).
 Access capabilities assigned to individuals on the payment system were
not adequately controlled. Two users could record adjustments to the
contractor pay data; however, their job function did not require this
capability. In addition, we were advised by AACPS management that one
other userid, which provides access to update contractor pay data, was
used by multiple users.
A similar condition regarding controls over changes to the information in the
automated bus contractor payment system was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that AACPS ensure that sufficient procedures and controls
over payments to bus contractors are established. Specifically, we
recommend that AACPS
a. ensure that an independent employee verifies that data entered into the
contractor payment system agrees to source documents, at least on a test
basis (repeat);
b. verify the time and mileage reports received from the contractors to actual
mileage and driver hours required for the specific bus routes; and
c. eliminate payment system access for individuals that do not require
assigned access to perform their duties and ensure that users have
unique userids.
Finding 14
Payments to contractors for bus transportation were not always properly
calculated and were not always in compliance with the contract terms.
Analysis
Payments to contractors for providing bus transportation to students were not
always proper. Our review of payments totaling approximately $98,000 for
transportation services provided by 10 buses during April 2013 disclosed the
following conditions:
 Mileage recorded in the bus contractor payment system was not always
accurate, and did not always agree to the miles reported by the contractor.
Our review noted that the mileage recorded in the system and used for
27

--- Page 30 ---
payment calculations exceeded the OLA calculated mileage for 6 of the 10
buses tested by 12 to 42 miles. Based on these differences, we
calculated that AACPS may have overpaid these contractors $5,300 for
transportation services provided during April 2013. In addition, mileage
recorded in the system for 4 buses (including 3 of the 6 buses included
above) exceeded miles reported by the contractors by 4 to 43 miles.
AACPS was not able to explain these mileage discrepancies.
 Hourly payment rates for drivers and aides for 5 of the 10 buses tested
were higher than the rates that were provided for in the related contracts
primarily due to incorrect cost of living adjustments (COLA). Each contract
provides for specific hourly labor rates in the initial year and annual COLA
factors for subsequent years. AACPS management advised us that due to
the implementation of a new automated payment system in fiscal year
2010, subsequent annual COLA adjustments were improperly calculated
for contracts that existed prior to 2009. As of April 2013, there were 312
buses operating under contracts prior to 2009, which could be impacted
by improper hourly rate adjustments. Although we calculated that the
overpayments for those five buses totaled approximately $12,000 during
fiscal year 2013, due to the number of affected buses and the length of
time the improper calculations have occurred we could not readily
determine the total system overpayments.
 AACPS increased the base hourly pay rates for bus drivers by a flat 50
cents per hour above the contracted amounts in fiscal year 2007. This
increase was given to all contractors providing services that school year
unless the contract was in its first year (that is, fiscal year 2007 contracts).
Although this increase was approved by the Board, this increase conflicted
with the terms of the contracts which specified increases to rates based
on COLA and appears to be inconsistent with the intent of having a
competitive procurement process. AACPS estimated that this increase
would cost approximately $277,000 in fiscal year 2007. This increase
also affected subsequent fiscal years; however, AACPS did not determine
the cost of this increase for the remaining years of the contracts.
A similar comment regarding increasing hourly rates above the contract
amount was made in our preceding audit report.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Recommendation 14
We recommend that AACPS ensure that payments to bus contractors are
proper and are paid in accordance with the contract terms. Specifically we
recommend that AACPS
a. determine the actual mileage required for each route and make payments
according to the correct route mileage;
b. ensure that hourly rates are paid in accordance to the contract;
c. discontinue the practice of increasing hourly rates that were previously
subject to the competitive bid process (repeat); and
d. investigate mileage and payment discrepancies, make adjustments as
necessary for future payments, and determine the appropriateness of
recovering prior overpayments from bus contractors.
Food Service Operations
Background
AACPS has a cooking cafeteria at 105 of its schools. Food and related
supplies are received and stored in each school. In fiscal year 2013, AACPS
had 529 cafeteria workers. According to the AACPS audited financial
statements, food service operations expenditures ($26,066,362) exceeded
revenues ($24,981,335) by $1,085,027 for fiscal year 2013. AACPS advised
us that a large purchase of replacement equipment contributed to the deficit
in fiscal year 2013.
Finding 15
Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated as transactions could be
voided by cashiers without independent review or approval at the schools we
reviewed.
Analysis
Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated. Specifically, cashiers and
managers in nine schools we reviewed (we visited four schools and contacted
an additional five schools) had the ability to void transactions on the
automated point-of-sale system with no independent review or approval. In
several of the schools we visited, managers were also routinely responsible
for initially processing cash receipts. Although the point-of-sale system is
capable of generating output reports of voided transactions for subsequent
review, the schools did not generate these reports.
According to the AACPS records, cashiers processed 13,756 voids totaling
$1.1 million during fiscal year 2013. Our review of 15 of these voids totaling
29

--- Page 32 ---
$1.0 million disclosed that voids tested were appropriate (such as the cashier
recording the student ID number as a cash payment instead of the price of
the food).
Recommendation 15
We recommend that independent supervisory personnel, such as food service
headquarters personnel, review and approve voids, at least on a test basis.
For example, AACPS could generate periodic reports of all void transactions to
enable this review process.
School Board Operations
Background
The AACPS Board of Education is composed of eight voting members
appointed by the Governor and one voting student representative. In its
oversight responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public
accounting firm for independent audits of the AACPS financial statements and
federal programs. The Board has standing committees for budget and policy
and individual members are periodically informed of and become involved
with all other aspects of operations and governance.
AACPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The AACPS Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State
law and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure
and was approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of this policy
are applicable to Board members as well as all AACPS employees. AACPS
established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members who are appointed by
the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide advice on policy
implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any reported complaints
of ethics violations. According to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure
statements are required to be filed by Board members, candidates for the
Board, the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendents, and a number of other
administrators (such as school principals and agency buyers) by April 30th of
each year. Our review of the 469 employees required to submit financial
disclosure forms for calendar year 2012 disclosed that forms were submitted
as required with few exceptions.
AACPS Established a Confidential Hotline to Enable Employees and Others to
Report Suspected Fraud, Waste, or Mismanagement
During September 2010, the Board implemented a third-party hotline to
report allegations of financial fraud, waste, or abuse. The Board also
30

--- Page 33 ---
implemented procedures to track and monitor these allegations. According to
AACPS records, during the period September 2010 through March 2013, 11
separate allegations were received as a result of the hotline and our review of
one of these allegations disclosed that it was appropriately investigated by the
AACPS Office of Investigations In addition, AACPS has implemented
procedures to advertise and promote use of the hotline. For example, hotline
contact information is shown on its website, and is printed on purchase orders
that are used to procure goods and services from vendors.
Other Financial Controls
As previously mentioned, AACPS self-funds health care costs. AACPS uses a
third-party administrator to pay claims on behalf of plan members and their
dependents and pays an administrative fee for these services. Our findings in
the area of health care are addressed in Finding 4 of this report.
Our other work in this area disclosed that AACPS had established reasonable
cash investment and risk management practices.
31

--- Page 34 ---
32

--- Page 35 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Anne Arundel County
Public Schools (AACPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the AACPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the AACPS policies provided for the efficient use
of financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of AACPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on AACPS dated September 27, 2007, was limited to those
findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11
areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the AACPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the
direct control or management of the Anne Arundel County Board of Education.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by AACPS. We also
interviewed personnel at AACPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
33

--- Page 36 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).6
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of AACPS operations. We tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2011 through December 31,
2012. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits AACPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also used data extracted from AACPS’ automated financial system and
corporate purchasing card program for the purpose of testing expenditure and
payroll transactions. We performed various tests of the relevant data and
determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit.
AACPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to AACPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from February 2013 to November 2013. The
AACPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise AACPS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
6 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies or
practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
34

--- Page 38 ---
P a g e | 1
Legislative Financial Management Practices Audit Response
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1: AACPS did not use available features of its automated accounts payable and
procurement system to restrict and monitor user capabilities.
Recommendation 1.a: AACPS Response: AACPS follows a policy of granting capabilities on the
system to ensure sound financial controls on financial operations. However, AACPS also needs
to ensure that these controls are not overly restrictive and do not impact day‐to‐day operations
in case of the unavailability of key staff due to any reason. Therefore some redundancy in
access capabilities is granted to ensure sufficient coverage for normal day‐to‐day operation.
However, AACPS has reviewed the access issues raised during this audit and has taken action by
changing some employees’ access where it may no longer be warranted.
With regard to the two super‐users identified, AACPS has taken actions to ensure separation of
duties with regard to review and execution of EFT payments. New procedures have been
implemented so that the two individuals no longer review EFT payments but only execute them
after review of the EFT payments by other Finance Office staff. As a back‐up measure,
processing authority was granted to the four employees who are responsible for reviewing
documentation for payments under $15,000 and have capabilities for processing payments.
AACPS is reviewing the need for processing capabilities, which may be modified or eliminated.
The finance system software requires that AACPS designate a SYSTEMS ADMINISTRATOR ID in
the finance area that can be used to submit nightly jobs, nightly cycles, batch jobs, and carryout
other system‐related duties. The capabilities assigned to this ID pertain to the system
administrator function. The individual who is identified as having two IDs is the designated
systems administrator and is also the Lead Accountant with functional responsibility in the
accounting area. It would be difficult to have an individual in the accounting area with only
SYSTEMS ADMINSTRATOR ID since staff has functional responsibilities that require them to
have capabilities associated with their function.
Recommendation 1.b: AACPS Response: AACPS has implemented a process to review security
reports of user capabilities by the Supervisor of Finance.
Recommendation 1.c: AACPS Response: AACPS has implemented a process to review changes
to the vendor information recorded in the accounts payable systems. Employees updating the
finance system with vendor changes place original documentation into the shared drive. The
Technology Division created a data change report from the finance system. The Supervisor of
Finance verifies the source documentation against the change report on a quarterly basis using
sampling methodology.

--- Page 39 ---
P a g e | 2
Finding 2: AACPS did not adequately monitor a contract to develop an automated human
resources management and payroll system. Payments to the contractor totaled $4.8 million.
Recommendations 2.a: AACPS Response: The Request for Proposal process includes a
requirement for specification of deliverables and milestones. AACPS will strengthen that
language in future software solicitations to include tying payment to deliverables and
milestones. AACPS reserves the right to negotiate these terms in our best interests during the
project kickoff stage.
Recommendation 2.b: AACPS Response: AACPS agrees that better project management may
have mitigated certain payments to the contractor. Project management procedures were
strengthened when this issue was identified.
Recommendation 2.c: AACPS Response: AACPS will follow through with exercising its legal
options in consultation with and under the direction of the Board’s Attorney.
Finding 3: AACPS did not thoroughly evaluate purchasing card assignments to reduce the
number of unnecessary cards.
Recommendation 3.a: AACPS Response: Procedures are in place to review the inactivity of
cards. It is not unusual to have inactivity for six months due to cyclical purchasing patterns.
Procedures will be updated to ensure all accounts with inactivity of 12 or more months are
reviewed for termination.
Recommendation 3.b: AACPS Response: As noted in the audit report, AACPS is in the process
of implementing an allocation of expenditures which will allow cardholders to have only one
procurement card. This program is being evaluated to ensure that expenditures are not being
recorded just against the main account number, but are actually being redistributed to the
correct expenditure account number. In some cases, funding may be better managed by having
multiple cards.
Human Resources and Payroll
FINDING 4: AACPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and retiree health
care costs.
Recommendation 4 a: AACPS Response: AACPS will establish a procedure, as part of our
annual renewal process, for the health benefit plans to obtain the data required from to ensure

--- Page 40 ---
P a g e | 3
that the administrative fees have been calculated properly based on enrollment in the various
plan options, and that fees have been charged only for eligible members.
Recommendation 4.b: AACPS Response: AACPS is currently exploring a plan for conducting a
claims audit as a process improvement tool, and as a way to provide a comprehensive report
card on the management of our health care plans.
Recommendation 4.c: AACPS Response: Our contracted actuarial and benefit consulting firm
will monitor the performance standards that have been contractually agreed with each vendor
on a quarterly basis. At the end of each quarter, the vendor and consulting firm will review the
year to date performance with AACPS. At the end of the plan year, the consulting firm will
review a final accounting from the vendor and will calculate any payment due from the vendor.
FINDING 5: Certain users were assigned unneeded capabilities in the automated human
resources and payroll system, and reports of personnel and payroll changes were not
comprehensive.
Recommendation 5.a: AACPS Response: AACPS is currently upgrading the 20 plus year old
Human Resources Information System (HRIS) from a mainframe to web‐based version. The
upgrade, currently in the testing and implementation phase, has greater granularity for system
security access and better reporting options. In addition, the upgraded system access to HRIS is
tied to a user’s overall network access, a process which aligns an employee’s access rights
based on their employment status. Implementing a more comprehensive, role‐based, security
plan will permit AACPS to better address this matter.
Recommendation 5.b: AACPS Response: AACPS agrees that there should be regular reporting
and review of access capabilities assigned to system users. The HRIS system upgrade has
greater granularity for system security access that AACPS will be taking advantage of to address
this matter.
Recommendation 5.c: AACPS Response: AACPS is pleased that the auditors’ test of personnel
and payroll transactions did not reveal any unauthorized or questionable transactions. AACPS
currently has reports to examine changes to existing employee payroll records which are
reviewed by independent supervisory staff. However, they do not address new hires being
entered into the system.
AACPS’ current position control processes would prevent a permanent hire into a position
where an allocation is non‐existent. Additionally, the Budget Office monitors the position
control regularly comparing budgeted positions to authorized positions and then to filled
positions. While there is agreement that new hire entries and nonrecurring payroll payments
are an area in which improvements may prevent erroneous or improper transactions, we are
exploring its reporting capabilities for audit reports in the updated HRIS system that may assist
with this need.

--- Page 41 ---
P a g e | 4
Inventory Control and Accountability
FINDING 6: The AACPS equipment inventory policies lacked specificity and a complete
physical inventory had not been performed.
Recommendation 6.a: AACPS Response: AACPS agrees that the current written procedures
should be amended to include processes for complete inventories and timelines to be followed
for equipment and sensitive items.
Recommendation 6.b: AACPS Response: AACPS agrees that physical inventory should be
conducted within procedural specified timelines and will work to address this issue. AACPS will
review approaches to ensure compliance with the recommendations above. AACPS will amend
its Property Control Regulation and Manual to include the use of inventory variance reports
showing the loss rate of items in the inventory.
FINDING 7: The AACPS detail equipment records were not always accurate and
comprehensive.
Recommendation 7.a: AACPS Response: AACPS began Bar‐coding as a perpetual process after
the 2007 audit and continues today. Bar‐coding is mandated in the Property Control Manual
for sensitive, grant, and items greater than $5,000 and is physically done at the user level.
Serial numbers are also used as single item identifiers. The Property Control Office is in the
process of following up with the identified items where a serial number or other unique
identifier has not been recorded in the detailed records to obtain this information.
Recommendation 7.b: AACPS Response: AACPS defines “equipment” as “an item costing
$5,000 or more”. Certain sensitive items costing less than $5,000, but which are highly prone
to theft and having a useful life of greater than one year are also included in the Fixed Asset
Inventory listing. A memo that is posted on the employee intranet is updated and reissued
annually to remind employees on the definitions of equipment and sensitive items.
Current procedures require that identified employees (i.e. fiscal secretary, business manager)
add equipment and sensitive items using the Logistics Office’s ADD Inventory Form. P‐card
limits are generally set at $1,000 or less per transaction. P‐card Program procedures prohibit
the purchase of equipment or sensitive items. The Purchasing Office will initiate a process to
copy the Property Manager on any violation letters sent to cardholders.

--- Page 42 ---
P a g e | 5
Information Technology
Finding 8: Access and monitoring controls over critical databases and applications were not
sufficient to protect critical data.
Recommendation 8.a: AACPS Response: AACPS has made the requisite adjustments to
comply with this recommendation.
Recommendations 8.b: AACPS Response: AACPS has created a process to comply with this
recommendation.
Recommendation 8.c: AACPS Response: AACPS has created a process to comply with this
recommendation.
Recommendation 8.d: AACPS Response: AACPS will record that the documentation is
reviewed and will retain this documentation for future audit verification. As noted in a previous
response, the HRIS system upgrade has greater granularity for system security access and we
will be taking advantage of this capability to address this matter.
Finding 9: Administrative access to the AACPS network was not adequately controlled and
audit policies for monitoring the security of certain critical servers were not in effect.
Recommendation 9.a: AACPS Response: AACPS has made the requisite adjustments to
comply with this recommendation.
Recommendation 9.b: AACPS Response: AACPS has made the requisite adjustments to
comply with this recommendation.
Recommendation 9.c: AACPS Response: AACPS made the requisite adjustment and
implemented audit logs for member servers and all local computers. However, this resulted in
audit logs filling up local drives. The Help Desk received numerous calls as users were unable to
log‐in and perform daily activities. Therefore, AACPS has had to turn off audit logs until a
solution can be determined and implemented to restrict log size.
Finding 10: Malware protection on AACPS workstations was not comprehensive.
Recommendation 10.a: AACPS Response: AACPS has upgraded this product to now allow this
control and thus comply with this recommendation.

--- Page 43 ---
P a g e | 6
Recommendation 10.b: AACPS Response: AACPS has eliminated local administrative privileges
except for personnel that require such rights for their job duties.
Finding 11: The AACPS network was not properly secured.
Recommendation 11.a: AACPS Response: AACPS is working to segregate publicly accessible
servers in a separate protected network zone.
Recommendation 11.b: AACPS Response: AACPS is in the process of implementing a Network
Access Control solution which will address this recommendation.
Transportation Services
Finding 12: AACPS did not have formal targets and goals for revising bus routes or use
automated routing software to improve route efficiency.
Recommendation 12.a: AACPS Response: We agree that having optimal bus routing is
important, and we take great care to accomplish this through local knowledge, supervision,
parental communication, and discretion of professional staff. As mentioned in previous audits,
bus routes are determined by the geographic locations of students and schools, timing, and
travel factors. Since each student’s needs, location and school are unique, we are cautious
about implementing policies where strict application of them could cause unintended
consequences that could compromise student safety.
Recommendation 12.b: AACPS Response: We agree that obtaining and implementing an
automated routing software package could potentially result in greater routing efficiency. For
this reason, we’ve assigned a professional staff member to work with the Purchasing Office and
Division of Technology to explore this possibility. We are exploring this technology cautiously,
given our previous cancellation of a vendor software contract as noted on the previous audit,
and the routing software issues that other counties have experienced. An analysis of the
funding needed for this project as well as projected cost savings and other efficiency gains will
be undertaken.
Finding 13: Procedures and controls were not sufficient to ensure that contractors were paid
the proper amounts.
Recommendation 13: We recommend that AACPS ensure that procedures and controls over
payments to bus contractors are adequate. Specifically, we recommend that AACPS ensure
that:

--- Page 44 ---
P a g e | 7
Recommendation 13.a: AACPS Response: We agree that pricing components from winning
bids, as well as annual cost of living adjustments (COLAs) and monthly fuel prices should be
reviewed and signed off by staff other than the person entering these figures. A review process
has been instituted whereby staff other than the Fiscal Specialist reviews and signs off on the
bid prices, COLAs and fuel prices entered by the Fiscal Specialist.
Recommendation 13.b: AACPS Response: We agree that an independent review of time and
mileage entries made in WINTSS by Specialists should be made. An independent review using
statistical sampling is being implemented. We agree that the review process with regard to
contractor‐submitted time and mileage reports can be improved upon, and should include
written adjustments and documentation to support the time and mileage paid to contractors.
Supporting documentation for adjustments will be retained by AACPS staff.
Recommendation 13.c: AACPS Response: We are committed to providing appropriate levels
of access to WINTSS by all staff who receives access. Access for all users has been reviewed and
access has been amended for those users who necessitate read‐only access or no access at all.
Access to WINTSS is provided on an individual bases unique to individual users so that there are
not multiple users.
FINDING 14: Payments to contractors for bus transportation were not always properly
calculated and were not always in compliance with contract terms.
Recommendation 14: We recommend that AACPS ensure that payments to bus contractors
are proper and are paid in accordance with the contract terms.
Recommendation 14.a: AACPS Response: We agree that calculated mileage in WINTSS must
agree to the correct route mileage reported by the contractor and any changes that
Transportation staff makes to the contractor‐submitted mileage must be documented.
Recommendation 14.b: AACPS Response: We are committed to paying all bus contractors
their hourly rates in accordance with contract pricing. Contracts implemented subsequent to
the migration from BCPS to WINTSS have been paid according to their contract pricing,
including proper COLA adjustments.
Recommendation 14.c: AACPS Response: The flat 50 cents‐per‐hour rate increase identified in
the audit was authorized by the Board to address severe driver shortages and provide an
augmentation over the COLA to alleviate the parity issue whereby commercial driver hourly
rates were growing faster than the COLAs. We agree to review past practice of hourly rate
increases and avoid future increases that conflict with the terms of contracts.

--- Page 45 ---
P a g e | 8
Recommendation 14.d: AACPS Response: We agree to review the overpayments identified in
the audit and are evaluating the feasibility of payment recovery on a case‐by‐case basis. Some
recover payments have already been received.
Food Service Operations
FINDING 15: Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated as transactions could be
voided by cashiers without independent review or approval at the schools we reviewed.
Recommendation 15: AACPS Response: Cash receipts cannot always be segregated (as is
clearly the ideal practice) when the school site staff is limited to one person. Central Office
Administrative Staff is aware of these situations and reviews voids at these school sites. Staff
will continue to monitor voids on a site‐by‐site basis. Managers will also be directed to place a
note in the bank deposit report stating void complete with total dollar amount. Area Specialists
currently review bank deposit reports on a weekly basis. Monthly communication to the
Supervisor will be added to the review process. Printing multiple page reports to reflect
approved voids would not be beneficial, or cost effective.
Additionally, as of June 2014 all cashiers are required to obtain manager approval prior to
completing voids. The void function is now password protected. Passwords are confidential
and issued only to managers at the specific school site. Central Office Administration issue and
monitor these passwords.

--- Page 46 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Sandra C. Medeiros
Senior Auditors
Christopher D. Jackson
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Nicholas J. Caronna, CPA
Samuel Hur
Robert J. Smith, CPA
Staff Auditors