Title: Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund
Date: 01/31/2017
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150ac1
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:03:55.872309
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund
April 2025
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
April 21, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Emergency
Medical System Operations Fund (MEMSOF) for the period beginning April 1,
2020 and ending March 31, 2024. MEMSOF was established by State law to help
fund the State’s emergency medical services related to five different operations
through surcharges on motor vehicle registrations and certain driver moving
violations. State law designated the Comptroller of Maryland (COM) as the
administrator of MEMSOF.
Our audit did not disclose any findings that warrant mention in this report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by COM
and the other agencies involved with MEMSOF.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund Overview
The Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund (MEMSOF) was
established by Chapter 269 of the Laws of Maryland 1992 to help fund certain
operations of the State’s emergency medical services system. State law provides
that MEMSOF is a continuing, non-lapsing fund, which is not required to be
reverted to the State’s General Fund at fiscal year-end. The law further provides
that interest and earnings on MEMSOF are to be separately accounted for and
credited to MEMSOF. The law also designated the Comptroller of Maryland
(COM) as the administrator of MEMSOF.
MEMSOF Revenues
MEMSOF is funded by surcharges collected by the Motor Vehicle Administration
(MVA) and Judiciary. The majority of the funding is from the MVA surcharge of
$14.50 on motor vehicle registrations specified in the Transportation Article,
Section 13-954 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.1 The surcharges are
recorded on MVA records and transferred monthly to the COM with any accrued
interest. The other source of MEMSOF revenue is the $7.50 surcharge on certain
driver moving violation fines specified in the Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Article, Section 7-301 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. These surcharges are
collected and recorded by the Judiciary and transferred at fiscal year-end to MVA,
which transfers the funds to the COM. MEMSOF received total revenue of
approximately $97.9 million during fiscal year 2024 including $70.5 million
related to the aforementioned MVA surcharges and an additional $25.5 million
from the General Fund.2
MEMSOF Expenditures
State law provides that MEMSOF shall be used to provide funding for the
following five operations of Maryland’s Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
program and expenditures totaling approximately $98.1 million were allocated to
MEMSOF during fiscal 2024:
1 Chapter 718, Laws of Maryland 2024, effective July 1, 2024 increased registration surcharges for
vehicles to $40 per year, of which up to $24.50 shall be paid to MEMSOF.
2 The April 2023 Joint Chairmen’s Report included an additional $25.5 million in general funds to
MEMSOF for fiscal years 2024 and 2025 to provide additional funding to cover anticipated
shortfalls in the MEMSOF for those same fiscal years.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Department of State Police – Aviation Command
MEMSOF supports the medically oriented activities of the Maryland
Department of State Police (DSP) – Aviation Command (MSPAC). MSPAC
has both medically oriented and non-medically oriented functions (such as law
enforcement and homeland security flights). DSP allocates MSPAC costs to
MEMSOF based on the ratio of medically oriented functions to non-medically
oriented functions. Since fiscal year 2003, MSPAC costs have been allocated
80 percent to MEMSOF (medically oriented) and 20 percent to General Fund
appropriations (non-medically oriented). Based on our review of certain
MSPAC data, this allocation appears to be reasonable. MEMSOF expenditures
related to MSPAC totaled approximately $45.2 million during fiscal year 2024.
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems
The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) is
responsible for coordinating the delivery of Statewide emergency medical
services, licensing and certifying emergency medical service providers,
providing emergency medical service research and education, maintaining a
Statewide communication system, and regulating and licensing commercial
ambulances. MEMSOF expenditures related to MIEMSS totaled approximately
$18.6 million during fiscal year 2024.
Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund
Title 8, Subtitle 1 of the Public Safety Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland established the Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and
Ambulance Fund (Amoss Fund) for grants to local jurisdictions for the purchase
of fire and rescue equipment and building rehabilitation. The Maryland
Department of Emergency Management (MDEM)3 administers these grants.
Funds from MEMSOF are provided to the Amoss Fund for MDEM to provide
grants in accordance with the Public Safety Article. MEMSOF expenditures
related to the Amoss Fund totaled $15 million during fiscal year 2024.
Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute
The Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute (MFRI) is the State’s fire and
emergency service training agency responsible for the majority of basic level
pre-hospital training and education for EMS providers. MEMSOF funds are
appropriated to MFRI as part of the University of Maryland, College Park
budget. MEMSOF expenditures related to MFRI totaled approximately $10.7
million during fiscal year 2024.
3 Effective October 1, 2021, MEMA was renamed to be the Maryland Department of Emergency
Management (MDEM) and established the MDEM as a principal department of the Executive
Branch of State government.
4

--- Page 7 ---
R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center
The R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center (STC), operated by the University
of Maryland Medical System, is the core element of the State’s EMS system
and serves as the State’s Primary Adult Resource Center for the treatment of
trauma. MEMSOF funds are provided as an operating subsidy to STC through
the Maryland Health Care Commission, a unit of the Maryland Department of
Health. MEMSOF expenditures related to STC totaled approximately $8.6
million during fiscal year 2024.
Audit Coverage
The 2016 Joint Chairmen’s Report required OLA to perform a financial audit of
MEMSOF and expressed the intent of the General Assembly that MEMSOF be
added to the standard audit cycle. A letter from the Joint Chairmen, dated May 6,
2016, clarified the periodic audits should primarily focus on year-end closeout
transactions to ensure proper maintenance of the fund. As a result, our audit
primarily focused on closeout transactions for fiscal years 2021, 2022, and 2023
at two agencies4 using MEMSOF funds and COM’s maintenance of the fund.
In addition, we performed certain additional testing for MSPAC such as of the
cost allocation of expenditures between MEMSOF and the General Fund.
Furthermore, we reviewed the MVA surcharges collected (which represented the
largest source of revenue for the MEMSOF) and transferred to MEMSOF and the
propriety of certain MEMSOF expenditures. Our audit did not include reviewing
other aspects of these agencies which were subject to audit during our fiscal
compliance audits of the respective agencies.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the finding contained in our
preceding audit report dated February 19, 2021. See Figure 1 for the results of
our review.
4 The remaining three agencies either did not have or did not require closeout transactions.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
The General Accounting Division (GAD) did not ensure
agencies reverted unspent Maryland Emergency Medical
Finding 1 System Operations Fund (MEMSOF) funds resulting in Not repeated
the failure to identify one agency that did not revert funds
totaling $697,000 during fiscal years 2018 and 2019.
Findings and Recommendations
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of MEMSOF’s internal control. Our audit did not disclose any significant
instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations. Findings
that did not warrant inclusion in this report were separately communicated to the
MEMSOF.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the Comptroller of Maryland. Since
there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not necessary.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a fiscal compliance audit of the Maryland Emergency
Medical System Operations Fund (MEMSOF) for the period beginning April 1,
2020 and ending March 31, 2024. State law designated the Comptroller of
Maryland (COM) as the administrator of MEMSOF. Funds are collected by two
agencies, the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) and the Judiciary, and funds
are used by the five operations of Maryland’s Emergency Medical Services
program:
 Maryland Department of State Police – Aviation Command (MSPAC)
 Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS)
 Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund
 Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute
 R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
6

--- Page 9 ---
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
As prescribed by the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the objectives of a fiscal compliance audit are to examine
financial transactions, records and internal control, and to evaluate its compliance
with applicable State laws, rules, and regulations. In planning and conducting our
audit of MEMSOF, we focused our efforts on year-end closeout transactions and
COM – Administration and Finance Division processes in place to account for
and maintain the fund as directed by a letter from the Joint Chairmen, dated May
6, 2016.
Based on our assessment of significance and risk, we also performed certain
additional testing. Our audit did not include reviewing other aspects of these
operations which were subject to audit during our fiscal compliance audits of the
respective agencies.
Our assessment of internal controls was based on agency procedures and controls
in place at the time of our fieldwork. Our tests of transactions and other auditing
procedures were generally focused on the transactions occurring during our audit
period of April 1, 2020 to March 31, 2024 but may include transactions before or
after this period as we considered necessary to achieve our audit objectives.
To accomplish our audit objectives, our audit procedures included inquiries of
appropriate personnel, inspection of documents and records, tests of transactions,
and to the extent practicable, observations of the respective agencies’ operations.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgement,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected.
We also performed various data extracts of pertinent information from the State’s
Financial Management Information System (such as revenue and expenditure
data). The extracts are performed as part of ongoing internal processes
7

--- Page 10 ---
established by the Office of Legislative Audits and were subject to various tests to
determine data reliability. We determined that the data extracted from these
sources were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during this
audit.
We also extracted data from MVA’s vehicle registration system used to collect
vehicle registration surcharge. We performed various tests of the relevant data
and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit. Finally, we performed other auditing procedures that
we considered necessary to achieve our objectives. The reliability of data used in
this report for background or informational purposes was not assessed.
Each agency’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial
records; effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of
assets; and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
As provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to the agencies, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Our reports are designed to assist the Maryland General Assembly in exercising
its legislative oversight function and to provide constructive recommendations for
improving State operations. As a result, our reports generally do not address
activities we reviewed that are functioning properly.
8

--- Page 11 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Sporthi J. Carnelio
Senior Auditor
Daniel G. Johnson, CFE
Staff Auditor