Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Central Region Finance Office to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2013 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 03/05/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b1c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:01:15.752921
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to March 5, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s August 6, 2012 Audit Report on the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services -
Central Region Finance Office
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Inmate Funds
1a. We recommend that CRFO on a periodic basis, reconcile
the aggregate balance of individual inmate accounts in the
Maryland Offender Banking System (MOBS) with the
Not Resolved
corresponding records of the Comptroller of Maryland,
including the investigation and resolution of all
differences.
Equipment
3a. We recommend that CRFO comply with the requirements
of the Inventory Control Manual by properly maintaining Not Resolved
all equipment records on a current basis.
Recommendations are more fully described in Exhibit 2.

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 2 to March 5, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Findings Regarding Repeat Findings That Had Not Been Resolved
Inmate Funds
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 1a
We recommend that CRFO on a periodic basis, reconcile the aggregate balance of
individual inmate accounts in the Maryland Offender Banking System (MOBS) with the
corresponding records of the Comptroller of Maryland, including the investigation and
resolution of all differences (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
CRFO has not fully reconciled the aggregate balance of individual inmate accounts recorded in
MOBS with the corresponding records of the Comptroller of Maryland. DPSCS’s January 1,
2014 status report indicated that the reconciliation for the month of April 2013 was complete.
However, according to the April reconciliation prepared by CRFO, which we did not audit, there
was an unresolved difference of $341,927 with the balance in MOBS exceeding the balance in
the Comptroller’s records by that amount. Furthermore, although the status report anticipated
that reconciliations for May and June 2013 would be completed by January 31, 2014, at the time
of our review in February 2014, those reconciliations had not been completed.
Equipment
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 3a
We recommend that CRFO comply with the requirements of the Inventory Control Manual
by properly maintaining all equipment records on a current basis (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our August 6, 2012 audit report noted that the equipment records were not adequately
maintained, as required by the Manual. To address the related recommendation, in October
2013, CRFO conducted equipment inventory controls training for certain selected personnel.
The training objectives included, in part, reviewing key aspects of the Manual and reviewing
roles and responsibilities of property and accountable officers. In addition, CRFO recently
completed physical inventory counts at certain institutions, but the reconciliation of those counts
to the related equipment records were still in process. We were advised that the inventory counts
at the remaining institutions have been scheduled.