Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2010
Date: 01/24/2011
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b5a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:03:56.733099
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2010
January 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro January 24, 2011 Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Delegate Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator James C. Rosapepe, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2010. Our review of closeout transactions disclosed
general compliance with the applicable laws, regulations, and policies. However,
we determined that certain transactions pertaining to the following agencies were
not in compliance:
Maryland State Department of Education
Department of Human Resources
Department of Juvenile Services
Department of State Police
Generally, the non-compliant transactions we identified suggest that additional
State funds may be required to eliminate potential deficits. For example, accrued
revenues totaling $12.9 million could not be substantiated. If the revenues are not
available for these accruals, general fund appropriations (or deficiency
appropriations) may be needed to eliminate the resulting deficits. A summary of
our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
Four State agencies reported a total of $37.2 million in unprovided for payables as
of June 30, 2010 (Exhibit 2). Our review disclosed additional unprovided for
payables related to one State agency, totaling $4.9 million, which had not been
reported. The expenditures related to these unprovided for payables will have to
be funded with subsequent year appropriations (or through a deficiency
appropriation). According to an opinion of the Attorney General, this is not a
violation of State law if the General Assembly enacts a budget bill for the
subsequent year containing an appropriation that can be used to fund these
expenditures.

--- Page 4 ---
The agencies identified in this report generally agreed with our findings. The
primary purpose of this annual review is to alert the Maryland General Assembly
to significant financial and budgetary closeout practices that do not comply with
applicable laws, regulations, and policies. The issues identified during this
review, as well as relevant recommendations, will be fully addressed, as
appropriate, in our fiscal compliance audit reports on the applicable agencies. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of our
review by the Comptroller of Maryland’s General Accounting Division and by the
various State agencies.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 7
Findings 9
Closeout Transactions
Revenue Transactions
* Finding 1 – Accrued Federal Fund Revenues Totaling $12.9 Million 9
Could Not Be Substantiated by One Agency
* Finding 2 – Accrued Federal Revenues Related to Disallowances Totaling 10
$10 Million May Have to Be Paid With General Funds
* Finding 3 – A $5.3 Million General Fund Deficiency Appropriation May 11
Be Needed to Eliminate a Special Fund Deficit Balance
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 4 – Unfunded Year-End Liabilities Totaling $4.9 Million Were 12
Not Reported to GAD as Required
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2010 Closeout Review Findings by 13
State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables According 14
to the General Accounting Division
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closing transactions that have not been previously recorded in the State’s
accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR).
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the CAFR. In its
audit report dated December 10, 2010, applicable to the fiscal year ended June 30,
2010, the firm stated that the State’s basic financial statements presented fairly, in
all material respects, the respective financial position of the State of Maryland as
of June 30, 2010, and the respective changes in the financial position and cash
flows, for the year then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (referred to as GAAP).
The States’ CAFR states that, on a budgetary basis, the General Fund had an
unencumbered balance of approximately $344.0 million as of June 30, 2010
($441.4 million less encumbrances of $97.4 million). This represents an increase
of approximately $256.8 million from the balance reported at the preceding fiscal
year-end ($87.2 million). The CAFR also states that the State Reserve (Revenue
Stabilization Account) balance totaled $614.7 million as of June 30, 2010.
The budgetary General Fund balance does not reflect the effect of year-end
GAAP adjustments made to the State’s financial statements that were prepared on
a modified accrual basis of accounting. The net effect of the GAAP adjustments
recorded for fiscal year 2010, if they had been recognized on a budgetary basis,
would have been to reduce the aforementioned unencumbered budgetary General
Fund balance of $344 million. For example, year-end GAAP adjustments
included $37.2 million recorded for liabilities incurred by State agencies during
fiscal year 2010 for which general fund appropriations were not available to
finance the expenditures (see Exhibit 2). Other GAAP adjustments that would
have reduced the budgetary General Fund balance included an estimated $189.6
million additional liability for the State’s share of Medicaid costs for services
rendered during fiscal year 2010 and a $450 million reduction for State and local
income tax collections that were recorded as revenue for fiscal 2010 but were
applicable to future fiscal years.
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2010. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 23
Departments and independent agencies to ascertain if the transactions were
properly supported and made in accordance with State budgetary laws,
regulations, and accounting policies. We also reviewed, on a limited basis,
transactions processed subsequent to June 30, 2010 to determine if the
transactions were properly recorded (such as charged or credited to the proper
fiscal year). Also, we assessed the status of the findings identified during our
review of the budget closeout transactions for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009,
which were reported to the Joint Audit Committee in a special report dated
January 15, 2010. As part of our current review, we contacted various officials of
State agencies, as well as the independent accounting firm under contract with the
State to express an opinion on its financial statements. Our review excluded
public colleges and universities and transactions processed through the
Transportation Trust Fund because the related financial activity does not involve
the State’s General Fund and/or because agencies have the authority to retain
unspent funds at year-end.
Our conclusions for the aforementioned objective are contained on page 9 of this
report. Our follow-up review of the seven findings from the Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2009 disclosed that three of the
seven findings are repeated in this report.
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. Our fieldwork was conducted during the period from September 2010
to January 2011.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings
Closeout Transactions
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that four departments or units thereof were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions either were not properly recorded or could not be
substantiated.
Revenue Transactions
One State agency could not substantiate certain revenue transactions totaling
$12.9 million. That is, the agency could not provide evidence that it was entitled
to receive federal funding for the specific expenditures incurred. To the extent
that these funds are not received, the resulting deficits may require the use of
general funds. In addition, accrued federal revenues of two State agencies, that
totaled approximately $10 million and resulted from the disallowance of federal
expenditures, have been recorded and may have to be paid with general funds.
Finally, one State agency maintained a deficit special fund balance of $5.3 million
as a result of an improper closing transaction recorded in a prior year. The use of
general funds will likely be required to eliminate the deficit.
Expenditure Transactions
One State agency did not properly report unfunded liabilities totaling $4.9 million
to GAD as required.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1 on page 13 of this
report.
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
Accrued federal fund revenues totaling approximately $12.9 million could
not be substantiated.
Analysis
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) recorded
unsubstantiated revenues of approximately $12.9 million at June 30, 2010. These
9

--- Page 12 ---
related to unreimbursed federal fund expenditures for the Temporary Assistance
to Needy Families (TANF) grant. Since revenues are not available for these
accruals, which were recorded to cover expenditures that had previously been
incurred, general fund appropriations in subsequent years (or deficiency
appropriations) may be needed to eliminate the resulting deficit.
This accrued revenue (that is, federal fund receivable) relates to MSDE’s failure
to recover TANF grant expenditures incurred during fiscal years 2002 and 2003.
DHR, which processes the federal fund recoveries, advised that the TANF federal
fund grants for those years have already been fully used and are no longer
available to reimburse the MSDE expenditures. MSDE personnel informed us
that a deficiency appropriation has been requested to cover the outstanding $12.9
million deficit. This issue has been commented upon in our four preceding annual
budget closeout reports.
Finding 2
Accrued Federal revenues relate to disallowances totaling approximately $10
million may have to be paid with general funds.
Analysis
In fiscal year 2009, the Department of Human Resources (DHR) and the
Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) were informed by the United States
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) that certain Title IV-E grant
expenditures totaling $14.4 million were disallowed. Subsequent to appeals to
DHHS and other State agency actions, $10 million of the disallowance still exists
that may need to be paid with State general funds ($9.6 million related to DHR
and $400,000 related to DJS). This issue was commented upon in our preceding
annual budget closeout report.
The disallowances related to DHR totaled $9.6 million and were principally based
on the lack of a Title IV-E foster care pre-placement provision in DHR’s cost
allocation plan. Consequently, DHHS did not pay for foster care pre-placement
costs claimed on DHR’s Title IV-E reports for the quarters ending September 30,
2008 and December 31, 2008. DHR and DJS disagreed with the DHHS’
disallowances and appealed DHHS’ decisions to the DHHS Departmental
Appeals Board. DHR entered into a settlement agreement with DHHS, effective
October 10, 2010, to resolve all outstanding appeals related to these federal
disallowances. Under the agreement, DHR will not be allowed to recover any
portion of its $9.6 million disallowance which, therefore, may need to be paid
with State general funds.
10

--- Page 13 ---
The disallowances related to DJS originally totaled $4.8 million and were
principally based on DHHS claiming that DJS and DHR violated Maryland State
law by operating separate Title IV-E programs and that a proposed agreement
between DHR and DJS permitting DJS to perform certain Title IV-E activities
was deemed by DHHS to be inconsistent with applicable laws. Consequently,
DHHS did not pay for DJS’ Title IV-E costs claimed on the DHR Title IV-E
reports for the quarters ending June 30, 2008, September 30, 2008, and December
31, 2008. DJS applied $250,000 of other federal funds toward the disallowance
and, during fiscal year 2010, used a deficiency appropriation of $1.8 million of
general funds to further reduce the outstanding disallowance to $2.7 million as of
June 30, 2010. Subsequently, under the aforementioned settlement agreement,
DJS will be allowed to recover $2.3 million of the remaining $2.7 million
disallowance. The remaining $400,000 of the DJS disallowance may need to be
paid with State general funds.
The Comptroller of Maryland - General Accounting Division (GAD) was aware
of these disallowances and $12.3 million ($9.6 million related to DHR and $2.7
million related to DJS) was recorded as a decrease to general fund revenue by
GAD in the State’s fiscal year 2010 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.
Nevertheless, general funds may be needed to offset the expenditures incurred.
Finding 3
A general fund deficiency appropriation may be required to eliminate a
special fund deficit balance of $5.3 million.
Analysis
The Department of State Police (DSP) may require a general fund deficiency
appropriation to eliminate a special fund deficit balance of $5.3 million that
existed as of June 30, 2010. Specifically, DSP mistakenly recorded certain
transactions as both accrued revenue and actual revenue during fiscal year 2005.
This resulted in a special fund surplus of $5.6 million being reflected in the
records which DSP transferred to the general fund during the fiscal year 2005
closeout because it did not have legal authority to retain any balance in this
special fund. When this mistake was discovered during fiscal year 2006, DSP
was left with a special fund deficit balance of $5.6 million at the end of fiscal year
2006 due to the transfer of the apparent surplus to the general fund and the
subsequent automatic reversal of the previously recorded accrued revenue
transaction at the beginning of fiscal year 2006. Since fiscal year 2006, excess
revenues of $300,000 were retained in the fund, which reduced the negative
balance to $5.3 million. DSP attempted to obtain a deficiency appropriation in
2010 to resolve this situation; however, the deficiency appropriation was not
11

--- Page 14 ---
approved. This condition has been commented upon in our four preceding annual
budget closeout reports.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 4
Unfunded year-end liabilities totaling approximately $4.9 million were not
reported to the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division
(GAD).
Analysis
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) did not report
unfunded year-end general fund liabilities of approximately $4.9 million to GAD,
as required. General fund appropriations in subsequent years (or deficiency
appropriations) may be needed to eliminate these liabilities.
MSDE’s unfunded liabilities related to amounts due to the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for certain expenditures incurred by DHMH on
MSDE’s behalf. Specifically, at the end of fiscal year 2010, MSDE had not
reimbursed DHMH for payments to medical providers made by DHMH during
the third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2010. MSDE did not have sufficient
appropriations to fund the entire amount due. In this regard, MSDE encumbered
its remaining appropriation balance of $360,000 to apply towards the third
quarter, but there were no remaining appropriations to pay for the remainder of
the $5.2 million in outstanding invoices. MSDE failed to estimate and report
these unfunded liabilities to GAD during the fiscal year 2010 budget closeout
process, which ultimately totaled $4.9 million ($5.2 million less $360,000
encumbrance). According to MSDE, this has been a recurring issue where
appropriations from the subsequent fiscal year are used to fund the expenditures
of the preceding fiscal year.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2010 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Agency Finding Finding Description
Number
1 $12.9 million in unsubstantiated federal fund accrued
revenues were recorded.
Maryland State Department of
Education 4 $4.9 million of unfunded year-end liabilities were not
reported to GAD as required.
Department of Human Resources
and Department of Juvenile 2 $10 million in federal disallowances were outstanding.
Services
Department of State Police 3 $5.3 million special fund deficit balance exists.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables
According to the General Accounting Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Unprovided for Payables
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene $21,258,721
Maryland Higher Education Commission1 12,809,495
Department of Assessment and Taxation 2,425,398
State Board of Elections2 699,779
Total $37,193,393
1 During our previous closeout review, we disclosed that the Maryland Higher Education
Commission had underreported it’s unprovided for general fund payables to the General
Accounting Division (GAD). During our current closeout review, similar unprovided for
payables were reported to the GAD during the closing of fiscal year 2010.
2 During our previous closeout review, we disclosed that the State Board of Elections had not
reported approximately $2.0 million in unprovided for payables. During our current closeout
review, the unprovided for amount had decreased and was reported to the GAD during the
closing of fiscal year 2010.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Audit Team
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Terry S. Gibson
Roger E. Jaynes, III, CFE
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Elaine D. Portnoy
Athenia M. Rock, CFE
Robert A. Wells, CPA
Edward J. Welsh
Senior Auditors
Jason M. Goldstein
Julia M. King
Michael A. Klausmeier
Michael J. Murdzak, CPA
Alexander M. Prodey
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Adam M. Auerback
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA