Title: Garrett County Public Schools
Date: 09/17/2010
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d36cc9d72404c150a18
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:43:04.267722
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit Report
Garrett County Public Schools
September 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
September 17, 2010
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Garrett County
Public Schools (GCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. GCPS is the fourth
smallest public school system in Maryland based on the number of students
enrolled. The educational services are delivered in 15 schools, with fiscal year 2009
expenditures of $60.5 million. The objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether
GCPS procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its
assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed that, in many cases, GCPS had procedures and controls in place
to ensure the safeguarding of assets and the efficient use of financial resources.
Nevertheless, our report contains 22 recommendations to GCPS to enhance controls
and to implement best practices used to improve operations in such areas as
student transportation, procurement, and payroll. For example, GCPS had not
established comprehensive procurement policies and certain individuals were
assigned unnecessary and incompatible capabilities pertaining to the processing of
vendor payments. GCPS also did not have a written policy establishing the criteria for
calculating the bus contractors’ table of payment rates, which included payments for
the cost of the vehicle, bus driver wage rates, and fuel and maintenance cost
reimbursements. Also, GCPS should establish better controls over critical
information technology systems and verify dependent eligibility for employee health
care programs.

--- Page 4 ---
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page i, immediately following
this cover letter, and our audit scope, objectives and methodology are explained on
page 55. GCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by GCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
Executive Summary
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted an audit to evaluate
the effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management
practices of the Garrett County Public Schools (GCPS) in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. State law requires the Office to
conduct such an audit of each of the 24 public school systems in
Maryland and provides that the related audit process be approved
by the Joint Audit Committee. Since the Committee approved the
audit process in September 2004, we have issued audit reports
related to 21 school systems; GCPS represents the twenty-second
to date. The approved process included 11 functional areas to be
audited at each system. The following are summaries of the
findings in these areas at GCPS.
Revenue and Billing Cycle (see pages 7 through 9)
According to GCPS’ audited June 30, 2009 financial statements,
$56.6 million in revenue was received from all sources during fiscal
year 2009, the majority of which was received via electronic fund
transfers from other governmental entities. Procedures and
controls for significant revenue sources and for accounts receivable
were found to be adequate.
Federal Funds (see pages 11 through 13)
Annually, GCPS is subject to an audit of its federally-funded
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, a requirement of
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). Due to parallels between that work and the scope of
our audit, we placed significant reliance on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2009 grant activity, for which
reported expenditures totaled $4.7 million. The related report
stated that GCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. In addition,
with respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the
operation of, major federal programs, the auditors reported no
matters considered to be material weaknesses and no significant
deficiencies.
i
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 6 ---
Furthermore GCPS has processes for the identification of children
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services and for recovering the
related costs. GCPS participated in the E-Rate program, which
provides financial assistance to schools for telecommunications
expenses.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle (see pages 15
through 18)
According to GCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled
approximately $14 million during fiscal year 2009. GCPS used
existing governmental contracts as a way to obtain discounts and
reduce procurement costs and had appropriate processes in place
to control travel expenditures. However, GCPS needs to develop
comprehensive procurement policies and ensure that goods and
services are obtained through competitive procurement processes.
In addition, GCPS should improve controls over its automated
vendor invoice processing and payment application.
Human Resources and Payroll (see pages 19 through 21)
GCPS employed 643 full-time equivalent employees as of October
2008, and payroll and benefit costs during fiscal year 2009 totaled
$46.5 million. GCPS uses a centralized hiring and approval process
to help control payroll costs. GCPS should improve controls over its
automated human resources and payroll systems. Although GCPS
had implemented workforce planning for teachers and other
instructional personnel, such planning was not comprehensive since
it did not address the needs and processes for non-instructional
personnel.
Inventory Control and Accountability (see pages 23
through 24)
GCPS should improve its policies and procedures to ensure that
accountability and control is effectively maintained for its
equipment inventory. In addition, procedures for centrally
monitoring textbook inventory need to be improved. According to
GCPS’ audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2009, the
capital equipment inventory had an undepreciated cost of $2.9
million.
ii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 7 ---
Information Technology (see pages 25 through 27)
GCPS maintains and administers a computer network, computer
operations, and a number of significant administrative and
academic-related information system applications. A master
technology plan, which is periodically updated to address current
and future school needs, has been developed. GCPS, however,
needs to improve computer system access and security procedures,
and develop a comprehensive disaster recovery plan.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance (see pages 29 through 34)
GCPS maintains 15 schools and several other facilities (such as
administration and support offices) with a staff of 48 custodial and
8 maintenance personnel. GCPS uses a comprehensive and public
process to plan for construction and renovation of school facilities.
Plans are long-term, updated annually, and reflect input from the
Board. However, GCPS should establish a performance
measurement system and an energy management program to
manage its maintenance operations and control costs. GCPS
should also establish formal review and approval requirements for
construction change orders and establish criteria for determining
when a formal evaluation of school facility usage should be
initiated.
Transportation Services (see pages 35 through 41)
GCPS is responsible for the safe transportation of approximately
4,400 eligible students, of which one percent are disabled.
GCPS uses several best practices to increase the efficiency of
transporting students, such as staggering school start and stop
times so buses can provide multiple trips on the same day.
However, GCPS should use automated routing software to help
efficiently plan bus routes and develop a written policy establishing
the criteria for determining bus contractor payment rates. GCPS
should also reevaluate the formula used to determine fuel
payments to bus contractors, because it appears to result in
unnecessarily higher payments (for example, $279,000 in school
year 2008-2009). Also, GCPS should perform an analysis to
determine if it is cost beneficial to continue outsourcing its
iii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 8 ---
transportation services. In addition, GCPS should establish
performance measures to evaluate its transportation operations.
Food Services Operations (see pages 43 through 47)
GCPS currently uses a number of best practices in its food services
operations. For example, it uses available USDA commodities and
has procedures in place designed to maximize participation in the
National School Meal Program. However, GCPS should improve
controls over the procurement of food supplies and analyze food
operations to determine whether efficiency could be improved.
School Board Operations and Oversight (see pages 49
through 52)
The five-member Board has adopted policies governing certain
operations of the Board and GCPS, and exercised oversight of
financial activities through independent audits. To enhance
oversight, the Board should consider establishing an internal audit
function and a confidential reporting process to receive reports of
possible fraud, waste, or mismanagement.
Other Financial Controls (see pages 53 through 54)
GCPS has appropriate practices in place to govern its risk
management. However, GCPS should establish sufficient controls
to verify the propriety of its health care costs and develop a written
cash management policy.
iv
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 9 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary i
Background Information 5
Oversight 5
Statistical Overview 5
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2009 Activity 6
Chapter 1: Revenue and Billing Cycle 7
Background 8
Controls Over Revenue and Billing Cycle Activity Were Generally Adequate 9
for Significant Revenue Types
Chapter 2: Federal Funds 11
Background 12
GCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over Federal Grants and 12
Complied With Federal Grant Requirements
Procedures Were in Place to Identify All Students Eligible for Medicaid 12
Services and to Obtain Federal Cost Reimbursements
GCPS Participated in the Federal E-Rate Program 13
Chapter 3: Procurement and Disbursement Cycle 15
Background 15
GCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its Procurement 16
Needs and Control Travel Costs
GCPS Should Develop Comprehensive Procurement Policies 16
and Procedures
GCPS Had Not Established Adequate Invoice Processing and 17
Payment Controls
GCPS Should Obtain Goods and Services Through Documented 17
Competitive Procurement Processes
Recommendations 17
1
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 10 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 4: Human Resources and Payroll 19
Background 19
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need to Be 20
Strengthened
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include Non-Instructional 21
Positions
Recommendations 21
Chapter 5: Inventory Control and Accountability 23
Background 23
Existing Controls and Procedures Over Equipment Should Be Improved 24
Textbook Tracking Procedures Should Be Enhanced 24
Recommendations 24
Chapter 6: Information Technology Services 25
Background 25
Technology Plans Were Developed to Address Current and Future 26
Needs of GCPS
Steps Should Be Taken to Properly Secure IT Applications 26
GCPS Should Develop a Comprehensive Disaster Recovery Plan 27
Recommendations 27
2
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 11 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 7: Facilities Construction, Renovation, and 29
Maintenance
Background 29
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance the 30
Efficiency and Effectiveness of the GCPS Facilities and
Maintenance Department
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to Increase the 31
Effectiveness of Maintenance and Custodial Operations
GCPS Should Institute Certain Controls for its Construction Program 32
GCPS Should Establish Criteria to Trigger a Formal Evaluation 33
of School Facility Usage
Recommendations 34
Chapter 8: Transportation Services 35
Background 35
Several Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance Student 36
Transportation Services
Bus Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced and Routing Software 37
Should Be Used
Bus Contractor Rates Paid Were Not Based on Documented Criteria 38
More Can Be Done to Help Ensure Cost-Effective Operations 39
Control Over Payments to Bus Contractors Should Be Enhanced 39
Performance Should Be Measured and Reported Regularly to the Board 40
Recommendations 40
3
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 12 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 9: Food Services Operations 43
Background 43
Certain Best Practices Were in Place 45
Internal Controls Over Purchasing of Food Supplies Need to Be Improved 46
GCPS Should Analyze Operations to Improve Efficiency 46
Recommendations 47
Chapter 10: School Board Operations and Oversight 49
Background 49
Certain Oversight Has Been Put in Place Regarding GCPS Operations 51
The Board Should Take Additional Steps to Assist in Governance 51
of GCPS
Recommendation 52
Chapter 11: Other Financial Controls 53
Risk Management Best Practices Were in Place 53
GCPS Should Take Steps to Verify the Propriety of Health Care Costs 53
GCPS Should Develop a Written Investment of Cash Management 54
Policy
Recommendations 54
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 55
Response of Garrett County Public Schools Appendix
4
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 13 ---
Background Information
Oversight
Garrett County Public Schools (GCPS) is governed by a local school
board, consisting of five elected members and one non-voting
student member. The vast majority of GCPS funding is provided by
the State and the Garrett County government. In addition, the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) exercises
considerable oversight through the establishment and monitoring of
various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. MSDE also works with GCPS to comply with the
requirements and mandates of the federal No Child Left Behind Act
of 2001. Oversight by the Garrett County government is limited,
although the GCPS annual operational and capital budgets require
County approval.
Statistical Overview
According to MSDE student enrollment records, GCPS is the fourth
smallest school system based on student enrollment among the 24
public school systems in Maryland. From fiscal year 2000 through
2009, the total full-time regular and special education pupil
population has decreased 11.3 percent from 4,989 to 4,425 with
projected decreases to 4,130 by 2017. For the 2009-2010 school
year, GCPS had 15 schools, consisting of 11 elementary, 2
intermediate, and 2 high schools. According to the fiscal year 2009
audited financial statements, total expenditures were $60.5 million.
The largest expenditure category is salaries and wages, including
benefits, which accounted for approximately 77 percent of total
expenditures during fiscal year 2009. GCPS budgeted full-time
positions in fiscal year 2009 totaled 643, which consisted of 444
instructional and 199 non-instructional employees.
Certain statistical information contained in this report was taken
from unaudited reports distributed by MSDE and represents the
most current comparable information available at the time of our
5
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 14 ---
audit. These reports are based on self-reported data from the 24
Maryland public school systems, and MSDE does not warrant the
comparability or completeness of the data.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2009 Activity
Annually, GCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its fiscal year-end financial statements.
Additionally, the auditor conducts what is referred to as a Single
Audit of GCPS federal grant programs (as required by federal
regulations). The two resulting audit reports for the 2009 fiscal year
were issued in September 2009. Neither report disclosed any
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies on GCPS record
keeping, processes, and controls.
6
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 15 ---
Chapter 1
Revenue and Billing Cycle
According to GCPS’ audited financial statements for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2009, $56.6 million of revenue was received by
GCPS during fiscal year 2009. Due to similarities between the work
of the independent certified public accounting firm that audited
GCPS financial statements and the scope of our audit in this area,
we placed significant reliance on the results of the audit of the fiscal
year 2009 financial statements for revenue transactions, including
State, local, and federal sources and other sources of revenue (such
as student activity fund cash receipts of $1.2 million), and for
accounts receivable (for example, amounts due from other
governments). The firm’s procedural review and testing disclosed
no material weaknesses1 and no significant deficiencies.2 Such
testing included the most significant revenue types—the majority of
which related to electronic fund transfers from other government
entities, as well as school activity funds and food service cash
receipts.
1 A material weakness is a significant deficiency, or a combination of significant
deficiencies, that results in more than a remote likelihood that a material
misstatement of the financial statements (or, with respect to Single Audit, material
noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program) will not
be prevented or detected by an entity’s internal control.
2 A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or combination of control
deficiencies, that adversely affects the entity’s ability to initiate, authorize, record,
process, or report financial data reliably in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles such that there is more that a remote likelihood that a
misstatement of the entity’s financial statements that is more than inconsequential
will not be prevented or detected by the entity’s internal control. With respect to
Single Audit, a significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or combination of control
deficiencies, that adversely affects the entity’s ability to administer a federal
program such that there is more than a remote likelihood that noncompliance
with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program that is more than
inconsequential will not be prevented or detected by the entity’s internal
control.
7
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 16 ---
Background
GCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State,
Garrett County, and the federal government. Other sources include
receipts from the sale of food, facility rentals, and interest income.
Chart 1 (see below) shows the breakdown of GCPS fiscal year 2009
revenues of $56.6 million by major source.
Chart 1
Sources of Fiscal Year 2009 Revenues
($56.6 Million)
Garrett
County
$23,535,535
42%
Federal
$4,036,882
7% State of
Maryland
$28,736,910
Other
50%
$305,345
1%
Source: GCPS fiscal year 2009 audited financial
statements and supporting GCPS records
In addition to the revenues in Chart 1, schools also collected funds
for various purposes, such as student activity groups including
yearbook and student activity funds.3 These school activity funds
are accounted for separately by each school and are reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. According to the
3 The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that the school activity fund is
used only for intended purposes by those to whom the assets belong. Receipts
for the school activity fund are not included in the $56.6 million revenue total
because the Board cannot use these assets to finance its operations.
8
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 17 ---
audited financial statements, fiscal year 2009 school activity fund
receipts totaled $1.2 million, and the June 30, 2009 balance was
$566,430.
Controls Over Revenue and Billing Cycle Activity Were
Generally Adequate for Significant Revenue Types
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified
public accounting firm that audited the GCPS financial statements
and the scope of our audit in this area, we placed significant
reliance on the results of the independent audit of the fiscal year
2009 financial statements. The auditor’s procedural review and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies
regarding the collection of accounts receivable or revenues from
local, State, federal and other sources (such as food service
operations), including electronic fund transfer transactions. Student
activity funds and cafeteria cash operations were also audited by
the firm, including a review of internal controls and bank account
reconciliations. The independent auditors identified no material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies over these funds.
Recommendations
None
9
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 18 ---
10
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 19 ---
Chapter 2
Federal Funds
Annually, GCPS is subject to an audit of its federally funded grant
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, and required by
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). The report on the audit of fiscal year 2009 federal
grant activity was issued by an independent certified public
accounting firm on September 29, 2009.
In that report, the auditor stated that GCPS complied, in all material
respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal grant
programs. In addition, with respect to internal controls over
compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors noted no matters considered to be material weaknesses
and no significant deficiencies.
GCPS had established an adequate procedure to identify children
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized4 services, and had adequate
procedures to ensure that the related Medicaid reimbursements
were actually received. GCPS also participated in the federal E-Rate
program, which provides discounts for school systems related to
telecommunications and Internet access.
4 The Federal Medical Assistance Program, or Medicaid, is not a grant program
under Circular A-133 and is not included in the Single Audit.
11
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 20 ---
Background
GCPS receives funds primarily from the State, Garrett County, and
the federal government. Most funds received from Garrett County
and from the State are unrestricted; however, federal funds are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the
School Lunch Program or Special Education). According to the
audited Schedule of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2009 expenditures
of federal award funds totaled $4.7 million.
GCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over
Federal Grants and Complied With Federal Grant
Requirements
Because of the accounting firm’s work on GCPS federal fund
expenditures, we relied on the auditor’s results. Besides expressing
an opinion on GCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure’s impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2009
required Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant-related expenditures). In its report dated September
29, 2009, the firm stated that GCPS complied, in all material
respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal grant
programs. In addition, with respect to internal controls over
compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors noted no material weaknesses and no significant
deficiencies.
Procedures Were in Place to Identify All Students
Eligible for Medicaid Services and to Obtain Federal
Cost Reimbursements
GCPS had established adequate processes in place to identify
students eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services and to recover
the related costs. GCPS used listings from the Maryland
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene of children whose
families were participating in Medicaid to identify eligible students.
The lists were regularly compared to the GCPS student information
system to identify newly-eligible students and to establish the
continued eligibility for previously identified students. In addition
12
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 21 ---
GCPS ensures that all services provided are billed and costs are
recovered. According to GCPS records, total Medicaid payments
received for FY 2009 were $374,754.
GCPS Participated in the Federal E-Rate Program
GCPS had a process in place to request and receive reimbursement
for technology expenditures from the federal School and Libraries
Universal Service Program (E-Rate). GCPS received $130,199 in
federal E-Rate funding for fiscal year 2009. The E-Rate program
provides funding to schools for telecommunications expenses (such
as, Internet access). The funding is based on the level of poverty
and the rural status of the school district.
Recommendations
None
13
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 22 ---
14
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 23 ---
Chapter 3
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
GCPS often used existing governmental contracts (referred to as
“piggybacking”) as a way to obtain discounts and reduce
procurement costs and had established policies and procedures to
control travel costs. However, GCPS needs to develop
comprehensive procurement policies. In addition, GCPS needs to
improve controls over its automated vendor invoice processing and
payment application. In this regard, numerous employees were
assigned incompatible system capabilities, including the ability to
post payment transactions, add vendors, and print checks. Also,
goods and services were not always obtained through a competitive
bidding process.
Background
GCPS uses an automated system for purchasing goods and services
and for processing and paying the related invoices. Requisitions are
manually prepared by departments and are subject to supervisory
approval within the requesting departments. Purchase orders,
contracts, solicitations, and bids are usually handled by the finance
office with the exception of construction and other facility related
acquisitions. Purchases of goods over $25,000 are required to be
formally bid, and are required to be approved by the area supervisor
and the Director of Finance. In addition, contracts over $25,000
are to be publicly bid and approved by the Board.
15
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 24 ---
The ordering department or school documents the receipt of goods
and services by signing a receiving report, which is forwarded to the
accounting department where an employee ensures that the
purchase order, packing slip, and invoice are in agreement. Vendor
payments are then processed on the automated system by the
finance department. According to GCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $14 million during fiscal year 2009.
GCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its
Procurement Needs and Control Travel Costs
GCPS had instituted certain best practices to enhance the cost
effectiveness of its procurements. These include “piggybacking”
onto contracts already procured by the State and other local
governments, and participating in cooperative purchasing
organizations. These practices saved GCPS certain costs
associated with the procurement of the contracts and may provide
larger discounts because of the combined purchasing power of
multiple entities.
Furthermore, GCPS had established adequate policies and
procedures to control employee travel costs, including requirements
that all travel reimbursements be approved by supervisors, that
expenses be documented with itemized receipts, and that
expenses, such as meals and mileage, be subject to certain limits.
Travel expenditures for fiscal year 2009 totaled approximately
$400,000 according to GCPS records.
GCPS Should Develop Comprehensive Procurement
Policies and Procedures
GCPS’ policies did not adequately address the majority of
procurements that it made. Specifically, while GCPS had developed
formal procurement policies to address the acquisition and approval
of architectural and engineering services and food purchases, it had
not developed such policies for any other types of goods and
services. For example, although we were advised that, for these
other types of purchases, Board approval was generally required for
contracts over $25,000, this requirement was not specified in GCPS
policies. Comprehensive procurement policies should, at a
minimum, specify the acceptable procurement methods (such as
16
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 25 ---
sealed bidding, sole source) for all types of procurements, when
contracts should be in writing, the mandatory contract provisions
and the related approval requirements, such as Board approval.
GCPS Had Not Established Adequate Invoice
Processing and Payment Controls
GCPS had not established adequate controls over its automated
invoice processing application. Specifically, we noted that eight
employees had been assigned system capabilities that allowed
them to perform critical incompatible functions (such as entering
and posting payment transactions, adding vendors, authorizing the
disbursement of funds, and printing checks). As a result, improper
or erroneous transactions could be processed without detection.
GCPS Should Obtain Goods and Services Through
Documented Competitive Procurement Processes
Our test of seven procurements of goods and services (each over
$25,000) totaling $939,000 disclosed deficiencies related to four
procurements. Specifically, there was no Board approval for two
procurements totaling $123,855, one procurement totaling
$33,437 was not competitively bid, and one procurement totaling
$48,505 was not publicly advertised. In addition, for one of these
four procurements, GCPS did not have a written contract. Rather,
the vendor had been providing these services (trash removal) for
the prior 12 years without such services and related costs being
rebid or reevaluated for cost effectiveness. Payments to the vendor
totaled approximately $50,000 during fiscal year 2009.
Recommendations
1. GCPS should develop procurement policies that address all
categories of goods and services purchases, and specify the
procurement methods to be used, when contracts should be in
writing, the mandatory contract provisions and the approval
requirements, including when Board approval is required (for
example, procurements over a specified amount).
17
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 26 ---
2. GCPS should improve controls over invoice processing by
segregating incompatible functions and assigning critical system
functions to only those employees who need the capabilities to
perform their job duties.
3. GCPS should obtain goods and services through a properly
documented competitive procurement process. If a competitive
procurement process is not deemed appropriate (such as when
only one vendor can provide the required services), then
documentation justifying the decision should be maintained.
18
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 27 ---
Chapter 4
Human Resources and Payroll
GCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources
information, to record employee time and track leave, and to
process and record payroll transactions. In addition, GCPS uses a
centralized hiring and approval process to help control payroll costs.
However, GCPS should address certain procedural deficiencies with
respect to payroll processing. These deficiencies included the
assignment of unnecessary and incompatible system capabilities to
certain personnel on the GCPS payroll system and the lack of
supervisory review of certain payroll transactions. Additionally,
although GCPS had implemented workforce planning, it did not
address the needs and processes for employees other than
teachers and related instructional positions.
Background
Payroll costs represent the largest single cost component in the
GCPS budget. According to GCPS records for fiscal year 2009,
salary, wage, and benefit costs totaled $46.5 million. As of October
2008, GCPS had 643 full-time equivalent employees, of which 199
(31 percent) were non-instructional. The 6.9 to 1 ratio of GCPS
students to full-time equivalent employees (both instructional and
non-instructional) is similar to other similarly sized school systems
(see Table 1 on the following page).
GCPS uses an automated integrated human resources and payroll
system to maintain human resources information, record employee
time, and track leave usage. The system automatically generates
19
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 28 ---
biweekly time records, and any adjustments are processed by
central payroll personnel. The system generates payroll checks and
direct deposit advices. Payroll processing involves both automated
processes (such as compiling leave and running edit reports) and
manual processes (such as data entry of new employee
information).
Table 1
Comparison of Student to Employee Ratios – Fall 2008 (Unaudited)
Number of Full-
Number of Student to
Time Equivalent
School System Students Employee
Employees
(as of September 30, Ratio
2008) (as of October 1,
2008)
Garrett Co. 4,425 643 6.9 to 1
Talbot Co. 4,419 607 7.3 to 1
Caroline Co. 5,513 781 7.1 to 1
Dorchester Co. 4,560 696 6.6 to 1
Somerset Co. 2,912 475 6.1 to 1
Source: MSDE 2008-2009 Fact Book, MSDE Student /Staff Publications
Note: School systems selected for comparison are those with student enrollments
closest in number to GCPS.
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need
to Be Strengthened
GCPS did not establish adequate internal control over its automated
human resource and payroll system and related processes.
 Seven employees had been assigned certain incompatible
human resources and payroll system capabilities, as well as
capabilities that were not required for their job responsibilities.
These critical human resources and payroll functions included
adding and deleting employees, changing employee salaries,
entering time and attendance information, preparing checks,
and preparing the electronic file for direct deposits. As a result,
improper or erroneous transactions could be processed without
detection.
20
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 29 ---
 Information (such as leave, employee data, and salary) and
transactions processed each pay period were not independently
reviewed or approved after initial recordation. This could allow
for inaccurate adjustments or unauthorized payments to
employees.
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include
Non-Instructional Positions
Although GCPS had implemented workforce planning for
instructional positions, GCPS should expand its workforce planning
efforts to include non-instructional positions. As of June 30, 2009
24 percent of GCPS 668 employees are currently eligible to retire.
Approximately 34 percent of GCPS employees are non-instructional.
The GCPS Master Plan sets the strategic direction and provides
coordination and focus for initiatives to address challenges faced by
GCPS. The Plan includes a number of objectives and strategies to
address human resource needs—which is evidence of workforce
planning. However, it addresses only the recruitment and retention
of highly-qualified instructional staff (that is, teachers and certain
instructional aides).
Non-instructional positions play a key role in the ultimate success of
GCPS in providing quality education and, therefore, should be
included in workforce planning.
Recommendations
4. GCPS should improve controls over the human resources and
payroll system by segregating incompatible functions and
assigning critical system functions to only those employees who
need the capabilities to perform their job duties. In addition,
GCPS should ensure that all critical payroll-related transactions
and information recorded in the system are reviewed and
approved, at least on a test basis, by an employee independent
of the payroll processing function using supporting
documentation.
5. GCPS should expand its workforce planning to include key non-
instructional positions in critical operational units.
21
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 30 ---
22
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 31 ---
Chapter 5
Inventory Control and Accountability
Our audit disclosed that GCPS has developed written procedures
and policies for the acquisition and disposal of assets. However,
GCPS could improve its controls and procedures which govern
accountability over its equipment inventory. Additionally, GCPS
should enhance its procedures over tracking textbook inventories.
Background
According to GCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30,
2009, the undepreciated cost of capital equipment was $2.9
million. Equipment items include computers, audio and video
items, and various other items. All furniture and equipment items
with a cost of $500 or greater are to be included in the inventory
records. Generally, GCPS orders materials and supplies on an as-
needed basis and does not maintain a central inventory location.
23
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 32 ---
Existing Controls and Procedures Over Equipment
Should Be Improved
There was an inadequate separation of duties between custody and
physical inventory responsibilities. Specifically, even though an
employee at each school was responsible for conducting annual
physical inventories, we were advised that these employees allowed
the equipment custodians (the teachers) to account for those items
in their custody. Furthermore, GCPS did not verify the accuracy of
the inventory counts reported by the employees, as recommended
by the Government Finance Officers Association. As a result,
assurance was lacking that the physical inventory counts were
accurate.
Textbook Tracking Procedures Should Be Enhanced
While GCPS had established formal procedures for selecting and
purchasing textbooks, the processes established to maintain a
comprehensive inventory of textbooks need improvement.
Textbooks are inventoried within the individual schools; however, no
centralized process existed for tracking overall inventory levels, to
assess accountability at the individual schools and to ensure that
excess textbooks are redistributed among the schools before
making new purchases. During fiscal years 2008 and 2009,
textbook expenditures totaled approximately $858,000 according to
GCPS records.
Recommendations
6. GCPS should separate inventory custody and physical inventory
responsibilities, or independently verify, at least on a test basis,
the accuracy of the completed equipment inventory counts
performed by the equipment custodians.
7. GCPS should enhance existing procedures governing textbook
accountability by maintaining a comprehensive, centralized
inventory, and using the results of textbook physical inventories
to monitor accountability by the schools and to ensure that
excess books are redistributed among schools before
purchasing new textbooks.
24
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 33 ---
Chapter 6
Information Technology Services
GCPS maintains and administers a computer network, with Internet
connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks
to the computer resources located at the GCPS central offices.
GCPS has established a written technology plan, which includes a
comprehensive assessment of the technical needs of the schools.
The plan provides a vision and mission for technology in GCPS and
includes measurable goals and objectives.
However, we identified several areas in need of improvement.
GCPS needs to strengthen its policies and procedures over
passwords and accounts, and data back-up. GCPS should monitor
security events involving critical servers, improve physical security
for the server room, and develop a comprehensive disaster recovery
plan.
Background
GCPS operates a wide area network connecting the various schools
within Garrett County. The GCPS Resource Center maintains and
administers the GCPS network, the financial management
information application, and other general computer operations.
The GCPS student information system is hosted and maintained by
a contractor.
25
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 34 ---
Technology Plans Were Developed to Address Current
and Future Needs of GCPS
GCPS has developed a written technology plan, which includes a
comprehensive assessment of the technology needs of the schools.
The plan identifies each school’s information technology (IT) needs
and the actions to be taken to address those needs. The plan also
includes measurable goals and objectives, and addresses
professional development and IT related budgets. The plan is
periodically updated and monitored for implementation status of
identified actions.
Steps Should Be Taken to Properly Secure IT
Applications
Improvements are needed to improve security over data
and programs – Our review disclosed several deficiencies in
computer security which increased the vulnerability of certain GCPS
automated systems, programs, and data. Enhancements should be
made to existing procedures to ensure that controls over computer
resources are appropriate. For example, for one critical application,
automatic password expirations and minimum password length (to
make the passwords more difficult to hack) were not enforced; for
one critical server, password expirations were also not enforced. In
addition, logging and reporting of security events for a critical server
was not enabled. Furthermore, IT employees were unnecessarily
assigned certain capabilities that allowed them to modify critical
data and production files (such as payroll data). Finally, GCPS did
not obtain an independent audit report of controls over the
outsourced student information system.
Physical security of computer resources and data backups
should be improved – The GCPS servers were stored in open
areas or in unlocked rooms. Furthermore, although critical back-up
files were created, some of those files were stored in the same
room. Accordingly, critical data might be lost if the facility was
destroyed in a disaster.
26
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 35 ---
GCPS Should Develop a Comprehensive Disaster
Recovery Plan
GCPS did not have a disaster recovery plan (DRP) for its computer
systems. Specifically, GCPS had made no provision for the following
critical elements of a DRP:
 Alternate site processing arrangements
 Current and complete list of required hardware and software
components
 Current and complete network restoration procedures
 Current and complete list of applications prioritized for recovery
 Procedures for testing the DRP
Recommendations
8. GCPS should implement appropriate security measures to
safeguard its applications and data systems by improving
password protection, enabling logging and reporting of all
critical security events, and eliminating unnecessary access to
critical programs and data files. In addition, GCPS should
obtain from the contractor an independent audit report of
controls over the outsourced student information system, and
review the report to ensure controls are properly designed and
operating effectively. GCPS should also establish adequate
physical controls and safeguards for its computer rooms, and
store backup copies of data from critical servers at an
appropriate secure offsite location.
9. GCPS should develop and implement a comprehensive
disaster recovery plan.
27
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 36 ---
28
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 37 ---
Chapter 7
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance
GCPS uses a comprehensive and public process to plan for
construction and renovation of school facilities. Six-year plans are
prepared and updated annually, and reflect input from the Board.
GCPS has followed a number of best practices that should enhance
project results and cost effectiveness in its Facilities, Maintenance
and Operations Department.
Nevertheless, for its maintenance and custodial operations, GCPS
had not established formal performance measures and related
benchmarks, and had not developed a comprehensive energy
management plan to reduce energy costs. Also, construction
change orders were only approved by the director of the
aforementioned department, and a written agreement was not
executed with an organization that funded part of a school
renovation. Finally, GCPS had not established criteria for
determining when a formal evaluation of school facility usage
should be initiated.
Background
GCPS maintains 15 schools and other administrative and support
offices with a staff of 48 custodial and 8 maintenance personnel.
GCPS uses a six-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to identify
ongoing and projected needs for new buildings and major
renovations.
29
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 38 ---
Table 2 below compares GCPS fiscal year 2008 plant costs (that is,
maintenance and operational costs) with other similarly sized school
systems in Maryland. The table presents two measures used to
assess plant costs: cost per student and cost per square foot. The
statistics for these two measures are in line with its peer group.
However, square footage per student is somewhat higher than most
other peer schools.
Table 2
Plant Cost Comparison Per Student and Per Square Foot
Fiscal Year 2008 (Unaudited)
Plant Costs Square Total
Per Footage Gross
School System Per
Total Square Per Square
Student
Foot Student Footage
Garrett Co. $4,707,008 $1,043.68 $5.89 177.2 799,176
Talbot Co. 5,004,539 1,138.43 7.24 157.1 690,787
Somerset Co. 3,582,104 1,230.96 7.16 171.9 500,178
Dorchester Co. 4,548,517 977.33 5.48 178.4 830,410
Caroline Co. 4,244,012 750.09 5.10 147.1 832,272
Average of
$4,344,793 $1,024.20 $6.25 163.6 713,412
Comparable Schools
Sources: MSDE Financial Data, MSDE Fact Book, Maryland Public School Construction Square Footage Data
(most recent data available)
 - Based on Average Daily Enrollment 2007-2008
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance
the Efficiency and Effectiveness of the GCPS Facilities
and Maintenance Department
GCPS has instituted several best practices to enhance project
results and cost effectiveness in its Facilities, Maintenance and
Operations Department.
 GCPS utilizes value engineering to help control construction
costs during the various phases of the design process of a
project. Specifically, value engineering uses an independent
architect, engineer, or a similar expert in the design and
construction of facility projects to identify potential cost
savings by using alternative materials and design elements.
30
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 39 ---
 GCPS conducts monthly Administrators and Supervisors
meetings which are chaired by the Superintendent and
attended by all directors and school principals. The Director
of Maintenance, Operations, and Facilities attends and
participates in each of these meetings, providing information
related to maintenance of the system's facilities and
receiving feedback directly from the school principals. This
information is used in planning for upcoming maintenance
operations and is a form of customer feedback.
 GCPS participates in a consortium with other school systems
and local governments to purchase energy at the best
possible terms for the members of the consortium.
 GCPS prepares an annual facilities master plan specifying
renovation needs that is approved by the Board, the
Maryland Department of Planning, and MSDE.
 The size of the GCPS custodial staff was determined by using
established industry standards.
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to Increase
the Effectiveness of Maintenance and Custodial
Operations
GCPS should develop a performance measurement system
that establishes standards and expectations for
maintenance and custodial operations – GCPS had not
implemented a performance system to measure and assess the
efficiency of its maintenance and custodial operations, both for
internal self-evaluation purposes and for comparisons with other
systems. Comparability with other systems in Maryland could not
necessarily be done unilaterally since there would need to be a
consensus on the measures and methodology; however, other
states (for example, Michigan, Florida, and Minnesota) have
established measures and benchmarks (such as maintenance
expenditures per square foot) to assist their school systems in the
evaluation of costs and practices.
31
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 40 ---
A comprehensive energy management program to control
energy costs was not in place – GCPS does not have a
comprehensive energy management program to control energy
costs. Such a program is an accepted industry best practice and
includes goals, strategies, and measures to determine program
success (such as reducing total energy use by a stated percentage).
The effectiveness of an energy management program was
demonstrated in another Maryland school system that had an eight
percent decrease in energy use per square foot after implementing
an energy program. Energy use within individual GCPS schools was
not monitored, and we noted that GCPS did not use any school
incentive programs to encourage energy conservation. In this
regard, we found some school systems that, as an incentive to
conserve, allow dollars saved by individual schools to be used by
them in other areas (such as instruction). Finally, the last energy
audit of the school system was completed in 2003, and no in-house
or external audits have been performed since then. Expenditures for
heat and electricity for FY 2009 were budgeted at $1.5 million.
GCPS Should Institute Certain Controls for its
Construction Program
A policy for Board approval of significant construction
change orders was not established – Change orders for
construction projects were not reviewed or approved by the
Board. Specifically, during our review of the renovation of one
school, we identified 59 change orders totaling $557,000 that were
only reviewed and approved by the Director of the Facilities,
Maintenance and Operations Department. None of those change
orders were reviewed or approved by a higher authority (such as the
Superintendant or the Board) not directly involved in the
construction process. Although construction contracts exceeding
$25,000 are to be approved by the Board, due to the lack of a
policy, it is unclear whether change orders exceeding that amount
should also be approved. Since changes to project scope and work
can significantly affect contract costs, change orders for
construction projects should be subject to a similar approval
requirement.
32
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 41 ---
GCPS did not execute a written agreement with an
organization that provided substantial funding for a school
renovation – An organization that used part of a school during
school hours for its programs agreed to fund part of that school’s
renovation. Ultimately, the organization paid for $2.44 million of the
school’s $5.8 million renovation costs. However, a written
agreement between GCPS and the organization to protect and
clarify the rights and responsibilities of the parties was not
executed, as required by State law.
Such alternative financing is authorized by State law as relates to
public school construction, with the law requiring County
government approval for such projects. However, there was limited
documentation that the Garrett County government formally
approved the project or was aware of all significant aspects of the
project, such as the amount of funding to be provided by the non-
profit organization. The only evidence of County government
involvement was its approval of the GCPS budgets, which included
costs for the project; there was no documentation that indicated
County approval of the public/private financing for a significant
portion of the construction costs.
GCPS Should Establish Criteria to Trigger a Formal
Evaluation of School Facility Usage
GCPS had not established criteria (such as percentage of capacity
used, enrollment trends) for determining when a formal evaluation
of school facility usage should be initiated. As of September 30,
2009, GCPS had four schools that were being used at less than 70
percent of State-rated capacity, including three elementary schools
that were being operated at 31 percent, 45 percent, and 56 percent
of rated capacity. Total enrollment at these three elementary
schools in September 2009 was 233 students, and the total
capacity of these three schools was 521 students. In addition,
GCPS’s overall enrollment has declined in each of the past ten years
and it is predicted to continue dropping through 2018. However, a
formal evaluation of facility usage had not begun until after our
fieldwork primarily due to the need to address budgetary issues.
Nevertheless, in view of the history of declining enrollment and the
enrollment projections, GCPS may have benefitted from having
identified earlier, based on objective criteria, the need to pursue
school closings and consolidations.
33
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 42 ---
Recommendations
10. GCPS should develop a performance measurement system
that establishes standards and expectations for maintenance
and custodial operations, and report the results to the Board.
In addition, GCPS should develop a written energy
management plan that establishes energy efficiency goals,
monitors energy goals, and provides corrective actions in
facilities where the energy management system is less
effective. Furthermore, GCPS should consider implementing a
school incentive program to encourage lower energy usage.
11. GCPS should establish policies for construction contract
change orders that have review and approval requirements
similar to construction contracts (for example, Board approval
for change orders over $25,000). In addition, GCPS should
execute written agreements with organizations that provide
funding for construction projects. Finally, GCPS should
adequately document county government approval for
construction projects funded under alternate financing
methods as required by law, and ensure all substantive details
of the projects are provided to the county government when
seeking the approval.
12. GCPS should establish criteria for determining when to initiate
a formal evaluation of school facility usage.
34
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 43 ---
Chapter 8
Transportation Services
GCPS used a number of recognized best practices to increase
student transportation efficiency. These practices include
combining elementary, middle and high school bus runs to take
advantage of their close proximity and avoid sending multiple
buses, providing transportation services only to students not within
safe walking-distance and limiting the number of miles paid to bus
contractors for miles driven with no students on the bus (deadhead
miles).
In several areas, improvements should be made in an effort to
reduce GCPS’ transportation costs. For example, GCPS did not use
automated routing software to help efficiently plan bus routes. Also,
GCPS did not have a written policy establishing the criteria for
determining bus contractor payment rates. Furthermore, the
methodology used to reimburse the bus contractors for fuel usage
appears to result in higher payments than necessary (for example,
excess fuel payments of $279,000 for the 2008-2009 school year).
In addition, GCPS had not conducted any recent documented cost
benefit analysis of its decision to outsource student transportation
services and had not developed formal performance measures to
monitor and evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of
transportation services.
Background
GCPS is the fourth smallest school system in Maryland based on
student enrollment. Approximately 4,400 students are eligible for
student transportation. GCPS students were transported on a fleet
35
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 44 ---
of 77 buses owned by 55 contractors that were hired by the school
system. Fiscal year 2009 transportation costs totaled $4 million. Of
the 1,114,664 reported route miles for the 2008-2009 school year,
five percent were for transporting disabled students.
Table 3 below shows that the GCPS cost per rider and cost per mile
are higher than three of the four similarly sized school systems.
Table 3
Comparison of Transportation Costs per Rider and per Mile
Fiscal Year 2008 (Unaudited)
Number of Eligible Miles Average Annual
Riders (in thousands) Expenditures Cost per
School System
Non- Non- (in
Disabled Disabled Rider Mile
Disabled Disabled thousands)
Garrett Co. 4,413 45 1,069 70 $3,893 $873 $3.42
Talbot Co. 2,838 13 595 27 2,540 891 4.08
Dorchester Co. 4,370 81 829 123 2,950 663 3.10
Caroline Co. 4,712 87 949 216 3,515 732 3.02
Somerset Co. 2,832 77 668 110 2,270 780 2.92
Average of Similarly
Sized School 3,688 65 760 119 $2,819 $767 $3.28
Systems
Sources: MSDE 2007-2008 Fact Book
Several Best Practices Were In Place to Enhance
Student Transportation Services
The GCPS transportation department used several practices to
enhance bus operations:
 Combining elementary, middle, and high school students on the
same bus to take advantage of the close proximity of the
schools and to avoid sending multiple buses
 Assigning bus routes to drivers based on their proximity to the
routes to reduce the number of miles driven with no students on
the bus (deadhead miles)
 Providing transportation services only to students residing
outside the limits specified for walking to school or when the
conditions for walking are not considered safe
36
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 45 ---
Bus Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced and
Routing Software Should Be Used
Bus routing procedures should be more comprehensive –
GCPS needs to better document processes used to plan, review and
revise bus routes, and ensure that such processes include all
appropriate factors. Specifically, GCPS does not have adequate
documented procedures that instruct routers on how to plan,
review, and revise bus routes. The existing procedures provide only
a general guideline for routing and do not establish documented
policies for related areas, such as bus loads (capacity) and
maximum student ride times.
GCPS should use automated routing software – GCPS did not
use its electronic routing software to assist in developing efficient
bus routes. Recognizing the potential benefits of an electronic
routing system, GCPS had previously purchased routing software;
however, usage of the software was discontinued because GCPS
believed that the software was not adequate and it was easier to
manually formulate and update routes.
Using routing software is a recognized best practice that can be
used to reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce
student ride time, and help ensure that routes minimize the number
of buses needed to transport students. In addition, the use of
routing software can automate current manual processes, such as
electronically developing routes. Therefore, GCPS should explore
acquiring a new routing software product, if the current version does
not suffice.
It is current GCPS practice to use existing bus routes and then make
changes on an as-needed basis versus periodically reviewing routes
for efficiency. GCPS primarily relies on the knowledge of
transportation department employees to develop bus routes. This
practice could also have a potentially negative impact on route
efficiency. Our analysis of GCPS’ 2008-2009 bus stop forms
prepared by bus drivers, which listed the number of students at
each stop on given days, disclosed that, on 42 of the 105 routes,
37
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 46 ---
the buses were operated, on average, at 70 percent of GCPS
capacity.5 For example, on 18 of the 42 routes, student capacity
was less that 40 percent. Implementation of the electronic routing
system could help in the development of more efficient bus routes
and assist in the periodic evaluation of routes. For example,
another Maryland school system advised that Implementation of
automated routing software resulted in estimated savings of
$45,000 annually.
Bus Contractor Rates Paid Were Not Based on
Documented Criteria
GCPS does not have a written policy establishing the criteria for
calculating the bus contractor payment rates, which included an
annual per vehicle allotment, bus driver wage rates, maintenance
and fuel costs per mile, and auxiliary fixed costs per bus. GCPS
personnel advised us that the bus rates were generally increased
each year by a percentage over the prior year’s rates without any
specific analysis of the costs for each bus contractor pay element.
GCPS had no policy to specify the method for establishing the
various rates and no documentation to substantiate the rates
actually used.
In general, GCPS selects bus contractors based on certain
qualifications, including past performance, and the bus contracts
renew annually automatically for the life of the bus. GCPS assumes
nearly all of the risks for bus operations while essentially
guaranteeing a profit to the contractors each year for the life of
each bus. Specifically, contractors are paid a per vehicle allotment
each year, which is designed to cover the depreciation cost of the
bus and provide a return on investment for the contractor’s
investment in the bus. In addition, the contractors receive a per-
mile rate for operating and maintenance costs (which includes fuel
costs), a driver per-hour payment to cover the contractor’s labor
costs, and an annual administrative cost payment. GCPS also pays
for the liability insurance, including personal injury, property
damage, and medical coverage, for all contractor buses.
5 Like other LEAs, GCPS uses a lower capacity rate than the manufacturer’s
stated bus capacities. For example, GCPS determined the capacity for high,
middle, and elementary schools routes at 48, 50, and 72 respectively based on
72 passenger buses (manufacturer stated capacity).
38
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 47 ---
More Can Be Done to Help Ensure Cost-Effective
Operations
Contractor pay for fuel usage appeared excessive – GCPS
pays contractors for fuel usage using an assumed miles per gallon
(mpg) rate, which is substantially below industry standards.
Specifically, GCPS uses 4.8 mpg when determining the fuel cost
reimbursement paid to bus contractors with large buses; virtually all
of the buses used by GCPS bus contractors are large buses.
However, the American School Bus Council reported that the
national average usage for a large school bus with a diesel engine is
7 mpg. GCPS advised that the 4.8 mpg rate dates back to when
GCPS used less fuel-efficient gasoline buses. GCPS bus contractors
now use diesel buses, and GCPS advised us that the 7 mpg appears
more reasonable. This factor alone indicates a possible 45 percent
overpayment for fuel. In addition, GCPS has been paying an
additional 20 percent for fuel usage for certain routes without
documented justification. If contractor fuel payments were
calculated using 7 mpg instead of the factors used by GCPS, the
payments would have been lower (for example, $279,000 less
during school year 2008-2009).
Periodic cost benefit analysis should be performed – GCPS
had not formally reevaluated its decision to have a bus fleet owned
by contractors. GCPS believes that a contractor-owned fleet is
beneficial due to the up-front capital outlay needed to buy buses,
the cost to operate maintenance shops, and the personnel-related
costs (such as healthcare) associated with an in-house fleet.
However, experiences in other states and Maryland school systems
have found that an in-house fleet, or even a mixture of an in-house
and outsourced fleet, may be more cost beneficial.
Control Over Payments to Bus Contractors Should Be
Enhanced
GCPS did not ensure the accuracy of certain payments to the bus
contractors. At the beginning of each school year, the contractors’
drivers complete a manifest, which includes the total time and miles
driven on each route. GCPS uses the data recorded on these
manifests to calculate the bus driver wages and maintenance and
fuel cost components of the monthly payments to the contractors.
While GCPS performed observations each year for half the routes,
39
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 48 ---
which included documenting the time and mileage of the route, it
did not compare for accuracy the data from its observation to the
data reported by the contractors. Our test of 10 bus routes did not
disclose any significant discrepancies.
Performance Should Be Measured and Reported
Regularly to the Board
GCPS did not have a formal performance measurement system for
its transportation services. Performance measures that could be
developed and reported regularly to the Board include ridership
compared to bus capacity, transportation cost per student, bus
operating costs per mile, and number of accidents. This data
should also be used to provide ongoing monitoring of performance
and ensure overall accountability. The Government Finance Officers
Association recommends that program and service performance
measures be developed and used as an important component of
long-term strategic planning and decision making.
Recommendations
13. GCPS should better document all procedures used to
determine bus routes, including all appropriate factors that
comprise the route planning process, and should use routing
software to help ensure efficient services.
14. GCPS should establish a written policy on how components of
the bus contractor’s table of rates are to be determined each
year. GCPS should maintain documentation that shows each
year how the rates were determined.
15. GCPS should reevaluate the methodology used to reimburse
bus contractors for fuel usage to determine whether the
related rates are reasonable. In addition, GCPS should
periodically prepare a documented analysis to determine
whether continued use of outside contractors to provide
student bus services is, in fact, cost beneficial for the school
system.
40
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 49 ---
16. GCPS should use its observations of bus route times and
distance to ensure that the applicable payments to contractors
accurately reflect the actual bus services provided.
17. GCPS should develop a performance measurement system for
transportation services, and periodically report the results to
the Board.
41
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 50 ---
42
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 51 ---
Chapter 9
Food Services Operations
GCPS has implemented a number of best practices to help reduce
food service costs, such as participation in the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) commodity program. GCPS also
has adequate procedures in place to identify students eligible for
free and reduced-price meals under the federal National School
Meals Programs. However, GCPS should improve internal controls
over the procurement of food supplies. In addition, GCPS should
analyze its food service operations to determine if opportunities for
cost savings exist through outsourcing and if additional efficiencies
in operations can be obtained.
Background
GCPS has 15 schools, 7 with base kitchens and 8 with satellite
kitchens. GCPS has 26 full-time and 29 part-time cafeteria
employees as of August 2009. Food Service revenues during fiscal
year 2009 totaled approximately $2.4 million. According to the
audited financial statements, food service operation expenditures
exceeded revenues by $258,660 for fiscal year 2009. See Table 4
on the following page regarding fiscal year 2009 GCPS food
services.
43
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 52 ---
Table 4
Food Service Activity for Fiscal Year 2009
Average cost per meal $ 3.20
Number of meals served
Breakfast
Paid 63,137
Free 65,214
Reduced Price 25,150
153,501
Lunch
Paid 190,175
Free 182,614
Reduced Price 81,424
454,213
Meal Equivalents
A La Carte Meal 232,248
Snacks 2,258
234,506
Total Meals Served 842,220
Schools 15
Full Kitchens 7
Full-time Employees 26
Part-time Employees 29
Revenues
Federal
Cash Payments $1,019,187
USDA Commodities 129,722
$1,148,909
Sales and other sources 1,195,158
State aid 89,716
Total Revenue (all
sources) $2,433,783
Total Expenditures 2,692,443
Excess of Expenditures over Revenues $ (258,660)
Source: GCPS Fiscal Year 2009 Audited Financial Statements, MSDE 2009data,
and GCPS data
44
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 53 ---
Certain Best Practices Were in Place
GCPS has implemented several practices to improve food
service operations – These measures helped to both increase
operational efficiency and reduce food supply and material costs.
 GCPS participated in the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) commodities program, which is a free food
program. According to GCPS records, $129,722 in USDA
commodities was received in fiscal year 2009.
 To better predict food purchase needs, GCPS used USDA
standard serving sizes and recipes.
 GCPS has implemented a program to reduce the amount of
food waste and give students greater flexibility in choosing what
to eat. Specifically, on a daily basis, cafeteria managers prepare
reports that compare the number of servings prepared with the
number of servings left over. These reports are analyzed and
can be used as a guide to estimate how much should be
prepared for future meals.
GCPS used several best practices to encourage
participation in the free and reduced-price meal programs
– These practices included the use of a family application process
(instead of individual student applications) to simultaneously qualify
more students for the free or reduced-priced meal programs. GCPS
also used an automated point-of-sale system in cafeterias which
helps to prevent easy identification of participating students,
thereby reducing any stigma associated with participating in the
program. For fiscal year 2008, 85 percent of GCPS students eligible
to receive free lunches and 74 percent of the students eligible to
receive reduced-price lunches actually participated in the programs,
which were comparable to the averages of similarly sized school
systems.
45
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 54 ---
Internal Controls Over Purchasing of Food Supplies
Need to Be Improved
Our test of 10 fiscal year 2009 purchases totaling $38,400 from
five vendors, disclosed that, for 3 invoices totaling $11,850, we
found that the invoices were paid without documentation of the
receipt of the goods. Consequently, there was no assurance that
the purchased goods were actually received.
GCPS Should Analyze Operations to Improve Efficiency
GCPS Food Services does not participate in any food purchasing
cooperatives, and has not recently performed any type of cost
analysis to determine if participation in such an organization would
be cost beneficial. Additionally GCPS Food Services has not
performed any type of formal analysis of in-house productivity or
cost-analysis of outsourcing functions, such as labor or food
storage.
For the 2008-2009 school year, we noted that 8 out of the 15 GCPS
schools that prepared food fell significantly below industry
guidelines6 and, in one school, the meals per labor hour (6.7) was
significantly below the 20 meals per labor hour cited in those
guidelines.
Based on data compiled by MSDE, during fiscal year 2008, GCPS
had a cost per meal of $3.83, which is $1 higher than the average
of similar-sized LEAs and $.69 higher than the Statewide average.
Contracting out certain food service functions, participating in food
purchasing cooperatives and increasing the meals per labor hour by
reducing staffing levels or hours worked could help to reduce the
cost per meal, and possibly allow GCPS’ food services to operate
without a deficit.
6 Industry guidelines for GCPS-sized cafeterias are based on the publication Cost
Control for School Foodservices, Third Edition, by Dorothy Pannell-Martin, revised
July 2000.
46
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 55 ---
Recommendations
18. GCPS should improve controls over its purchase of food
supplies by ensuring that goods paid for were actually
received.
19. GCPS should evaluate and analyze cost benefits relating to
outsourcing and participation in any available purchasing
cooperatives. In addition, GCPS should review its food service
operations to determine if additional efficiencies can be
achieved.
47
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 56 ---
48
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 57 ---
Chapter 10
School Board Operations and Oversight
Generally, the Board has adequate polices to govern the operations
of the school system. The Board meets periodically with the certified
public accounting firm to review the results of the audits of the
annual financial statements, the school activity fund, and federal
funds. In addition, the Board is actively involved in the development
of the GCPS annual budget.
To further assist its governing efforts, the Board should consider
establishing an internal audit function and a confidential hotline to
enable employees and others to report operational concerns and
suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement.
Background
GCPS is governed by a five-member board (excluding the one
student member) elected by the voters of Garrett County. The
Board does not have an established committee structure due to its
size and generally acts in whole to carry out its oversight duties. To
assist in its oversight function, the Board has contracted with an
independent auditor to conduct certain audits. The Board is
ultimately accountable for the success of the GCPS in providing
the children of Garrett County with a quality education, while wisely
spending local, State, and federal funds. Following is the GCPS
Board’s stated goals, according to the GCPS website:
49
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 58 ---
Goals for the Garrett County Public Schools
In order to effect the mission of the Garrett County Public Schools,
the Garrett County Board of Education establishes the following
school goals:
1. To provide safe, orderly, and drug-free environments;
2. To provide consistently applied discipline which promotes among
the students basic standards of courtesy, including respect for
themselves, parents, school personnel, others, and their school and
community;
3. To provide learning experiences which promote the acquisition of
knowledge, thinking, and problem solving abilities of students and
to prepare them to continue their education and to pursue a career;
4. To provide all students with rigorous and sequential courses of
studies, delineating specific content and academic skills to be
taught at each level;
5. To ensure that all students are well-grounded in the basic
academic skills with emphasis on application of reading, writing,
and mathematics;
6. To provide intensive reading instruction in which students learn
decoding strategies, including phonetic analysis, while the students’
reading comprehension skills are developed;
7. To hold all students to high levels of academic achievement,
including appropriate grade level expectations for the use of proper
grammar, spelling, punctuation, speech, and penmanship, in all
subject areas;
8. To expect every student, to the greatest extent possible, to
perform at or above grade level in all academic subjects; and
9. To provide the structure and environment for students, parents,
community members, teachers, administrators, and other
professional and support staff to work together to achieve these
goals.
50
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 59 ---
Certain Oversight Has Been Put in PlaceRegarding
GCPS Operations
The GCPS Board uses a number of methods to oversee the
operations of GCPS.
 The Board hires an independent certified public accounting firm
to perform audits of its financial statements, federally funded
grant programs and student activity funds, and annually meets
with that firm to review the results.
 The Board receives and discusses detailed budget and
expenditure information as part of the budget approval process.
 The Board adopted a detailed conflict of interest policy that
covers Board members and employees.
The Board Should Take Additional Steps to Assist in
Governance of GCPS
The Board should consider establishing an internal auditor
function – GCPS does not have an internal auditor. The use of an
internal auditor, independent of school system management, is a
recommended best practice of the Government Finance Officers
Association (GFOA). The GFOA notes that internal auditors
commonly assist directors in monitoring the design and proper
functioning of internal controls and procedures, and can play a
valuable role in conducting performance audits, special
investigations, and studies. As cited in this report, our audit
identified certain deficiencies in the GCPS system of internal
control, such as procedures over disbursements. While GCPS may
determine it is unable to afford the additional costs for a full-time
internal audit position based on its size (as the fourth smallest of all
24 public school systems in Maryland), it should determine if such a
position could be shared with other local Boards. Alternatively, the
Board could consider expanding the scope of work performed by its
independent auditor (similar to the work done by the auditor for
student activity funds as commented upon in Chapter 1).
51
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 60 ---
The Board should consider establishing a confidential
hotline – We noted that a confidential hotline had not been
implemented to enable employees and others to report suspected
fraud, waste, or mismanagement. If such a process was
established, the internal audit position could conduct the initial
investigations of information received via the hotline or direct the
information to appropriate officials, such as law enforcement.
Recommendation
20. The Board should enhance its oversight of GCPS operations by
considering the establishment of an internal audit function
and a hotline for the confidential reporting of operational
issues and suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement.
52
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 61 ---
Chapter 11
Other Financial Controls
This chapter addresses the management of cash, risk, health care
costs, and long-term debt such as lease-purchase agreements and
issues not addressed elsewhere. GCPS is not permitted to issue
bonds or other long-term debt instruments to finance capital or
operational needs. However, GCPS had not established sufficient
controls to ensure the propriety of health care costs or developed a
written cash management policy.
Risk Management Best Practices Were in Place
For risk management, GCPS primarily uses commercial insurance.
The school system purchases workmen’s compensation insurance
from the Injured Workers’ Insurance Fund. Other risks, such as
property coverage are addressed through the purchase of
commercial insurance.
GCPS Should Take Steps to Verify the Propriety of
Health Care Costs
GCPS obtains health insurance for employees, retirees, and their
dependents through the Garrett County government plan. According
to GCPS records, health insurance payments totaled $5.8 million in
fiscal year 2009. However, GCPS did not take certain actions that
could help contain health care costs. Specifically, GCPS did not
have a process in place to verify the authenticity of program
participants’ listed dependents.
53
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 62 ---
According to recommended practices published by the GFOA, health
care cost containment is a critical component of long-term financial
planning and budgeting. The GFOA recommends the establishment
of a cost containment program.
GCPS Should Develop a Written Investment of Cash
Management Policy
The notes to the fiscal year 2008 audited financial statements
stated that all except $100,000 of GCPS’ $7.6 million bank balance
at June 30, 2008 was exposed to custodial credit risk. This amount
was not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC) and, although fully collateralized by securities held by the
pledging financial institutions’ custodians, the collateral was not
held in the Board’s name, as the GFOA recommends.
As of June, 2009, the GCPS bank balance of $7.2 million was fully
protected by FDIC insurance, according to the GCPS’ audited
financial statements. The GCPS deposits were protected by a
temporary FDIC program that provides unlimited insurance coverage
to low-interest accounts. Since this temporary program is
scheduled to expire on December 31, 2010, GCPS should develop a
cash management or investment policy to help ensure that its cash
is adequately insured or collateralized.
Recommendations
21. GCPS should verify the authenticity of health care program
participants’ listed dependents.
22. GCPS should adopt a formal policy concerning cash
investments in accordance with GFOA best practices
recommendations.
54
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 63 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives,
and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the financial management practices of the Garrett
County Public Schools (GCPS). We conducted this audit under the
authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We
believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Objectives
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the GCPS procedures and controls were
effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the GCPS policies provided for the
efficient use of financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major
financial-related areas of operations based on assessments of
materiality and risk. Our audit approach, including the specific
objectives of our local school system audits, was approved on
September 14, 2004 by the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland
General Assembly in accordance with the enabling legislation. As
55
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 64 ---
approved, the audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing
student achievement, curriculum, teacher performance, and other
academic-related areas and functions. We also did not review the
activities, financial or other, of any parent teacher association,
group, or funds not under the local board of education’s direct
control or management. Finally, we did not evaluate the GCPS
Comprehensive Education Master Plan or related updates.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws
and regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary
education, as well as policies and procedures issued and
established by GCPS. We also interviewed personnel at GCPS, the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at other
local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).7 Our audit
procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of GCPS operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary
to achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2008
through June 30, 2009. For our audit work on revenue and federal
grants, we primarily relied on the results of an independent audit of
fiscal year 2009 activity.
In addition, we contacted a number of other state auditors’ offices
and legislative program evaluation agencies that had a history of
conducting audits or reviews of local school systems. We
interviewed those officials and inspected their work programs and
resultant reports to identify specific audit techniques and
operational practices at schools that could be adapted for our
school system audits. Finally, we used certain statistical data--
including financial and operational--compiled by the MSDE from
various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for
background or informational purposes, and was deemed
reasonable. For comparison purposes, information provided was
generally limited to those Maryland school systems of similar sizes,
based on student enrollment and/or system budget. In many cases,
this information was self reported by the school systems. The data
were neither audited nor independently verified by us. Finally,
information provided in this report was obtained from various
reports readily available during our fieldwork.
7 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to
identify policies or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
56
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 65 ---
Other Independent Auditors
When developing the approach for the audits of school system
financial management practices, a consideration was the reliance
on the work of other independent auditors to the extent practicable
to avoid unnecessary duplication of audit effort. With respect to
GCPS, the results of other auditors that we considered were
reported in three distinct audit reports: one related to the
administration of its federal grants; second, the management letter
from the audit of its financial statements audit; and third,
independent audits of the school activities and cafeteria funds.
During the course of this audit, we relied on these results. We
performed certain steps to satisfy ourselves as to the reliability of
the reported results of the independent federal grants audits of the
GCPS federal financial assistance programs for compliance with
federal laws and regulations and the GCPS financial statement and
school activity and cafeteria funds audits. Accordingly, we
significantly reduced the scope of our work in Chapter 1 “Revenue
and Billing Cycle,” and in Chapter 2 “Federal Funds.”
Limitations of Internal Control
GCPS management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of
operations including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud
may nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of
any evaluation of internal control to future periods are subject to the
risk that conditions may change or compliance with policies and
procedures may deteriorate.
In addition to the conditions included in this report, other less
significant findings were communicated to GCPS that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
57
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 66 ---
Fieldwork and GCPS Responses
We conducted our fieldwork from May 2009 to November 2009.
The GCPS response to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report.
58
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 68 ---
Garrett County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Performances Audit
PROCUREMENT & DISBURSEMENT CYCLE
Recommendation 1 ‐ GCPS should develop procurement policies that address all categories of
goods and services purchases, and specify the procurement methods to be used, when
contracts should be in writing, the mandatory contract provisions and the approval
requirements, including when Board approval is required (for example, procurements over a
specified amount).
Response ‐ GCPS will develop a formal comprehensive Board approved procurement policy and
administrative procedure. The policy and procedure will include guidelines for procurement of
items under the state established threshold for competitive bidding, instances where sole
source procurements are appropriate, and level of purchases requiring Board approval.
Purchasing guides from other Boards of Educations as well as that from the Garrett County
Commissioners will be used to assist in this process. The newly created position of Director of
Finance shall serve as the Procurement Officer. This should be completed prior to the end of
the 2010‐2011 fiscal year.
Recommendation 2 ‐ GCPS should improve controls over invoice processing by segregating
incompatible functions and assigning critical system functions to only those employees who
need the capabilities to perform their job duties.
Response – GCPS has already restricted the number of employees that have access to adding
vendors. None of the Finance Office secretaries or the Financial Coordinator has the
authorization to approve requisitions or to create purchase orders. Other functions have been
limited to those employees who need the capabilities to perform their duties.
Recommendation 3 ‐ GCPS should obtain goods and services through a properly documented
competitive procurement process. If a competitive procurement process is not deemed
appropriate (such as when only one vendor can provide the required services), then
documentation justifying the decision should be maintained.
Response ‐ GCPS shall adhere to the procurement policy and administrative procedure as
developed under Recommendation 1 under the direction of the new Procurement Officer.
Documentation will be maintained if a competitive procurement process is deemed not
appropriate or where only one vendor can provide the required services.
1

--- Page 69 ---
Garrett County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Performances Audit
HUMAN RESOURCES AND PAYROLL
Recommendation 4 ‐ GCPS should improve controls over the human resources and payroll
system by segregating incompatible functions and assigning critical system functions to only
those employees who need the capabilities to perform their job duties. In addition, GCPS
should ensure that all critical payroll‐related transactions and information recorded in the
system are reviewed and approved, at least on a test basis, by an employee independent of the
payroll processing function using supporting documentation.
Response – GCPS will segregate human resources and payroll operations as much as possible.
All salaries and rates of pay are established by Human Resources and furnished to Finance.
Actual payroll records must be reconciled back to Human Resource documents. GCPS will have
someone independent of the payroll processing function to review and approve payroll on at
least a test basis.
Recommendation 5 ‐ GCPS should expand its workforce planning to include key non‐
instructional positions in critical operational units. Work will begin on this planning in the 2010‐
2011 fiscal year.
Response – GCPS agrees with this finding. There is a need for reviewing all positions within the
district as they are all critical in our ability to operate with high quality and efficiency. The
workforce planning goal will be to ensure that the workforce needs are examined and that we
develop a plan to address gaps between our needs and our current status.
INVENTORY CONTROL AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Recommendation 6 ‐ GCPS should separate inventory custody and physical inventory
responsibilities, or independently verify, at least on a test basis, the accuracy of the completed
equipment inventory counts performed by the equipment custodians.
Response ‐ GCPS already has some independent checks in place to verify inventories. The
finance office verifies that all purchases of $5,000 or more have been added to the inventory.
The Facilities Department will begin doing actual inventory verifications throughout the year at
all locations. Deletions from inventory require documentation by school administration. GCPS
shall consider the purchase of a bar code inventory system which will allow a computerized
inventory of all fixed assets. In addition, the Facilities Department will begin a more stringent
independent inspection of the individual schools to verify actual locations of fixed assets.
Inventory verifications will begin during the 2010‐2011 fiscal year.
2

--- Page 70 ---
Garrett County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Performances Audit
Recommendation 7 ‐ GCPS should enhance existing procedures governing textbook
accountability by maintaining a comprehensive, centralized inventory, and using the results of
textbook physical inventories to monitor accountability by the schools and to ensure that
excess books are redistributed among schools before purchasing new textbooks.
Response – GCPS will implement procedures governing textbook accountability that will assure
that a centralized inventory exists to enhance redistribution in lieu of purchasing new
textbooks.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Recommendation 8 ‐ GCPS should implement appropriate security measures to safeguard its
applications and data systems by improving password protection, enabling logging and
reporting of all critical security events, and eliminating unnecessary access to critical programs
and data files. In addition, GCPS should obtain from the contractor an independent audit
report of controls over the outsourced student information system, and review the report to
ensure controls are properly designed and operating effectively. GCPS should also establish
adequate physical controls and safeguards for its computer rooms, and store backup copies of
data from critical servers at an appropriate secure offsite location.
Response ‐ We have upgraded the password policies to require 180 day password changes and
require a more complicated password. Multiple failed attempts will lock out the account.
We will do some testing of logging and reporting of security events to make sure it doesn’t
impact performance. We make every attempt to only allow access to the files needed for the
individuals to perform their duties.
We have obtained a copy of the SAS70 report (pertaining to the handling of our student
information system data [PowerSchool]) ; review of the document shows that our data is
housed by Savis, Inc. The controls for our data are very comprehensive, meet our needs and
were independently audited for the period 10/1/08‐9/30/09 by Ernst and Young on 11/11/09.
We have plans for moving all equipment into a fenced cage area which will be kept locked
when not being accessed. This will be completed during the 2010‐2011 fiscal year.
Recommendation 9 ‐ GCPS should develop and implement a comprehensive disaster recovery
plan.
Response – GCPS will develop a disaster recovery plan for the data processing systems. Work
will begin on the disaster recovery plan during the 2010‐2011 fiscal year.
3

--- Page 71 ---
Garrett County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Performances Audit
FACILITIES, CONSTRUCTION, RENOVATION, AND MAINTENANCE
Recommendation 10 ‐ GCPS should develop a performance measurement system that
establishes standards and expectations for maintenance and custodial operations, and report
the results to the Board. In addition, GCPS should develop a written energy management plan
that establishes energy efficiency goals, monitors energy goals, and provides corrective actions
in facilities where the energy management system is less effective. Furthermore, GCPS should
consider implementing a school incentive program to encourage lower energy usage.
Response ‐ GCPS will review industry standards for developing performance measurements for
the maintenance and custodial staff to determine the best measuring system for Garrett
County. GCPS agrees that an energy management plan should be established to better meet
efficiency goals. GCPS is presently doing two things to help with the cost of utilities. The first is
that GCPS is a member of the Frederick CO‐OP for electricity. This gives us a great rate which is
established for at least three years out. GCPS is also in the process of negotiating a contract
with Johnson Controls Inc. to perform an energy audit.
Recommendation 11 ‐ GCPS should establish policies for construction contract change orders
that have review and approval requirements similar to construction contracts (for example,
Board approval for change orders over $25,000). In addition, GCPS should execute written
agreements with organizations that provide funding for construction projects. Finally, GCPS
should adequately document county government approval for construction projects funded
under alternate financing methods as required by law, and ensure all substantive details of the
projects are provided to the county government when seeking the approval.
Response: GCPS will develop a policy that will require that during a construction project that all
change orders must be signed by the Superintendent or a designee not involved in the
construction process. All change orders of $25,000 or more must be approved by the Board of
Education. The policy will be completed and implemented during the 2010‐2011 fiscal year.
GCPS shall execute a written agreement with any organization that is providing substantial
funding for a school construction or renovation project. We will also document County
government approval for all construction projects using alternative financing and will ensure
that all substantive details of the projects will be provided to the County government when
seeking approval.
4

--- Page 72 ---
Garrett County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Performances Audit
Recommendation 12 ‐ GCPS should establish criteria for determining when to initiate a formal
evaluation of school facility usage.
Response – GCPS evaluates all school facilities annually in 24 different areas and also gives each
facility an overall ranking in physical condition. A capacity utilization rate is established each
year by calculating the actual enrollment against the state rated capacity provided by the State.
This information is provided each year to the Board of Education in the Facilities Master Plan.
Other information that must be considered in closing a school is staffing costs, operating costs,
transportation issues, community concerns, and the overall financial impact of operating the
school upon the school system. GCPS believes that all of this information should be furnished to
the BOE on annual basis but that the BOE has to evaluate all the information and make the final
determination if a school facility should be considered for consolidation. The Board of
Education will need to determine if a policy to determine when a formal evaluation of school
facility usage based upon enrollment and building capacity should be developed.
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
Recommendation 13 ‐ GCPS should better document all procedures used to determine bus
routes, including all appropriate factors that comprise the route planning process, and should
use routing software to help ensure efficient services.
Response – GCPS will explore and consider the advantages of a routing software system. Until
a routing system is purchased, factors that will be considered in the planning stages will be to
maximize the ridership of buses and to maintain acceptable times for bus schedules. GCPS
student data system has the capability to report student address of residence with a map
display which will be used to assist in determining appropriate routing.
Recommendation 14 ‐ GCPS should establish a written policy on how components of the bus
contractor’s table of rates are to be determined each year. GCPS should maintain
documentation that shows each year how the rates were determined.
Response ‐ GCPS will initiate a yearly review of the Bus Contractors Table of Rates. To aid in
this process, GCPS will follow these procedures:
GCPS will conduct an analysis of how each Maryland LEA calculates its Table of Rate for
bus contractors which includes the PVA.
Once GCPS determines the best model for Garrett County, we will document the details
of the GCPS methodology.
Documentation will be maintained showing how each year’s rates are determined.
5

--- Page 73 ---
Garrett County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Performances Audit
Recommendation 15 ‐ GCPS should reevaluate the methodology used to reimburse bus
contractors for fuel usage to determine whether the related rates are reasonable. In addition,
GCPS should periodically prepare a documented analysis to determine whether continued use
of outside contractors to provide student bus services is, in fact, cost beneficial for the school
system.
Response – Beginning with the 2010‐2011 fiscal year, GCPS will reimburse for fuel on the basis
of 6.5 mpg for diesel fuel. Garrett utilizes a lower mpg than the national average because of
cold temperatures and idling. The school system will reevaluate the 20% grade factor that is
currently added to the mileage reimbursements. GCPS will gain input from Thomas Bus
Company and International Bus Company to determine the appropriateness of this add‐on
based upon our climate and terrain.
GCPS will gain input from other Maryland counties in analyzing the cost of operating with
outside contractors compared with county owned buses. In the future, GCPS will consider an
outside independent agency to conduct a study to help us determine the most efficient system.
Recommendation 16 ‐ GCPS should use its observations of bus route times and distance to
ensure that the applicable payments to contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services
provided.
Response – GCPS will verify bus contractor manifests to assure that they accurately reflect the
actual bus services provided. In the absence of a GPS system, confirmation of time and mileage
will be conducted during drive evaluation/observation. Documenting manifests will begin
during the 2010‐2011 fiscal year.
Recommendation 17 ‐ GCPS should develop a performance measurement system for
transportation services, and periodically report the results to the Board.
Response – GCPS will develop a performance measure for transportation. These reports to the
Board of Education will begin in the 2010‐2011 fiscal year.
6

--- Page 74 ---
Garrett County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Performances Audit
FOOD SERVICES OPERATION
Recommendation 18 ‐ GCPS should improve controls over its purchase of food supplies by
ensuring that goods paid for were actually received.
Response – GCPS does attempt to obtain multiple bids for food supplies; however, Garrett
County is a rural county where it is not always possible to receive multiple bids for all products.
There is only one diary that serves Garrett County. We will investigate the possibility of
whether this meets the requirement of a sole source item. We will make sure that all invoices
sent to the central office for payment are signed by the manager or PIC verifying receipt.
Recommendation 19 ‐ GCPS should evaluate and analyze cost benefits relating to outsourcing
and participation in any available purchasing cooperatives. In addition, GCPS should review its
food service operations to determine if additional efficiencies can be achieved.
Response – We will investigate the possibility of joining the Maryland Co‐op in November when
the Co‐op accepts new members as well as the Pittsburgh Schools Co‐op. We have reduced
staff when possible as positions turnover. The geographic make‐up of Garrett County in having
smaller schools than the state average will always impact our efficiency in the number of meals
produced per hours. Our food cost for 2009‐2010 decreased by 9% from 2008‐2009.
SCHOOL BOARD OPERATIONS AND OVERSIGHT
Recommendation 20 ‐ The Board should enhance its oversight of GCPS operations by
considering the establishment of an internal audit function and a hotline for the confidential
reporting of operational issues and suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement.
Response – The establishment of a Director of Finance position should assist the Board of
Education in its oversight of GCPS operations. GCPS will also consider the hiring of a part‐time
person as needed outside the school system to perform further audit functions; however, it
cannot take priority over needed resources for students during this economic environment.
GCPS will consider and research creating a fraud hotline and will draft an employee
whistleblower protection policy. Should a fraud hotline be created, there will be formal follow‐
up procedures.
7

--- Page 75 ---
Garrett County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Performances Audit
OTHER FINANCIAL CONTROLS
Recommendation 21 ‐ GCPS should verify the authenticity of health care program participants’
listed dependents.
Response – Since the legislative audit was conducted, a national healthcare plan has been
enacted and beginning in the 2011‐2012 fiscal year, new guidelines will have to be
implemented regarding the definition of eligible dependents in order to comply with the
federal legislation. A Dependent Eligibility audit will not be completed until the federal
legislation regarding dependent eligibility has been implemented. Implementation will not
occur until the 2011‐2012 fiscal year.
Recommendation 22 ‐ GCPS should adopt a formal policy concerning cash investments in
accordance with GFOA best practices recommendations.
Response – GCPS agrees with the need for a formal policy governing cash investments. A new
Director of Finance position has been created and that new director will provide leadership in
the development of this policy during the 2010‐2011 fiscal year.
8

--- Page 76 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
J. Alexander Twigg
Senior Auditor
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Kevin J. Mercer
Tracy D. Ross
Ryan P. Stecher
Staff Auditors
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Staff Auditor