Title: Carroll County Public Schools
Date: 03/20/2012
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d35cc9d72404c150a02
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:04:54.765061
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Carroll County Public Schools
March 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2010 Activity 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Finding 1 – Schools Did Not Always Comply With Established 10
Procedures Governing School Activity Funds or Ensure Account
Activity Was Reviewed in a Timely Manner
Federal Funds
* Finding 2 – CCPS Did Not Ensure That All Costs Associated With 12
Medicaid-Subsidized Services Were Recovered
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 3 – Internal Controls Over Procurements and Disbursements 13
Were Not Adequate
* Finding 4 – Certain Purchasing Card Transactions Did Not Appear 14
to be in Compliance with CCPS Policy and Were Not Always
Properly Supported
Human Resources and Payroll 15
Inventory Control and Accountability
* Finding 5 – Internal Controls and Record Keeping Over Equipment 16
Were Not Adequate
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 6 – Administrative Access to the CCPS Network Was Not 18
Adequately Restricted and Network Password Controls Were Not
Adequate
* Finding 7 – Student Management System Database Controls Were 19
Not Sufficient and Certain Program Change Controls Were
Inadequate
Finding 8 – CCPS Network Was Not Properly Secured 20
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 9 – CCPS Had Not Implemented a Process to Independently 21
Verify Reported Project Benefits of its Energy Conservation Contract
Transportation Services
Finding 10 – CCPS Did Not Base Certain Elements Used to Determine 24
Payment Amounts to Bus Contractors on Market Conditions or
Actual Costs
Food Service Operations
Finding 11 – CCPS Has Experienced Persistent Deficits in its Food 25
Service Operations
* Finding 12 – Internal Controls Over Cash Receipts at Certain School 28
Cafeterias Were Not Adequate and CCPS’ Manual System to Track
Student Meal Purchases May Be Inefficient
School Board Oversight 29
Other Financial Controls
Finding 13 – CCPS Had Not Implemented a Formal Investment Policy 29
and Current Investment Practices Should be Reevaluated
Finding 14 – CCPS Had Not Implemented Procedures to Ensure the 31
Propriety of Health Care Costs
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 33
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Carroll County Public Schools (CCPS)
March 2012
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
CCPS ranks 9th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. In fiscal year 2010, CCPS had a total full-time regular and special
education pupil population of 27,721 at its 44 schools. CCPS’ operating and
capital expenditures totaled $398.5 million during that year.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of CCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated January 5, 2007. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for CCPS to improve internal controls, to adopt more cost-
effective processes, and to enhance policy direction.
CCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability in Certain
Financial Areas
Although proper internal controls had been established in certain financial
areas, such as human resources and payroll processing and bidding,
awarding and monitoring construction projects, CCPS needs to improve
internal controls and accountability in certain other financial areas. For
example, CCPS did not ensure that all reimbursable services provided to
Medicaid-eligible students were subsequently billed. Specifically, staff
responsible for submitting such billings for federal reimbursement often did
not receive documentation from the schools regarding eligible services that
were provided to the students. We estimated that CCPS may have been able
to recover up to an additional $275,000 for the period from August 2010 to
February 2011 if all services that were rendered had been subsequently
billed.
Adequate security measures and monitoring procedures were not in place to
protect CCPS’ network and related critical devices from security risks. For
example, firewall rules allowed numerous insecure and unnecessary
connections to critical CCPS network devices. In addition, a number of
network accounts had excessive or improper access to network resources
including data files and programs.
CCPS Should Consider Implementing Certain Steps to Improve Cost
Effectiveness
CCPS did not base certain elements used to pay its bus contractors on either
market conditions or actual costs. For example, although CCPS pays
5

--- Page 8 ---
contractors an annual per vehicle allotment for 12 years, the related
depreciation component uses a 10-year assumption. As a result, the
contractors are paid 120 percent of the cost of each bus over the bus’
lifetime. We estimated that CCPS may pay approximately $2.3 million more
for depreciation than if the payments were based on the actual 12-year life of
the buses obtained since 2007.
CCPS did not independently verify the contractor reported energy savings
related to an energy conservation contract. Costs under the contract over its
15-year period will total $19.5 million, including financing costs. These costs
include certain capital improvements to CCPS facilities and software and
monitoring services. As of July 1, 2011 CCPS owed $4.2 million for the
remainder of the services portion of the contract (contract years 8 through
15). The contract guarantees savings of $10.8 million over the life of the
contract.
CCPS has experienced persistent deficits in its food service operations. From
fiscal year 2007 to 2010, food service operation costs have exceeded related
revenues by a total of over $1 million. Based on our analysis of CCPS costs to
those of four similarly-sized school systems, CCPS’ cost per meal was higher
than all four systems reviewed. Specifically, CCPS salary and wage costs per
meal exceeded those of the four systems. Further, we found that over the
same four year period, CCPS student participation in paid lunches decreased
at a significantly higher rate than those of the four comparison systems.
CCPS Needs to Establish a Comprehensive Investment Policy
CCPS had not implemented a formal investment policy. Its current practice of
forgoing interest earnings to avoid bank account fees may not represent the
best investment choice.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records complied by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Carroll County Public Schools (CCPS) ranks
9th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
From fiscal year 2000 to 2010, the total full-time student population has
increased 0.9 percent from 27,472 to 27,721 students. For the 2010-2011
school year, CCPS had 44 schools, consisting of 23 elementary, 9 middle, 8
high schools, and 4 alternative schools. According to CCPS’ audited financial
statements, operating and capital expenditures totaled $398.5 million in
fiscal year 2010. The largest expenditure category was salaries and wages,
including benefits, which accounted for 80 percent of total operating
expenditures during fiscal year 2010. According to MSDE records, during
fiscal year 2010, CCPS had 3,594 full-time equivalent positions which
consisted of 2,510 instructional and 1,084 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Carroll
County government provide the vast majority of CCPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with CCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Carroll County government exercises authority over CCPS,
primarily through review and approval of CCPS’ annual operational and capital
budgets.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2010 Activity
CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts
what is referred to as a Single Audit of CCPS federal grant programs (as
required by federal regulations). The resulting financial statement and single
audit reports for fiscal year 2010 were issued in September 2010 and
7

--- Page 10 ---
December 2010, respectively. Neither report disclosed deficiencies1 in CCPS’
record keeping, processes, and controls. However, the Report on Internal
Control Over Financial Reporting and on Compliance and Other Matters issued
in conjunction with the financial statement audit included a material
weakness2 related to CCPS’ financial reporting and presentation of
construction in progress. Specifically, additions to construction in progress
were previously recorded based on budgeted amounts. This resulted in
construction in progress being materially overstated as of June 30, 2009,
thereby requiring an adjustment to correct the error.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited CCPS’ financial statements and the risks and
scope of our audit in certain areas, we relied on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2010 financial statements to reduce the
scope of our audit work related to revenues, accounts receivable and federal
grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 15 of the 30 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated January 5, 2007 (the 30
findings resulted in 22 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed
up on these 15 findings based on our current assessment of significance and
risk relative to the audit objectives. We determined that CCPS satisfactorily
addressed 9 of these findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this
report.
1 A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent or
detect misstatements on a timely basis. With respect to Single Audit, a deficiency is a control
deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies, that does not allow management or employees, in
the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct
noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program on a timely basis.
2 A material weakness in internal control is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, such that
there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Board’s financial statements (or,
with respect to Single Audit, material noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a
federal program) will not be prevented or detected and corrected, on a timely basis.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Carroll County Public Schools (CCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Carroll County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the CCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $401 million during fiscal year 2010. In addition, CCPS
maintains school activity funds that are collected to operate various student
activities, clubs, and school publications. Each school maintains detail
records which separately account for the activity of each group or club. Each
school also maintains its own separate bank account and, in accordance with
policy, is responsible for transferring excess funds to CCPS’ Central Office at
least once a month. For fiscal year 2010, school activity fund collections
totaled $5.1 million and disbursements totaled $5.4 million. The June 30,
2010 balance based on the audited financial statements totaled $2.3 million.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the CCPS financial statements and the objectives
of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of that
audit for revenues and accounts receivable (for example, amounts due from
other governments). The auditor’s procedural review and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or deficiencies regarding significant revenue types or
accounts receivable. Such testing included the most significant revenue
types–the majority of which related to electronic fund transfers from other
government entities.
Accounting Manual for School Activity Funds Was Established and Related
Disbursements Tested Were Proper
CCPS’ Board of Education has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that school
activity funds are used only for intended purposes. In response to a
recommendation in our preceding audit, CCPS developed a Procedures
Manual for School Funds to establish a uniform method for reporting all
receipts, expenditures, and balances related to school sponsored activities.
The Manual states that school principals are responsible for maintaining
internal controls over school funds. Each school has a dedicated financial
secretary for school activity funds who is tasked with maintaining accounts,
disbursing funds, and collecting funds in accordance with the Manual.
9

--- Page 12 ---
In addition, our test of fiscal year 2010 and 2011 disbursements from the
checking accounts of two schools disclosed that the disbursements tested
were properly supported and made for valid school purposes.
Finding 1
Schools did not always comply with the procedures established in the
Procedures Manual for School Funds governing school activity funds nor
ensure account activity was reviewed in a timely manner.
Analysis
Our review of fiscal year 2010 and 2011 school activity fund transactions at
two schools disclosed that certain transactions were not processed as
required by the Procedures Manual for School Funds. Also, we noted that
account activity was not always reviewed in a timely manner. Specifically, we
noted the following conditions:
 Our test of 10 receipts at one school, totaling $87,700, disclosed that
school personnel did not properly complete the required receipt
documentation for 2 receipts totaling $29,980. Specifically, the same
employee received, counted, signed the receipt document as verifying the
total collected, and made the related deposit. Furthermore, an
independent verification was not performed to ensure all funds collected
were deposited. The Manual requires that funds received be verified by
someone other than the person receiving the funds. School activity fund
receipts at this school totaled $536,439 in fiscal year 2010.
 Our test of 10 receipts totaling $109,000 at the other school disclosed
that the school did not deposit receipts timely for 2 receipts tested totaling
$27,175. These receipts were deposited from 4 to 17 days after receipt.
For example, for one test item, receipts were collected over several weeks
prior to transferring the funds to the bookkeeper for recording and deposit.
The Manual requires that funds be counted and turned into the
bookkeeper no later than the end of the school day on which it was
collected. The Manual further states that receipts must be deposited
promptly, preferably on the same day for large amounts. School activity
fund receipts at this school totaled $481,677 in fiscal year 2010.
 Account advisors (CCPS staff assigned the responsibility to oversee
student groups and activities) did not always review school activity fund
account activity in a timely manner. According to a CCPS review of school
fund accounts as of May 2011, many accounts were not reviewed in a
timely manner, especially at the high schools. For example, at one high
school with 122 listed accounts, 51 accounts (42 percent) were not
10

--- Page 13 ---
reviewed within the past 30 days and 6 accounts had not been verified by
an advisor since the account’s inception. To enhance controls over school
activity fund accounts, CCPS developed an automated process that
facilitates the review of all fund receipt and disbursement activity.
Account advisors are required to periodically review all account activity
and use an electronic signature to document this review.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS ensure that schools are properly administering
student activity funds. Specifically, we recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that schools properly control cash receipts, deposit funds timely
and independently verify that all collections were deposited; and
b. ensure all accounts are reviewed in a timely manner.
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of Federal
Awards, fiscal year 2010 expenditures of federal award funds totaled $16
million.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to the work performed by the independent certified public accounting
firm that conducted the Single Audit of the CCPS federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor’s work and results.
Besides expressing an opinion on CCPS compliance with the terms of several
grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure’s impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2010 required
Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant-
related expenditures). The related report stated that CCPS complied, in all
material respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal
programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the
operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did not identify any
material weaknesses or deficiencies.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
CCPS did not ensure that all costs associated with Medicaid-subsidized
services were recovered.
Analysis
Although CCPS had a process to track the submission of documentation used
to recover Medicaid-subsidized costs for applicable students, CCPS did not
ensure that its Medical Assistance billing staff received documentation for all
services performed each month from the individual schools. In this regard,
records generated by the CCPS Medical Assistance billing system identified
students who received eligible services for which no subsequent billing was
processed. Based on these records (which we tested and found sufficiently
reliable), we estimated that CCPS may have recovered approximately
$275,000 less than it could have due to the failure to receive documentation
from individual schools for the period from August 2010 to February 2011.
According to the fiscal year 2010 audited financial statements,
reimbursement for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled $875,000, and as of
May 2011 according to CCPS records, approximately 900 students were
eligible to receive Medicaid-subsidized services. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS ensure that all eligible costs for Medicaid-
subsidized services are properly documented and fully recovered (repeat).
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to CCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled $64 million
during fiscal year 2010. CCPS’ Board of Education policy requires the Board
to approve all contracts with a bid value of $25,000 or greater. The policy
also requires the solicitation of quotes for purchases from $7,500 to
$25,000. To implement the policy, CCPS developed detailed procedures to
govern the procurement process. CCPS properly procured the contracts we
selected for review.
Also, in response to our preceding audit report, CCPS took a number of
actions to better control the use of corporate purchasing cards (CPC). For
example, CCPS developed a detailed Procurement Card User Guide, instituted
periodic reviews of card usage including reducing or eliminating spending
limits for underutilized or unused cards, required independent reconciliation
12

--- Page 15 ---
of user charges to the master billing, and required independent reviews of all
processed transactions by Central Finance Office staff. According to CCPS
records, as of November 2010, CCPS had approximately 325 active CPC. For
fiscal year 2010, expenditures made using the CPC totaled $8.6 million.
Although CCPS had instituted these measures, we found that control over
disbursements could be improved and that certain CPC transactions may not
have been processed in accordance with established CPC procedures.
Finding 3
Internal controls over procurements and disbursements were not adequate.
Analysis
Although CCPS had established a process to periodically review capabilities
assigned to employees on the automated financial system used to process
purchases and disbursements, our testing disclosed several instances in
which employee capabilities allowed them to record and process critical
transactions. Specifically, we found that four employees’ assigned
capabilities allowed unrestricted access to critical system functions (including
incompatible functions such as entering accounts payable, adding and
deleting vendors, entering and posting manual and void checks, and printing
checks). As a result of these incompatible capabilities, improper or erroneous
transactions could be processed without detection. One of these employees
did not require any of these capabilities to perform their job duties. Our testing
of purchase orders and invoice payments processed by these employees did
not disclose any inappropriate or erroneous transactions. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Although CCPS had a process in place to review all checks for propriety prior
to issuance, the employees responsible for this review function were two of
the four employees with the unrestricted access capabilities commented on
above. Accordingly, this review was not an effective control process due to
the lack of reviewer independence from the transaction processing.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS improve its internal controls over procurements
and disbursements. Specifically, we recommend that CCPS
a. restrict critical system access capabilities so that incompatible functions
are separated (repeat), and
b. ensure that the comparisons of transactions and checks processed to the
related supporting documentation are performed by persons independent
of transaction processing.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 4
Certain purchasing card transactions did not appear to be in compliance with
CCPS policy and were not always properly supported.
Analysis
Our test of 40 corporate purchasing card (CPC) transactions totaling $58,900
made during fiscal years 2010 and 2011 disclosed the following conditions:
 CCPS lacked documentation to support the propriety of certain CPC
transactions for the purchase of gift cards. Specifically, 12 transactions
totaling $4,800 used to purchase gift cards did not include documentation
listing who was to receive the gift cards and documentation that the cards
were distributed as intended.
 Certain transactions using school activity or principal funds were made to
purchase items to benefit employees. Five transactions totaling $2,000
(including one transaction noted in the preceding paragraph) were used to
purchase items subsequently awarded to school staff (such as chocolates
and gift cards). This appears to violate CCPS’ Procedures Manual for
School Funds which states that principal funds may only be used to
benefit the general student body and student funds shall benefit those
students who have contributed to the accumulation of such funds.
Furthermore, the Procurement Card User Guide specifically prohibits the
use of a CPC for the purchase of gift cards for employees or employee
volunteers.
Similar conditions regarding the use of corporate purchasing cards were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS
a. improve controls over its credit card program by reviewing the propriety of
CPC transactions for the purchase of gift cards (including the
aforementioned transactions), and ensure that appropriate supporting
documentation is being maintained (repeat); and
b. ensure that CPCs are used in accordance with current requirements that
limit the use of school activity funds and principal funds as well as
enforcing its policy prohibiting the purchase of gift cards for employees.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS budget.
According to CCPS records, fiscal year 2010 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled $260 million. According to MSDE reports, as of June 2010, CCPS had
3,594 full-time equivalent positions, including 1,084 non-instructional
positions.
Internal Control over the Processing of Human Resources and Payroll
Transactions Was Adequate
CCPS had established adequate controls over its automated human resources
and payroll processing systems. Specifically, adequate automated and
manual processes were in place to ensure the propriety and accuracy of
additions and modifications to personnel information as well as related payroll
disbursements. These included an independent supervisory review of human
resources and payroll transactions as well as a periodic review of all access to
the automated system used to process these transactions to ensure that
access was appropriate based on the employee’s position and job duties.
Payments to Employees were in Accordance with Approved Contracts and
Appropriate Documentation
Our test of regular and hourly payroll transactions processed in fiscal year
2011 disclosed that CCPS made payments in accordance with appropriate
contracts and the payments agreed to support documentation such as
timesheets or other attendance records.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $49.5 million as of June 30, 2010.
CCPS uses automated records to track equipment inventory with a cost of
$1,000 or more (including items capitalized for financial statement purposes).
In addition, CCPS tracks certain other technology sensitive equipment costing
over $500 (such as laptops and projectors) for control purposes.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 5
Internal controls and record keeping over equipment were not adequate.
Analysis
Our review disclosed that CCPS controls and record keeping were inadequate
to ensure accountability over equipment. Specifically, the audit disclosed the
following conditions:
 Although CCPS procedures require that schools periodically conduct
physical inventories of items included in the inventory records, there was
no documentation to substantiate that these inventories were completed
as required. Although each school received an annual listing of all items
assigned to that school according to the automated inventory records, we
were advised that the listing was used to facilitate reporting of disposals,
transfers and related activity, but CCPS could not provide documentation
that the schools actually conducted the required inventories. In addition,
CCPS had no procedures specifying the process to be followed to
investigate and resolve lost or missing items.
Furthermore, certain technology sensitive items were not subject to
periodic physical verification. In this regard, CCPS’ Technology Services
Department maintained system-wide automated records over certain
technology sensitive items and could track all computers attached to the
CCPS network to verify their existence and location. However, CCPS had
no process to ensure accountability for computers not attached to the
network and other sensitive equipment such as electronic whiteboards
and projectors.
 The employees responsible for maintaining and updating inventory records
at the schools, essentially the property custodians, also had the
responsibility to verify the existence of the equipment as recorded on the
annual listing of items assigned to the school. CCPS did not have a
process to independently verify the accuracy of the inventory records, at
least on a test basis.
 Although CCPS procedures require that the automated inventory records
include a property ID number and serial number for identification
purposes, our review of these records disclosed that the records were
often incomplete. For example, the records for one high school showed a
number of items (such as flat screen televisions) that did not include serial
numbers or other item-specific identification. In addition, CCPS did not
require that items be tagged to identify the items as property of CCPS.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 Certain equipment was not recorded in the detail records. Of 30
capital/sensitive equipment items totaling $34,800 tested from
purchases made in fiscal years 2010 and 2011, we found that 14 of the
items totaling $17,300 were not recorded in CCPS’ equipment inventory
records, including the records maintained by the Technology Services
Department. We sighted each of the unrecorded items. Our test of 15
sensitive equipment items (computers) sighted at 3 locations disclosed
that 2 items were not included in the detail equipment records and 1 item
could not be positively identified as being recorded due to the lack of a
serial number in the automated records.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure a physical inventory of all school equipment items and sensitive
technology items are periodically conducted and the results are reconciled
with the automated records;
b. implement a process to periodically and independently verify the results of
the physical inventories taken by the schools, at least on a test basis;
c. update its existing procedures to include directives on the processes for
following up on lost and missing items (repeat);
d. ensure that the inventory records include all required equipment
identification information and that all equipment (especially sensitive
equipment) is tagged or otherwise identified as CCPS property (repeat);
and
e. ensure that the equipment inventory records accurately include all
equipment owned by CCPS.
Information Technology
Background
CCPS’ Technology Services Department maintains and administers CCPS’
computer network, computer operations, and instructional information
systems applications. CCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet
connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the
computer resources located at CCPS headquarters. The Technology
Services Department maintains a server room at the headquarters location
and at a disaster recovery location where numerous computer servers operate
to support CCPS’ information system applications and provide alternate
processing capability. The Technology Services Department supports CCPS’
17

--- Page 20 ---
critical applications including the student management application and the
financial/human resources application which includes accounts payable,
purchasing, human resources, and payroll.
CCPS Properly Procured a Contract for New Student Information Software
CCPS properly procured software and related implementation services (such
as training) for a new student information system. The procurement process
included submission and review of technical proposals by a team of CCPS
staff, user committee review, and selection of the lowest price of the
technically qualified vendors. The Board approved the contract. The system
was implemented for the 2011 school year (placed in service effective July 1,
2010). Based on our review of available documentation, CCPS implemented
the system in accordance with its anticipated schedule.
Finding 6
Administrative access to the CCPS network was not adequately restricted and
network password controls were not adequate.
Analysis
Administrative access to the CCPS network was not adequately restricted and
network password controls were not adequate. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 Eleven accounts were improperly placed in the domain administrators
group. As a result of this condition, these accounts had administrative
control over all domain resources and could access and make
unauthorized modifications to critical data without detection by
management.
 Twelve development staff accounts were improperly placed in the local
administrators group on two critical servers. As a result of this condition,
these accounts had full control over all data files and programs residing on
these servers.
 Network password controls with respect to password length, complexity,
age, and history were not adequate. For example, the minimum password
length was set to only six characters.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS
a. remove unnecessary accounts from the domain administrator and local
administrator groups; and
b. implement stronger password controls with respect to length, complexity,
age, and history.
Finding 7
Student management system database controls were not sufficient and
certain program change controls were inadequate.
Analysis
Student management system database controls were not sufficient and
program change controls over the financial/human resources application’s
computer programs were inadequate. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
 Critical security and audit events on the student management system
database were not logged. As a result, an audit trail to identify any
unusual or questionable activities did not exist. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Seventeen accounts were improperly given full control over the student
management system database. As a result, these accounts had improper
modification access to all data on this database.
 Program change controls over the financial/human resources
application’s computer programs did not provide for a comparison report
of program changes or a technical review of the changes by information
technology management personnel. In addition, documentation of
program change reviews and approvals was not maintained and the
programmers who performed the changes moved the programs into
production. As a result of these conditions, unauthorized or erroneous
changes to production programs could occur without detection. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS
a. log critical security and audit events on the student management system
database, regularly review these logs, investigate unusual or questionable
items, and document and retain these reviews and investigations; (repeat)
19

--- Page 22 ---
b. remove all unnecessary access to the student management system
database; and
c. establish controls over program changes to ensure that all changes to
production programs are properly reviewed and approved (repeat).
Finding 8
CCPS network was not properly secured.
Analysis
CCPS network was not properly secured. Specifically, we noted the following
conditions:
 CCPS used an intrusion prevention system (IPS) to monitor network traffic.
However, CCPS did not effectively employ the IPS component to monitor
network traffic flowing to critical CCPS network resources. As a result, the
CCPS would not be aware of attacks against the internal network
originating from the Internet and other untrusted locations.
 Firewall rules allowed numerous insecure and unnecessary connections to
critical network devices. For example, firewall rules were not configured to
adequately secure connections into the CCPS network from the Internet.
 Four vendors who performed support services for CCPS and students
using the CCPS wide area network had unrestricted network level access
to the entire CCPS network. Such access should be limited to the devices
and ports necessary for these vendors and students to perform their
required tasks.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS adequately secure its network. Specifically, we
recommend that CCPS
a. employ the IPS to effectively monitor network traffic,
b. configure firewalls to adequately secure connections into the CCPS
network, and
c. restrict network level access.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS maintains 44 schools (totaling 4.4 million square feet) with a staff of
303 custodial and 73 maintenance personnel. According to the fiscal year
2011 Capital Improvement Plan (CIP), the estimated cost of construction,
20

--- Page 23 ---
major renovations, and systemic improvements that were needed for CCPS
facilities over the next six years totaled $212 million.
An Inclusive Process is Used to Plan for School Facility Construction, Major
Renovation, and Repair Projects
CCPS uses a comprehensive process, which includes the solicitation of input
from various sources, to plan for future school construction, major renovation,
and repair projects. For example, CCPS uses public meetings, student
demographic data, and other internal sources (such as current curriculum
mandates) to develop its six-year CIP. The CIP is presented to and approved
by the Board, as well as elected local officials. In addition, the Educational
Facilities Master Plan that is used to guide overall CCPS operations
incorporates CIP objectives and strategies related to school facilities. Our
review of the fiscal year 2011-2016 CIP disclosed that it appeared to address
the needs of CCPS based on items such as student demographics and facility
assessments.
CCPS Procedures and Practices for Bidding, Awarding, and Monitoring
Construction Projects Appeared Proper
Our review of 11 construction-related procurements totaling $22.9 million
disclosed that CCPS properly procured all 11 contracts, including review and
approval by the Board. In addition, our test of 11 invoices totaling $1.9
million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were properly reviewed
and approved and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with the related
contract terms.
Energy Conservation Contract
Finding 9
CCPS had not implemented a process to independently verify the reported
project benefits of its energy conservation contract.
Analysis
CCPS had not implemented a process to independently ensure that the
calculation and reported amount of cost savings was accurate and in
accordance with the methodology specified in its energy conservation
contract. As a result, CCPS lacked assurance that the guaranteed cost
savings established in the contract were realized.
The CCPS Board has adopted an energy conservation policy and CCPS has
included energy conservation in its annual facilities planning documents. In
order to implement its overall energy management conservation program,
21

--- Page 24 ---
CCPS contracts with a third-party vendor to provide a number of services
including physical plant improvements, installation of energy efficient devices
(lighting for example) and new heating and cooling equipment at certain
schools as well as a system to monitor, measure, and achieve project benefits
as a result of such improvements. The contract, beginning in October 2004,
included costs of $9.4 million for system improvements and $7.1 million for
system monitoring and reporting over the 15-year life of the contract. The
total cost of the contract, including financing costs, is expected to be $19.5
million.
The energy performance contract guarantees costs savings to CCPS totaling
$10.8 million over the life of the contract. Cost savings (actually cost
avoidance) is to be reported annually to CCPS using a methodology stated in
the contract. The contractor is required to submit a measurement and
verification (M&V) report that details the cost savings/avoidance and energy
usage by school.
CCPS had not implemented a process to verify the accuracy of the reported
cost savings. Based on the report received for contract year 2008-2009 (the
most recent received by CCPS), the contactor indicated that actual cost
avoidance from the beginning of the contract totaled $3 million to date, which
exceeded the guaranteed cost avoidance for the related period by $970,000.
The majority of this excess related to the installation year, when actual cost
avoidance reportedly exceeded the guarantee by $880,000. As of June 1,
2011, CCPS owed $4.2 million for the remainder of the services portion of the
contract (contract years 8 to 15).
Industry best practices state that, when a contractor is hired by a facility
owner to make and report energy savings, the owner may need an
independent verifier to review the savings reports. Independent verifiers are
typically engineering consultants with experience and knowledge in energy
performance contracting.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. independently verify the contractor reported data, at least on a test basis,
to ensure the propriety of critical calculations (such as guaranteed cost
savings) included in the related contract and subsequent M&V reports;
and
b. retain documentation of all such verifications performed.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Transportation Services
Background
CCPS has approximately 26,700 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on one of 295
contractor-owned buses or 7 school-owned buses. According to CCPS
records, fiscal year 2010 transportation costs totaled $19.4 million, with 91
percent representing payments to contractors. Of the 5.4 million reported
route miles for the 2009-2010 school year, 36 percent represented miles
traveled to transport disabled students.
CCPS had Appropriate Practices in Place to Help Ensure Efficient Use of
Regular Bus Routes
CCPS used a variety of practices in order to ensure efficient use of buses for
regular bus routes. These practices included analysis of prior year’s routes,
projected enrollments, and use of routing software. Routing software provides
the number and location of students and is updated periodically throughout
the school year. CCPS is in the process of updating routing software to a new
software package. In addition, CCPS reviews routes throughout the year
based on data provided by the contractors (as to route time and load) and
updates routes as needed.
We reviewed ridership data as of March 2011 to determine the efficiency of
CCPS bus routes. Our analysis and tests of CCPS ridership data disclosed that
CCPS generally operated buses within capacity targets (that is, 75 percent of
intended capacity3).
Payments Made to Bus Contractors were Properly Controlled and Agreed to
Supporting Documentation
In response to our preceding audit report, CCPS took a number of actions in
order to better control payments to bus contractors. Contractors receive
payments based on manifests that include driving time and mileage. CCPS
personnel periodically verified the information provided on the manifests.
Hours and mileage are entered into an automated system and payment
reports are reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel prior to biweekly
submission to the Finance Office for processing. Our tests of payments made
to 10 contractors for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 disclosed that payments
agreed to submitted manifests and contractually agreed upon rates.
3 Like other LEAs, CCPS uses a lower capacity rate than the manufacturer’s stated bus capacities. For
example, CCPS determined the capacity for high, middle, and elementary schools routes at 44, 51, and
58 passengers, respectively, based on 66 passenger buses (manufacturer stated capacity).
23

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 10
CCPS did not base certain elements used to determine payment amounts to
bus contractors on market conditions or actual costs.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did
not reflect market conditions or actual costs over time. The Per Vehicle
Allotment (PVA) is one of several elements used to determine payment
amounts to bus contractors. CCPS’ bus contracts are for one year with annual
renewals generally granted over the 12-year useful life of the bus. Our review
of the contract terms disclosed the following conditions:
 CCPS pays contractors an annual PVA for each bus. The PVA formula uses
the average cost of buses purchased by the contractors multiplied by a
factor that includes depreciation and a fixed rate of return on the initial
outlay for the bus purchase. CCPS contractors generally receive the
annual PVA payment for the 12-year life of the bus. However, the PVA is
calculated as if the bus will only be in operation for 10 years. As a result,
the PVA rate overpays the contractors for depreciation for the life of the
contract (that is, the depreciation cost paid to bus contractors over 12
years will be 120 percent of the bus’ cost). According to CCPS, this
method provides a “profit” for the contractors.
To estimate the dollar effect, we calculated the PVA for each of the 129
new buses (regular and special education) placed into service from fiscal
years 2007 to 2011 using a 12-year depreciation factor (8.33 percent per
year instead of 10 percent per year), and compared these calculated PVA
results to the actual PVA amounts paid by CCPS. This comparison showed
that the CCPS annual PVA payments per bus were from $1,292 to $1,632
more than the payments would have been had CCPS used the 12-year
depreciation factor. The effect is that, over the 12-year life of these 129
buses, CCPS will pay out approximately $2.3 million more than if CCPS
used the actual life of the bus. This analysis does not include the effects
for any new bus purchases that may be made after fiscal year 2011 and
those purchased prior to 2007.
 In addition to the PVA, CCPS payments to bus contractors also include a
per mile fee for maintenance and operating costs (including fuel). CCPS
pays contractors for fuel usage using an assumed miles per gallon (mpg)
rate below industry standards. Specifically, CCPS uses 6.5 mpg when
determining the fuel cost reimbursement paid to bus contractors, although
no data were accumulated and analyzed to substantiate the rate.
However, the American School Bus Council reported that the national
24

--- Page 27 ---
average usage for a large school bus with a diesel engine is 7 mpg. CCPS
acknowledged that this rate allows the contractors a small profit if they
can achieve mileage above 6.5 mpg. Although the difference does not
appear large, if contractor fuel payments were calculated using 7 mpg
instead of the 6.5 mpg used by CCPS, the payments would have been
lower (for example, a total of $300,000 less during school years 2010 and
2011).
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS
a. reevaluate the elements used to determine payment amounts to bus
contractors in future contracts, and
b. document the rationale for the various payment components.
Food Service Operations
Background
CCPS has a cooking cafeteria at 39 of its 44 schools. Food and related
supplies are received and stored in each school. In fiscal year 2011, CCPS
had 125.5 cafeteria positions (consisting of 122 cafeteria positions and 3.5
administrative positions). According to the audited financial statements, food
service operations expenditures exceeded revenues by $319,000 for fiscal
year 2010 prior to a transfer of $400,000 in general operating funds to the
food service fund.
Controls Over Food Ordering and Payment of Related Invoices Were Adequate
Our review of CCPS procedures over food ordering and usage disclosed that
cafeteria managers monitor food usage on a daily basis and that this
information is reviewed periodically by food service management. We also
tested contracts procured for food supplies in fiscal year 2010 and 2011 and
related invoices, and found that CCPS properly procured the contracts and
that payments made to vendors were in accordance with the terms of the
related contracts.
Finding 11
CCPS has experienced persistent deficits in its food service operations.
Analysis
CCPS food service operation expenditures have consistently exceeded
revenues. For fiscal years 2007 to 2010, total expenditures have exceeded
related revenues (exclusive of any transfers of general funds) by over $1
million, see Table 1 on the following page. During the same period, CCPS’
25

--- Page 28 ---
budgets indicate that food service fund revenues were to equal expenditures
for each fiscal year.
Table 1
Operating Deficiencies
Fiscal Years 2007 to 2010
Fiscal Year Revenue Expenditures Deficit
2007 $ 6,525,827 $ 6,536,121 $ 10,294
2008 6,467,971 6,985,165 517,194
2009 6,370,962 6,545,583 174,621
2010 6,069,303 6,387,855 318,552
Total $ 25,434,063 $ 26,454,724 $ 1,020,661
Source: Audited Financial Statements
Based on our analysis of CCPS food service costs, it would appear that a
significant contributing factor to these deficits is personnel costs. Specifically,
CCPS overall cost per meal and cost per meal related to salaries and wages
were substantially higher than that of comparably-sized school systems as
shown in Table 2 below.
Table 2
Comparison of Per Meal Costs by Category of Expenditure
Fiscal Year 2010 (unaudited)
Supplies Total Average
Salaries Contracted
School System and Other Equipment Cost Per
and Wages Services
Materials Charges Meal
Carroll County $ 1.88 $ 0.01 $ 1.10 $ 0.02 $ 0.01 $ 3.02
Charles County 1.49 0.03 1.31 0.02 0.01 2.86
Frederick County 1.55 - 0.85 0.20 0.04 2.64
Harford County 0.94 0.06 1.10 0.47 0.05 2.62
Washington County 1.36 0.01 1.36 0.04 0.07 2.84
Average of
Comparable $1.33 $0.03 $1.16 $0.18 $0.04 $2.74
Systems
Source: LEA provided data
We were advised by CCPS management that it monitors meals per labor hour
or MPLH (a common efficiency measure) and has taken actions over the past
several years to reduce staffing such as reducing hours and eliminating
positions where practical. However, our tests of MPLH and a review of CCPS
26

--- Page 29 ---
MPLH calculations showed that a number of schools did not meet industry
guidelines, especially at the CCPS high schools. For example, in May 2010,
CCPS determined that the MPLH for its 8 high schools ranged from 8.1 to
13.2 MPLH, well below industry guidelines of 18-19 MPLH for similarly-sized
schools. Per discussion with CCPS staff, although CCPS routinely calculated
MPLH, it did not use predetermined or industry standard goals to compare
against its performance and make appropriate operating adjustments.
We also found that student meal participation was generally below that of
other similarly-sized school systems and this could be contributing to
inefficient operations. We compared student participation (based on actual
meals served versus total potential meals that could be served) for each type
of student participant (paid, free, and reduced price). See Table 3 below for
the participation rates for fiscal year 2007 as compared to the rates for fiscal
year 2010 for paid lunches at CCPS and four similarly-sized systems. CCPS
had the lowest participation rate for paid lunches in fiscal year 2010 as well
as the largest decrease in participation over the period. While CCPS monitors
average daily meals served, it did not determine participation rates or
establish targets (and related actions) to increase participation.
Table 3
Change in Rate of Student Participation in School Lunches – Paid Lunches
Fiscal Year 2007 to 2010 (unaudited)
Fiscal Year 2007 Fiscal Year 2010 Change in
School System
Participation Rate Participation Rate Participation
Carroll County 36.9% 27.9% -24.4%
Charles County 48.8% 43.9% -10.0%
Frederick County 29.7% 28.1% -5.4%
Harford County 44.4% 43.6% -1.7%
Washington County 48.4% 45.5% -6.0%
Source: MSDE Fact Book
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish performance benchmarks for existing performance measures
(average cost per meal, meals per labor hour, participation rates), using
industry standards or other accepted practices; and
b. monitor actual performance against these benchmarks and take
appropriate actions to improve operating results.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Finding 12
Internal controls over cash receipts processed at certain school cafeterias
were not adequate and CCPS’ manual system to track student meal
purchases may be inefficient.
Analysis
Internal control over cash receipts processed at two school cafeterias
reviewed was not adequate. Furthermore, the CCPS’ manual system to track
student meal purchases may not be efficient. Specifically, we found the
following conditions:
 At two schools reviewed, cashiers did not always close the cash drawer
between transactions, did not always record the transaction in the register
at the time of the sale, and did not restrictively endorse checks (received
for advance meal purchases) at the time of receipt. Revenues at these
schools totaled $475,000 for fiscal year 2010 according to CCPS records.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 CCPS’ manual process used to record and track advance meal purchases
appears to be inefficient. Parents may purchase meals in advance by
completing the appropriate paperwork and submitting payment to the
central finance office or by providing bank account information for
electronic payments. Central office personnel process the related revenue
and submit spreadsheets to each school to advise them of students
participating in the meal program. Each school manually tracks student
use of meals through logs or other manual documents. In other school
systems, automated cash register systems are used to track advanced
meal purchases and student meal uses. CCPS cash registers do not have
this capability or certain other reporting capabilities (monthly sales
reports) that other systems possess. The use of a manual process can
lead to errors in recording and accounting for student meals. Since the
revenue for advance meal purchases was not separately accounted for in
CCPS’ records, the extent of such purchases could not be readily
determined.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that schools institute adequate internal controls over all cash
receipts, including recording all transactions immediately and restrictively
endorsing checks when initially received (repeat); and
b. investigate the feasibility of installing a new cash register system to
improve efficiency and reporting capabilities.
28

--- Page 31 ---
School Board Oversight
Background
CCPS’ Board of Education is composed of five elected members and one non-
voting student representative. In its oversight responsibilities, the Board
contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent audits of
the CCPS financial statements and federal programs. Due to the size of CCPS
and the limited membership of the Board, a committee structure is not used,
but rather individual members are periodically informed of and become
involved in all aspects of operations and governance.
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure.
Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all CCPS
employees. CCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members
who are not subject to the authority of the Board of Education to interpret
ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent,
Assistant Superintendents, and a number of other administrators (such as
school principals and agency buyers) by January 31st of each year. Our test of
20 judgmentally selected employees required to submit financial disclosure
forms for calendar year 2010 disclosed that forms were generally submitted
as required.
Other Financial Controls
Finding 13
CCPS had not implemented a formal investment policy and current
investment practices should be reevaluated.
Analysis
CCPS’ Board of Education had not adopted a formal investment policy.
Furthermore, CCPS should reevaluate certain banking arrangements and
investment practices to ascertain whether interest earnings are being
maximized.
29

--- Page 32 ---
According to the fiscal year 2010 financial statements (the most recent
available as of our audit), CCPS invested funds in the Maryland Local
Government Investment Pool and in repurchase agreements. However, a
considerable amount of operating funds was on deposit in its general
checking account with a bank. Under its current banking agreement, effective
February 1, 2010, CCPS receives a credit against bank fees incurred in lieu of
any interest earnings on its general checking account balance. This decision
was based on the bank’s recommendation due to historically low interest
rates.
However, our analysis of CCPS’ main bank account disclosed that CCPS
should further analyze this arrangement. Specifically, the bank’s analysis was
based on an estimated average account balance of $3 million and estimated
bank fees of approximately $2,500 per month. For the period from February
2010 through May 2011, the average daily collected balance in the account
was approximately $16.4 million. CCPS received earnings credits based on a
tiered interest rate structure to offset eligible service fee charges. According
to CCPS provided documentation (which we traced to bank provided
information), for the above period, CCPS received earnings credits totaling
$100,000. The actual service fees CCPS incurred were approximately
$74,000, which is even less than the earnings credit received.
Based on CCPS’ average daily balance, CCPS could consider investing a
higher portion of its funds into other legally permitted investments, such as
the Maryland Government Investment Pool. For the 16-month period we
reviewed, the ending daily balance in the checking account dropped below $5
million just 4 days (out of 485 days in the period) and below $10 million for
62 days. State law specifies that county boards of education may invest
funds in any manner permitted by law for the Maryland Office of the State
Treasurer.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that CCPS
a. develop a formal investment policy including the Board’s investment
philosophy; and
b. regularly monitor cash flow, consider investing a higher portion of its funds
in other investment options such as the Investment Pool, and adjust the
arrangement with the bank for the general checking account to increase
overall net earnings.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Finding 14
CCPS had not implemented procedures to ensure that claims paid by the
third-party health care administrator were reviewed for propriety and had not
verified the authenticity of program participants.
Analysis
CCPS did not ensure that the claims paid by the third-party health care
administrator were reviewed for propriety. CCPS self funds all health care
costs. CCPS uses a third-party administrator to pay claims on behalf of plan
participants and authorized dependents. Providers submit claims to the
administrator who pays them on behalf of CCPS and then obtains
reimbursement from CCPS for actual costs of claims paid. CCPS pays an
administrative fee for these services. For fiscal year 2010, according to
agency records, amounts paid for health care totaled $41.1 million, including
administrative fees of approximately $1.9 million.
Also, CCPS did not have any process to periodically verify the authenticity of
covered program participants and their listed dependents. As of March 2011,
CCPS provided health care coverage to 5,053 employees, retirees, and their
dependents.
Recommended practices published by the Government Finance Officers
Association state that health care cost containment, which includes
verification of enrolled participants, is a critical component of long-term
financial planning and budgeting.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that CCPS institute processes to
a. verify the propriety of claims paid by the third-party administrator, at least
on a test basis; and
b. verify the eligibility of enrolled health care program participants and their
listed dependents.
31

--- Page 34 ---
32

--- Page 35 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Carroll County Public
Schools (CCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on CCPS dated January 5, 2007, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at CCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
33

--- Page 36 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).4
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2009 through December 31,
2010. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits CCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to CCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from August 2010 to June 2011. The CCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
4 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
34

--- Page 38 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to the
Draft Legislative Audit Report
March 15, 2012

--- Page 39 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 2 of 11
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS ensure that schools are properly administering student activity
funds. Specifically, we recommend that CCPS:
a. ensure that schools properly control cash receipts, deposit funds timely and
independently verify that all collections were deposited; and
b. ensure all accounts are reviewed in a timely manner.
Response
a. CCPS implemented the Procedures Manual for School Funds which includes procedures
to properly control cash receipts, deposit funds timely and independently verify that all
funds collected are deposited. We addressed the specific receipts and deposits noted in
the analysis with the appropriate employees who were in violation of the established
procedures. We examined the deposit tickets related to the 2 receipts totaling $29,980
in question and an independent verification was performed to ensure that all collections
were deposited. In addition, we will continue to work to reiterate and remind schools of
the necessity of complying with the established procedures for processing receipts. The
following steps have already been taken:
 Attending financial training classes is a requirement for all principals and assistant
principals. This training specifically addresses the need for administrators and their
staff to comply with established procedures, including the processing of receipts, the
counting and verifying of funds, and the importance of timely bank deposits. The
financial secretaries also attend an annual training class where these same
procedures are discussed and reiterated.
 To further ensure compliance with procedures, a new position was created in the
finance department to deal specifically with financial transactions at schools. The
creation of this position was a direct result of the 2006 legislative audit. Some of the
responsibilities for this position include reviewing monthly bank statements, bank
reconciliations, cash receipt forms, entries into the finance system, and pre-
numbered cash receipts for every school. If any errors are made, they are corrected
immediately.
 The office of internal audit also performs comprehensive school audits that include
testing of who originally receives funds, who verifies the funds, the timeliness of
deposits, and documented evidence of the independent verification that all funds
received were deposited. School audit reports are distributed to the principal,
director at the appropriate level (i.e. elementary, middle, and high) and the audit
committee.
b. As stated in the analysis, CCPS has developed a web-based system that allows
designated account advisors to review all account receipts and disbursements.
Analysis of all accounts county-wide indicated that 85% were verified within 30 days
as of May 2011. We have addressed the appropriate employees at the specific schools
who were in violation of the established procedures. In addition, we will work to
reiterate and remind schools to follow procedures to ensure that all accounts are
reviewed in a timely manner.

--- Page 40 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 3 of 11
Federal Funds
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS ensure that all eligible costs for Medicaid-subsidized services are
properly documented and fully recovered (repeat).
Response
CCPS agrees with the recommendation but wishes to state this can only occur in a perfect
scenario whereby there is 100% student/provider attendance. The audit implies that CCPS
could capture at least $275,000 for the period from August 2010 to February 2011. We
believe we could have captured at most that amount.
We continue to be in the process of developing an electronic billing system. The development
of this system involves three phases. Phase I includes the development of the program for
data submission to DHMH. This phase is expected to be completed by July 2012. Phase II is
development and testing of the new process, which is expected to occur during the 2012-
2013 school year. Full implementation, Phase III, is anticipated to occur during the 2013-
2014 school year. This will reduce human error and make the process far more efficient,
which will result in far more eligible costs being recovered.
Service providers have been assigned in such a manner to allow for billable services to be
recovered by assuring fully certified and licensed providers.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS improve its internal controls over procurements and
disbursements. Specifically, we recommend that CCPS
a. restrict critical system access capabilities so that incompatible functions are separated
(repeat), and
b. ensure that the comparisons of transactions and checks processed to the related
supporting documentation are performed by persons independent of transaction
processing.
Response
a. CCPS agrees with the recommendation. As stated in the discussion notes, CCPS has
established a process to periodically review employee access to the automated financial
system used to process purchases and disbursements. Of the four employees with
unrestricted access referred to in the analysis, we have already taken action and
restricted system access for three of the employees. Regarding the remaining employee,
we have compensating controls in place to ensure the security and integrity of the system.
The controls allow the finance department to run effectively with a limited number of
employees. Employees are cross-trained and act as back-ups which allows the
department to run smoothly and continuously in the event of a key employee’s absence.
b. CCPS agrees with the recommendation. As stated in the discussion notes, CCPS has a
process in place to review all checks for propriety prior to issuance. Together with the
actions taken to restrict critical system access capabilities to those employees whose job
duties require such access, we believe we have addressed this recommendation.

--- Page 41 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 4 of 11
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS
a. improve controls over its credit card program by reviewing the propriety of CPC
transactions for the purchase of gift cards (including the aforementioned transactions),
and ensure that appropriate supporting documentation is being maintained (repeat); and
b. ensure that CPCs are used in accordance with current requirements that limit the use of
school activity funds and principal funds as well as enforcing its policy prohibiting the
purchase of gift cards for employees.
Response
a. CCPS agrees with the recommendation. Effective September 1, 2011, CCPS
implemented a requirement that all gift card purchases must be documented with a gift
card form, which details the individual responsible for distributing the gift card, the
recipient of the gift card, the approving principal/supervisor, and the type of gift and
amount.
The finance department communicated these changes to school/central office
administrators at monthly principal and cabinet meetings. The new gift card form is
available and the requirements are detailed on our website.
b. CCPS agrees with the recommendation and this is our practice. The finance department
reviews and reconciles each procurement card transaction on a monthly basis. This
entails the review of thousands of transactions annually. The gift card purchases
identified in this analysis were “flagged” in the monthly review process and addressed
accordingly with the responsible cardholder.
CCPS will continue to communicate and educate our cardholders of the importance of
adhering to the procurement card user guide. During our annual review of the
procurement card program, we recently revised our user guide to incorporate a “violation
of policy” section, which addresses minor and major offenses and the repercussions of
failing to follow the guidelines.
In addition, CCPS implemented a requirement that all gift card purchases be documented
with a gift card form, which details the individual responsible for distributing the gift card,
the recipient of the gift card, the approving principal/supervisor, and the type of gift and
amount. CCPS only allows gift card purchases for student incentives and for non-
employee volunteers.
CCPS will continue to monitor purchases to ensure student activity funds are spent in a
manner which benefits the general student population. While we do not promote the
purchase of staff appreciation gifts, we believe these small tokens of appreciation express
gratitude and can improve staff moral which ultimately benefits the general student body.

--- Page 42 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 5 of 11
Inventory Control and Accountability
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure a physical inventory of all school equipment items and sensitive technology items
are periodically conducted and the results are reconciled with the automated records;
b. implement a process to periodically and independently verify that results of the physical
inventories taken by the schools, at least on a test basis;
c. update its existing procedures to include directives on the processes for following up on
lost and missing items (repeat);
d. ensure that the inventory records include all required equipment identification
information and that all equipment (especially sensitive equipment) is tagged or
otherwise identified as CCPS property (repeat); and
e. ensure that the equipment inventory records accurately include all equipment owned by
CCPS.
Response
a. CCPS agrees. Procedures will be refined and promulgated for all cost centers to conduct
periodic independent physical inventories of equipment and sensitive technology, and to
reconcile all identified differences with inventory records. This process will include
appropriate training for cost centers in conducting physical inventories, investigating and
resolving differences identified between the physical inventory and inventory records, and
documenting these resolutions. Documentation of this process will be maintained for
review. These procedures will be incorporated into the system’s Capital Assets Manual.
The internal auditor will develop a periodic cycle of verification of these physical
inventories to include reviews of physical inventory documentation and independent tests
of inventory.
b. CCPS agrees. As noted above in item a., the internal auditor will develop a periodic cycle
of verification of these physical inventories to include reviews of physical inventory
documentation and independent tests of inventory.
c. CCPS agrees. As noted above in item a., procedures to conduct periodic independent
inventories of equipment to reconcile all identified differences with inventory records will
be incorporated into the system’s Capital Assets Manual.
d. CCPS agrees. As part of the initial physical inventory of all cost centers, the reconciliation
process will include verification of information in the inventory records and the recording
of any missing information. We are currently exploring various options to permanently
mark ownership of equipment, including sensitive and non-sensitive equipment. Since
equipment is shipped directly to cost centers, the cost centers will be trained and
provided what is needed to implement the selected method. As part of the cyclical tests
of physical inventory, the internal auditor will verify that equipment is being properly
marked.
e. CCPS agrees. As part of the refinement of the inventory process noted above in item a.,
verification of technology service tracked assets not verified through automatic means
will be included in a physical inventory process.

--- Page 43 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 6 of 11
Information Technology
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS
a. remove unnecessary accounts from the domain administrator and local administrator
groups; and
b. implement stronger password controls with respect to length, complexity, age, and history.
Response
a. CCPS agrees, in part, with this finding and immediately re-arranged some staff
responsibilities and decreased a few of the domain administrators. However, due to a
lack of human resources and our staff needing to wear multiple hats and fulfill multiple
roles, this is not as simple as it would seem in an ideal environment. So, we completed
this to the extent of our capability to do so, but readily admit that it has not been reduced
to an optimal level based simply on the human resource limitations. During our
Discussion Notes Conference, this was confirmed as having been adequately addressed.
b. CCPS fully agrees and are already in the planning stages of implementation during this
school year. Historically, this challenge was a problem with our legacy system and a
desire to make the transition to a new system as painless as possible. Technology
Services has tested and will be implementing a new system to allow users to reset their
passwords using industry standard methodology. We now have executive buy-in and
approval to move forward with this plan. The controls in respect to length, complexity,
age, and history are addressed in this implementation.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS
a. log critical security and audit events on the student management system database,
regularly review these logs, investigate unusual or questionable items, and document and
retain these reviews and investigations; (repeat)
b. remove all unnecessary access to the student management system database; and
c. establish controls over program changes to ensure that all changes to production
programs are properly reviewed and approved (repeat).
Response
a. We are in the process of implementing a logging and reporting solution based on a new
product. This was a planned part of our technology evolution strategy that was enabled
when the migration was completed earlier this year. At the directive of the
Superintendent, periodic reviews are conducted on a routine basis. All reviews that
resulted in a finding were documented via a written “Incident Report” that was directed to
Human Resources and/or the appropriate administrator if it involved a student. However,
we recognize that the periodic reviews that did not result in any incidents or findings were
not documented. Therefore, we have established a more formalized review procedure to
address this concern. All reviews are now documented regardless of the outcome.
b. CCPS agrees, in part, with this finding and immediately decreased the number of
SysAdmin users and modified other roles accordingly. However, due to a lack of human
resources, it is necessary for many of our staff to wear multiple hats and fulfill multiple
roles. So, we completed this to the extent of our capability to do so, but readily admit that
it has not been reduced to an optimal level based simply on the human resource

--- Page 44 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 7 of 11
limitations. During our Discussion Notes Conference, this was confirmed as having been
adequately addressed.
c. CCPS agrees, in part, with this finding and have taken many steps to improve our change
control process. Many of the issues are constraints of legacy products. However, we have
created an “ownership” model and document all changes in our internally developed
“Technology Services Project Center” application. However, due to limited staff with a
large breadth of applications to support, we simply do not have the resources to
implement change control in the “textbook” ideal manner described above. The model
described requires ideal conditions with abundant human resources that we simply do not
have. We will continue to make modifications to improve the process including the
implementation of a software-based change control process such as Microsoft
SourceSafe. Executive leadership is aware of the need for support in us enforcing the
change control process including appropriate written approvals from system owners.
While it was noted that “a similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report”, it should be noted that significant changes have been made during the interim
and that this should be noted in the audit report. Our internally developed “Technology
Services Project Center” is a direct result of our work to improve in this area and it was
acknowledged by the auditors that this was an excellent tool and a significant
improvement in the process. It also must be acknowledged that the “textbook” process is
an ideal that we will continue to strive for but not necessarily realistic with current
resources.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS adequately secure its network. Specifically, we recommend that
CCPS
a. employ the IPS to effectively monitor network traffic,
b. configure firewalls to adequately secure connections into the CCPS network, and
c. restrict network level access.
Response
a. IPS was in test mode at the exact time of the audit to monitor, test and assess the impact
on performance of the firewall when fully employed. Since the time of the review, a plan
has been created to fully implement the IPS with assistance from a vendor and a
consultant. This was explained to the auditors and verified as fixed at the time of the
Discussion Notes Conference.
b. CCPS agreed to the requested changes and made changes immediately that were verified
as addressed during the Discussion Notes Conference. It should be noted that none of
the issues presented significant security risks and in the original Discussion Notes, the
auditors used the terminology of implementing a “least privilege security strategy for
better protecting the aforementioned network devices.”
c. CCPS agrees and are currently upgrading our VPN environment to address this concern.
However, it should be noted that our current vendor list is very small and manageable and
the four vendors noted were charged with supporting our network environment as
“additions” to our own staff. We had researched and budgeted for Network Access
Control in each of the past four CIP Budget requests and in each case, it was not funded.
So while we agree, the solution required an investment and upgrade to our existing
environment that we were already in the midst of performing.

--- Page 45 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 8 of 11
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. independently verify the contractor reported data, at least on a test basis, to ensure the
propriety of critical calculations (such as guaranteed cost savings) included in the related
contract and subsequent M&V reports; and
b. retain documentation of all such verifications performed.
Response
a. CCPS agrees that CCPS has not implemented any process to independently verify
reported project benefits. However, CCPS reviews the annual report for data accuracy and
agreement of assumptions made in the analysis before accepting the conclusions.
An independent evaluation would also add an unaccounted for expense, reducing the cost
avoidance.
b. If verifications are performed, CCPS will retain the documents.
Transportation Services
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS
a. reevaluate the elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors in future
contracts, and
b. document the rationale for the various payment components.
Response
a. CCPS agrees that the breakdown of the annual PVA calculation as printed and approved
by the School Board is misstated. Buses in Maryland generally are replaced after 12
years of service. The depreciation portion of the PVA should be correctly stated at 0.833%
(100% ÷ 12) rather than the 10% depreciation (+ 7 % profit) as stated in CCPS’s current
formula and paid in equal annual payments over 12 years. However, the overall 17%
multiplied by the average cost of school buses purchased within a school year does
accurately reflect CCPS’s intended payments to bus contractors for the PVA portion of the
bus contractor formula. The difference between the overall 17 % and the depreciation
factor has been determined to be fair compensation (profit) to contractors. CCPS does a
comparative analysis on an annual basis of the 17 Maryland counties using a formula-
based compensation method. CCPS’s overall formula compensation (PVA, salary, fuel and
maintenance, and administrative allotment) provided to bus contractors is in line with the
other 16 jurisdictions. ( For SY 2010-2011, CCPS’s formula compensation for an average
bus route of 5 hours and 85 miles placed Carroll as the 7th highest county among all
counties with contracted service using a formula-based compensation method.)
Based upon the audit recommendation, CCPS will study the current PVA formula
(depreciation %+ profit %) and develop a revised calculation that does not overstate

--- Page 46 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 9 of 11
depreciation (% over 12 years to not exceed 100 %) + an additional % representing
current market conditions and what would be determined to be fair compensation to
contractors over the life of the bus.
b. CCPS has begun to collect data from school bus contractors related to MPG and the
purchase price of new buses. Further study will be made regarding the fuel rate
calculation and PVA formula.
Food Service Operations
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish performance benchmarks for existing performance measures (average cost per
meal, meals per labor hour, participation rates), using industry standards or other
accepted practices; and
b. monitor actual performance against these benchmarks and take appropriate actions to
improve operating results.
Response
a. CCPS agrees with the recommendation. We have always used benchmarks to monitor
performance and have used this information to staff our schools. However, these
changes have not been enough to offset the effects of the weak economy and declining
student enrollment. In addition, we have taken a number of actions to promote marketing
strategies to increase our breakfast and lunch participation along with efforts to increase
the participation of our free and reduced eligible students.
b. See a. above.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that schools institute adequate internal controls over all cash receipts, including
recording all transactions immediately and restrictively endorsing checks when initially
received (repeat); and
b. investigate the feasibility of installing a new cash register system to improve efficiency
and reporting capabilities.
Response
a. CCPS agrees with the recommendation. We addressed the specific schools noted in the
analysis with the appropriate employees who were in violation of the established
procedures. In addition, we will remind schools of the necessity of complying with the
established procedures for recording transactions and endorsing checks, and procedures
will be reinforced in writing within the food services manual.
b. CCPS agrees with the recommendation and will pursue as funding is available.

--- Page 47 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 10 of 11
Other Financial Controls
Recommendation 13
We recommend that CCPS
a. develop a formal investment policy including the Board’s investment philosophy; and
b. regularly monitor cash flow, consider investing a higher portion of its funds in other
investment options such as the Investment Pool, and adjust the arrangement with the
bank for the general checking account to increase overall net earnings.
Response
a. CCPS agrees with this recommendation. CCPS will develop a formal investment policy
which includes the Board’s investment philosophy and permitted types of investments.
b. Cash is monitored on a daily basis as we examine and record journal entries for the
previous day’s banking activity. On a weekly basis, we examine our current cash balance
and cash needs for the next two weeks to determine the amount of funds to request from
Carroll County Government (CCG). We provide CCG a two month forecast of expected
cash requests. During the month following a state aid payment, we typically have a higher
checking balance for approximately 30 days (until the funds are expended in normal
course of business, i.e. A/P, Payroll, Self-insurance claims, Express Script (Prescription)
payments, etc.).
CCPS agrees that we should review our current investment arrangement with our financial
institution, however, we also wish to correct certain information provided in the analysis.
It is true that CCPS entered into our current financial service agreement during a period of
historically low interest rates. Unfortunately, rates have continued to decline as the
current interest rate on NOW Accounts stands at .0005 (5 basis points). In the current
interest rate environment, our banking fees exceed the interest we would earn.
Therefore, CCPS has opted to take advantage of the tiered earnings credit which is used
to offset monthly banking fees. During the period, February 2010 through May 2011, the
tiered earnings credit typically paid approximately 15-20 basis points higher than the
annual interest rate, which supported taking advantage of the tiered earnings credit.
The following amounts are derived from monthly account analysis statements for the
period of February 2010 – May 2011:
 The average daily balance in our account approximated $17.9 million, however, the
average collected balance (available to invest) approximated $16.4 million.
 Service fees were approximately $74,100.
 The earnings credit allowance was $100,000.
CCPS receives funds from the state bi-monthly. We utilize these funds prior to requesting
funds from the county. This effectively allows the county government to invest the
pooled funds at a higher rate of interest than would otherwise be possible.
Our financial institution has shared that, in this current economic environment, most
other governmental units have abandoned the overnight investment sweep accounts as
this investment vehicle is “under water”. The interest earned on REPO rates, ranging

--- Page 48 ---
Carroll County Public Schools
Response to Draft Legislative Audit
March 15, 2012
Page 11 of 11
from 9 - 11 basis points, simply cannot cover the monthly banking fees and the additional
fees associated with an overnight sweep account. On the other hand, the tiered interest
rate credit for investment balances in excess of $1,000,000 is 47 basis points, which
adequately covers our monthly banking service charges.
We do plan to meet with our financial institution to determine whether there are areas
where we can reduce fees and maximize earnings; however, we believe that further
analysis will support continuing to employ the tiered earnings credit over interest income.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that CCPS institute processes to
a. verify the propriety of claims paid by the third-party administrator, at least on a test basis;
and;
b. verify the eligibility of enrolled health care program participants and their listed
dependents.
Response
a. CCPS has attempted to contact several of the firms utilized by other school systems for
claims audits. The firms were not recommended by the school system or have gone out of
business. CCPS has also contacted our insurance consultant to obtain other referrals. It
is our intent to complete a full dependent audit and a claims processing audit for the
medical plan by the end of FY13. The timing of these audits will depend on whether the
cost requires a bid of these audit services through Purchasing.
b. CCPS currently requests verification of lifestyle events when adding or making changes to
eligible dependents for marriage, divorce, and loss of other insurance coverage. CCPS
does not require a birth certificate for the addition of newborns at this time. The current
IRS Section 125 Summary Plan Document is being updated and the verification of
eligibility will be discussed with this process.

--- Page 49 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Lauren R. Crue
Senior Auditor
Kevin J. Mercer
Ryan P. Stecher
Matthew D. Straw
Staff Auditors
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Staff Auditors