Title: Managing for Results - Performance Measures - Education - Maryland Higher Education Commission
Date: 04/21/2011
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a86
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:57:43.341963
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Managing for Results
Performance Measures
Education
Maryland Higher Education Commission
April 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
April 21, 2011
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Delegate Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator James C. Rosapepe, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a performance audit to determine the accuracy of selected
Managing for Results (MFR) performance measure data reported in the Maryland
fiscal year 2011 operating budget request. We also determined whether adequate
control systems were in place for collecting, summarizing, and reporting the
performance measure data.
As requested by the chairmen of the legislative budget committees, we are
systematically auditing the results of the 62 MFR measures contained in the 2005
Managing for Results - State Comprehensive Plan, which was produced by the
Department of Budget and Management. This audit is the sixth to be conducted
on the 62 measures and focuses on data reported for the 6 measures from the
Higher Education portion of the Plan.1 The Maryland Higher Education
Commission (MHEC) was responsible for reporting these results. A list of the 62
MFR measures is contained in Exhibit 3 of this report.
As a result of our audit, we have classified each of the six measures as Certified,
Certified with Qualification, Inaccurate, or Factors Prevented Certification, as
noted in the chart on the following page. These designations are further described
in Exhibit 2.
1 The Plan includes six other education measures, which pertain to secondary education, that are
the responsibility of the Maryland State Department of Education. Those six measures were
evaluated in our October 2, 2009 audit report.

--- Page 4 ---
Level of Certification
Performance
Certified with Factors Prevented
Certified Inaccurate Measures Audited
Qualification Certification
(See Exhibit 1)
- 1 - 5 6
The primary factors contributing to our inability to certify five measures were that
MHEC did not verify degree information reported by colleges and universities
and MHEC did not obtain detailed student information from private institutions.
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page 4, and our audit
scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on page 11. The response from
MHEC to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by MHEC during the audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 4
Background Information 4
Conclusions 4
Recommendations 5
Findings 6
Certification Results 6
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Exhibit 1 – Definitions of the MHEC Performance Measures Audited 13
Exhibit 2 – Categories of Performance Certification 16
Exhibit 3 – Managing For Results – 2005 State Comprehensive Plan – List 17
of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Exhibit 4 – Managing For Results Audit Reports Previously Issued by 21
the Office of Legislative Audits Pertaining to the 62 Measures
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Executive Summary
Background Information
In July 1997, the Governor implemented the Managing for Results (MFR)
initiative, which is a strategic planning process used by department leaders and
others to establish direction and priorities for State programs to achieve
meaningful results. MFR requires State agencies to submit missions, goals,
objectives, and performance measures for each program as part of the annual
budget request. This information may then be considered in determining
Statewide spending priorities and the allocation of resources in agency budgets.
Effective July 1, 2004, the MFR process was established in State law, with the
Department of Budget and Management as the lead agency for developing a State
comprehensive plan for MFR. The resultant 2005 Managing for Results - State
Comprehensive Plan categorizes MFR goals into several functional areas, referred
to as pillars, which contain a total of 62 measures. Also, State law requires
agencies to maintain documentation of the internal controls established to
evaluate their performance measures.
As requested by the chairmen of the legislative budget committees, we are
systematically auditing these measures. This audit is the sixth to be conducted
pursuant to this request and focuses on the data reported by the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating
budget request (Exhibit 1). The categories of performance certification are
explained in Exhibit 2 of this report, and a list of the 62 MFR measures is
contained in Exhibit 3. Exhibit 4 references the first five MFR audit reports
issued by our Office, which collectively covered 46 measures in the Public Safety
and Safer Neighborhoods, Education, Fiscal Responsibility, Health, and
Commerce portions of the Plan.
Conclusions
We concluded that, for the six measures tested, one was Certified with
Qualification, and five were designated as Factors Prevented Certification. For
the measures that were designated as Factors Prevented Certification, our inability
to certify the measures was primarily due to MHEC’s failure to verify degree
information reported by colleges and universities and its failure to obtain and
verify certain data reported by the State’s independent colleges and universities.
These results are further described in the Findings section of this report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendations
The following detailed recommendations are among those we made to MHEC to
help strengthen the quality control processes and improve reporting for the
measures we audited:
 Establish procedures to obtain all relevant supporting data from third
parties and verify the data are reasonably accurate. Such procedures
should include data received from public college and universities, the
State’s independent schools, and community colleges.
 Establish written criteria to support the methods used to perform all
calculations.
 Ensure that the reported performance measure is consistent with its written
definition and that the period reported is clearly disclosed in the operating
budget.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings
Certification Results
Agency,
Performance
Program Level of
Measure Results
Name and Certification Comments / Causes
(See Exhibit 1 for Reported2
Budget (See Exhibit 2)
Definitions)
Reference1
MHEC Six-year graduation Certified with MHEC had a process to verify certain data used to calculate the measure.
Students
General rate of first-time, Qualification Specifically, MHEC had an independent party verify the accuracy of
Graduating
Administration full-time students at enrollment data reported by the State’s public four-year colleges and
by
Book 3, Maryland public universities. However, it did not have a process in place to determine the
Summer
Pages 264, 265 four-year colleges accuracy of degree data reported by the colleges and universities.
2008
and universities Consequently, data for certain students could be erroneously reported. Also,
it was not disclosed in the operating budget that the results reported as actual
64.3%
2009 data reflected students graduating by the summer of 2008, based on the
most complete data available. Nevertheless, we were able to determine that
the calculated result was reasonably accurate based on our tests of data at the
colleges and universities.
Percent of Academic Factors Prevented MHEC did not receive detailed student data from all of the independent
bachelor’s degrees Year Certification colleges and universities; consequently, as noted above, MHEC did not
awarded to 2008 determine the accuracy of degree data reported by the institutions included in
racial/ethnic this measure. Instead, only summary student data were used to calculate the
minorities at public 31.5% measure. These independent institutions accounted for approximately 1,300
and private of the 8,200 bachelor’s degrees awarded to racial and ethnic minorities in
Maryland colleges academic year 2008 according to the degree data reported by the four-year
and universities colleges and universities. We were advised by persons representing the
independent colleges and universities that they would be willing to work with
MHEC to develop a process to verify reported data.
It was also not disclosed in the operating budget that the results reported as
actual 2009 data represented data from academic year 2008.
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request.
2 Results are reported as Actual 2009 data in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Certification Results
Agency,
Performance
Program Level of
Measure Results
Name and Certification Comments / Causes
(See Exhibit 1 Reported2
Budget (See Exhibit 2)
for Definitions)
Reference1
MHEC Number of Fall 2007 Factors Prevented This measure is based on data drawn from MHEC’s Enrollment Information
General community Semester Certification System. MHEC compared enrollment at Maryland community colleges from
Administration college students the Fall 2006 semester to enrollment at Maryland public four-year colleges
Book 3, who transfer to a 8,690 and universities in the Fall 2007 semester. Although MHEC had instituted a
Page 266 Maryland public process to independently verify enrollment data for the public four-year
four-year campus colleges and universities, no similar process had been adopted for community
colleges. In addition, our review of the related enrollment data disclosed that
because many students attended more than one institution in the same
semester, MHEC randomly eliminated all but one of the schools attended
each semester before calculating the measure. For example, one student we
reviewed was enrolled in both a community college and a university in 2006
and was only enrolled in the university in Fall 2007. Because MHEC
randomly eliminated the student’s year 2006 enrollment in the community
college, the student was not counted as a transfer student for purposes of this
measure. As a result, 3,380 records pertaining to 3,332 students who were
enrolled in the Fall 2007 semester were eliminated from the calculation.
MHEC had no documented process to define which school should be
eliminated and no analysis to show that randomly eliminating one of the
schools produced the intended result.
It was also not disclosed in the operating budget that the results reported as
actual 2009 data represented data from the Fall 2007 semester.
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request.
2 Results are reported as Actual 2009 data in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Certification Results
Agency,
Performance
Program Level of
Measure Results
Name and Certification Comments / Causes
(See Exhibit 1 Reported2
Budget (See Exhibit 2)
for Definitions)
Reference1
MHEC Number of Academic Factors Prevented The measure is based on a survey of State colleges and universities
General graduates in Year Certification distributed and collected by MSDE. However, neither MSDE nor MHEC
Administration teaching from 2007 determined the accuracy of degree data reported. In addition, as previously
Book 3, Maryland’s mentioned, MHEC did not receive detailed student data from all of the
Page 266 public and 2,492 independent colleges and universities. Although MSDE compared the
private higher reported results to information received from other sources, these sources
educational were not sufficient as they were based on data that may or may not
institutions correspond to the number of candidates, such as data from local school
systems of newly hired teachers. According to the above survey, these
independent institutions accounted for 36 percent of all teacher candidates
prepared in academic year 2007.
It was also not disclosed in the operating budget that the results reported as
actual 2009 data represented data from academic year 2007.
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request.
2 Results are reported as Actual 2009 data in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Certification Results
Agency,
Performance
Program Level of
Measure Results
Name and Certification Comments / Causes
(See Exhibit 1 Reported2
Budget (See Exhibit 2)
for Definitions)
Reference1
MHEC Percentage of Test Results Factors Prevented The reported percentage is based on a report prepared by the Maryland State
General teacher for Certification Department of Education (MSDE) using summary test result data received
Administration candidates from Academic from the third-party vendor who conducts the testing. Neither MSDE nor
Book 3, Maryland public Year 2007 MHEC perform any verification of the accuracy of the reported information.
Page 266 and private Instead, MSDE only periodically receives detail test result data from the
higher 97% vendor in both electronic and paper form. We were unable to use these data
educational to establish the validity of the measure results, primarily because MHEC did
institutions who not ensure that the detail data reported by the third-party vendor were
pass Praxis II complete and usable. For example, we noted the following conditions:
 The vendor did not provide MSDE with a consolidated data file to
support the reported results.
 MSDE did not have, and the vendor did not provide, a master schedule
of results to ensure all testing data were provided. For example, during
academic year 2007, MSDE received data weekly for certain months but
only received one or no reports for other months. Further, several of the
supporting electronic data files we were provided were corrupted and not
usable.
 Electronic results were not formatted in a manner that would allow for
verification. For example, the reports for each individual included many
test results, including those for Praxis I which is a separate series of tests
administered by the same vendor. Based on our review of the file
layout, elimination of Praxis I results could accidentally result in the
elimination of Praxis II results as well.
It was also not disclosed in the operating budget that the results reported as
actual 2009 data represented data from academic year 2007.
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request.
2 Results are reported as Actual 2009 data in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Certification Results
Agency,
Performance
Program Level of
Measure Results
Name and Certification Comments / Causes
(See Exhibit 1 Reported2
Budget (See Exhibit 2)
for Definitions)
Reference1
MHEC Number of Academic Factors Prevented MHEC’s reported result was based on the number of degrees awarded
General graduates in Year Certification instead of the number of actual graduates. Our review of the related degree
Administration nursing from 2008 files disclosed that 82 students received dual nursing degrees in academic
Book 3, Maryland public year 2008 and were included twice in the reported results. Also, as
Page 266 and private 2,993 previously mentioned, MHEC did not determine the accuracy of degree data
higher reported by the public colleges and universities as reflected in the Degree
educational Information System. In addition, MHEC did not receive detailed student
institutions data from one independent university that, according to the degree data
reported by the colleges and universities, accounted for 12 percent of the
nursing degrees awarded in 2008; the school only provided summary data
which were used to calculate the measure.
It was not disclosed in the operating budget that the results reported as
actual 2009 data represented data from academic year 2008.
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request.
2 Results are reported as Actual 2009 data in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
Under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we conducted an audit of selected performance
measure results reported in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget
request. The audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As requested by the chairmen of the legislative budget committees, we are
systematically auditing the performance measures from the 2005 Managing for
Results - State Comprehensive Plan produced by the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM). This Plan included 62 performance measures categorized
into several functional areas referred to as pillars.2 This audit is the sixth to be
conducted pursuant to this request and focuses on 6 performance measures from
the Higher Education area as reported by DBM in the Plan and by the Maryland
Higher Education Commission (MHEC) in the Maryland fiscal year 2011
operating budget request.
Objectives
The objectives of our audit were (1) to determine whether the most recent actual
measurement results for the selected performance measures were accurately
reported in MHEC’s fiscal year 2011 operating budget request, and (2) to
determine whether adequate control systems existed over the collection and
reporting of the data related to the measurement results. Our performance audit
did not include an assessment of whether the performance measures reviewed
were consistent with the goals and objectives of the related programs or were
meaningful indicators of program performance.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed MHEC and other personnel, as
appropriate, responsible for collecting and reporting the measure data; reviewed
performance measure calculations for accuracy; reviewed the data collected and
reported for the performance measures; and determined whether the calculations
2 DBM reissued the State Comprehensive Plan in November 2009 with 98 performance measures
categorized into six functional areas. The measures under this new Plan will be reported on by
State agencies in the fiscal year 2012 budget cycle or later.
11

--- Page 14 ---
and data were consistent with the definitions of the performance measures as
noted in Exhibit 1. We used sampling techniques or other methods as deemed
appropriate to test the related source documents. We also analyzed MHEC’s
performance measurement data collection and reporting activities to evaluate
whether proper controls existed to ensure data integrity.
We developed a system to categorize the results of our audit of performance
measures. The four categories represent varying levels of certification of the
accuracy of the performance reported. The categories of performance
certification are defined in Exhibit 2. If during the course of our audit of a
measure we found circumstances that would require us to conclude that the
measure was inaccurate or that factors prevented certification, we did not perform
additional audit work that may have disclosed other factors that might have
adversely impacted the reported results.
Our fieldwork was conducted on site at MHEC during the period from December
2009 to May 2010. The response from MHEC to our findings and
recommendations appears as an appendix in this report. As prescribed in State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise MHEC regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the MHEC
Performance Measures Audited
Page 1 of 3
Performance
Definition3
Measure
Six-year This measure presents the percentage of first-time, full-time students
graduation rate of who enrolled at a Maryland public four-year institution and who
first-time, full-time earned a bachelor's degree from any Maryland public four-year
students at institution within six years of enrollment.
Maryland public
four-year colleges This rate is based on information drawn from the Maryland Higher
and universities Education Commission’s (MHEC) retention and graduation files.
These files are built by matching student records in the Enrollment
and Degree Information Systems. The files are updated each year
with student enrollment and completion data. MHEC tracks
students’ enrollment each fall for six years after entry and their
degree completion for seven years after entry.
Percent of This measure presents the number of bachelor’s degrees awarded to
bachelor’s degrees racial/ethnic minorities during the academic year at Maryland public
awarded to four-year institutions and state-aided independent colleges and
racial/ethnic universities divided by the total number of bachelor’s degrees
minorities at awarded during the same period at these institutions.
public and private
Maryland colleges Racial/ethnic minorities for this measure include African-American,
and universities Asian, Hispanic, and Native American students. Students who
identify as foreign and “other race” are not included in this measure.
The MFR submission is based on data drawn from MHEC’s Degree
Information System.
3 The definitions are substantially derived from those provided to the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) in annual State agencies’ Managing for Results budget submissions and from
DBM’s 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report. Additional information, such as data
sources, was included in certain definitions in this exhibit for informational purposes. Also, certain
definitions were modified to enhance readability.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the MHEC
Performance Measures Audited
Page 2 of 3
Performance
Definition
Measure
Number of This measure, which is based on data drawn from MHEC’s
community college Enrollment Information System, presents the number of all full-time
students who and part-time students who were primarily enrolled at a Maryland
transfer to a community college in the fall semester and who transferred to a
Maryland public Maryland public four-year college or university in the next fall
four-year campus semester.
Number of This measure presents the number of graduates in teaching from
graduates in Maryland’s public and private higher educational institutions each
teaching from academic year.
Maryland’s public
and private higher MHEC reports summary information collected by MSDE from
educational Maryland public and private colleges and universities based on an
institutions annual Teacher Staffing Report that includes the number of teacher
candidates by content area and institution. MSDE requests that each
institution of higher education offering teacher preparation programs
(23 institutions) submit the number of graduates reported by content
area, gender, and ethnicity.
Percentage of This measure presents the percentage of Maryland teacher
teacher candidates candidates from public and private higher education institutions who
from Maryland take the Praxis II tests, a certification requirement, each academic
public and private year and pass the tests during the same period.
higher educational
institutions who Once a year, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE)
pass Praxis II is required to report the number of candidates passing the Praxis to
the federal government. MSDE contracts with the vendor who
conducts the testing to search its database for all Maryland
candidates, by graduating institution, who take the Praxis exams.
The vendor reports to MSDE the number and passing percentage of
candidates, by institution and by content area, and provides
statewide data for the number and percentage of candidates passing
the test for each content area. MHEC utilizes the report submitted
by MSDE to the federal government for MFR reporting.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the MHEC
Performance Measures Audited
Page 3 of 3
Performance Definition
Measure
Number of This measure, which is based on data drawn from the Degree
graduates in Information System, presents the annual number of Maryland
nursing from college and university graduates who receive degrees in registered
Maryland public nursing and licensed practical nursing.
and private higher
educational
institutions
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 2
Categories of Performance Certification
Category Definition
Certified Reported performance was reasonably accurate.
Certified with Reported performance was reasonably accurate even though
Qualification minor deficiencies were noted with the supporting
documentation, controls were not sufficient, or the
methodology used to calculate reported performance was not
consistent with the measure definition.
Inaccurate Reported performance differed significantly from actual
performance; the calculation process was wrong, such as
excluding data relevant to the calculation; or, as reported, the
measure was misleading, such as failing to disclose the
measure as a rate when applicable.
Factors Prevented Reported performance could not be verified, as documentation
Certification was unavailable, controls were not adequate to ensure the
accuracy of the results, or results were not presented in a
manner consistent with the performance measure description.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – 2005 State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 1 of 4
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Public Safety and Safer Neighborhoods
Keeping Maryland communities safe – measured by
1 Firearm homicide rate per 100,000 (calendar year)
Recidivism: Percent of offenders returned to Department of Public Safety and
2 Correctional Services supervision for a new offense within one year of their release
from the Division of Correction - all releases
3 Traffic fatality rate per 100 million miles traveled (calendar year)
Maintaining necessary security standards in correctional institutions – measured by
Number of inmates who escape from all Division of Correction Facilities, Patuxent
4
Institution, and Division of Pretrial Detention and Services facilities (in aggregate)
Total number of inmates who walk off from Division of Correction minimum security
5
settings, prerelease or alternative confinement settings (in aggregate)
Providing effective rehabilitation and treatment services to offenders or substance abusers –
measured by
Percent of Proactive Community Supervision cases closed where the offender had
6
satisfactorily completed substance abuse treatment programs
Preventing youth violence, alcohol and substance abuse – measured by
Violent offense arrest rate for youths between 15 and 17 years of age (per 100,000
7
children per calendar year)
8 Recidivism: Percent of youth re-adjudicated or reconvicted within 1 year after release
Percent of 12th grade public school children who report using alcohol within the last 30
9
days
Percent of 10th grade public school children who report using heroin within the last 30
10
days
Protecting the well being of children – measured by
Rate of injury-related deaths due to accidents to children and youth between 0 and 19
11
years of age (per 100,000 children per calendar year)
Percent of children with recurrence of maltreatment within six months of first
12
occurrence
Statewide percent of current child support paid (Includes cases for persons who receive
13 public assistance, and for other persons who apply for child support services from the
Department of Human Resources)
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – 2005 State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 2 of 4
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Education
Children will enter school ready to learn – measured by
Percent of students entering Kindergarten demonstrating Full Readiness on the Work
1
Sampling System Kindergarten Assessment
Children will be successful in school – measured by
Percent of students scoring proficient or better by grade and content area
 Reading – Grade 3 – Total all groups
 Reading – Grade 8 – Total all groups
2  Reading – Grade 10 – Total all groups
 Mathematics – Grade 3 – Total all groups
 Mathematics – Grade 8 – Total all groups
 Algebra – Total all groups
Children will complete school – measured by
3 High School Graduation Rate
4 Percent of children in grades 9 through 12 who drop out of school in an academic year
Schools will promote high levels of learning – measured by
5 Percent of schools demonstrating Adequate Yearly Progress in reading – State totals
Percent of schools demonstrating Adequate Yearly Progress in mathematics – State
6
totals
Higher Education
Promoting access and academic success in postsecondary education – measured by
Six-year graduation rate of first-time, full-time students at Maryland public four-year
1
colleges and universities (all groups)
Percent of bachelor’s degrees awarded to racial/ethnic minorities at public and private
2
Maryland colleges and universities
Number of community college students who transfer to a Maryland public four-year
3
campus
Producing an educated and skilled workforce including addressing the State’s critical workforce
and healthcare needs – measured by
Number of graduates in teaching from Maryland’s public and private higher educational
4
institutions
Percent of teacher candidates from Maryland public and private higher educational
5
institutions who pass Praxis II
Number of graduates in nursing from Maryland public and private higher educational
6
institutions
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – 2005 State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 3 of 4
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Health
Promoting health and well being: Babies Born healthy – measured by
1 Infant mortality rate for all races (per 1,000 live births)
2 Rate of live births to adolescents between 15 and 19 years of age (per 1,000 women)
Promoting health and well being: Healthy children, adolescents, and adults – measured by
3 Percent of Maryland children fully immunized (by 24 months)
4 Number of children under 6 years of age with elevated blood lead levels (>10ug/dl)
Cumulative percent change from the calendar year 2000 baseline for underage high
5
school students smoking cigarettes
Overall cancer mortality rate per 100,000 persons (age adjusted to 2000 U.S. Standard
6
Population)
7 Percent change in number of new HIV cases from calendar year 2000 baseline
8 Rate of primary/secondary syphilis incidence (cases per 100,000)
Number of reported cases of vaccine preventable communicable diseases including
9
hepatitis A, measles, mumps, pertussis
Promoting health and well being: Services to the disability community – measured by
Number of people with disabilities who achieved successful employment through
10 assistance by the Department of Education’s Disability Rehabilitation Services
rehabilitation programs
Percent of Developmental Disabilities Administration Community Service respondents
11 of the “Ask ME Survey” who expressed satisfaction with physical well-being, personal
development, and self-determination (reported separately)
Promoting health and well being: Substance abuse treatment – measured by
12 Percent of substance use decrease during substance abuse treatment
Promoting health and well being: Mental health services – measured by
Percent of adults who report mental health services have allowed them to deal more
13
effectively with daily problems
Environment
Restoring the health of the Chesapeake Bay and its living resources – measured by
1 Acres of submerged aquatic vegetation
2 Blue crab landings (3 year average)
3 Oyster landings (3 year average)
4 Estimated nitrogen load to the Chesapeake Bay from Maryland (in million pounds)
Improving and protecting water quality and ensuring safe drinking water – measured by
5 Watersheds impaired by nutrients
Percent of Marylanders served by public water systems in significant compliance with
6
all rules adopted as of 2002
19

--- Page 22 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – 2005 State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 4 of 4
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Ensuring clean air – measured by
7 Three-year average of days the one-hour ozone standard was exceeded
Restoring contaminated industrial sites to productive use – measured by
Number of acres of property in the Voluntary Clean-up Program completed and a No
8
Further Requirements Determination or a Certificate of Completion issued
Reducing hazardous waste and hazardous materials in the environment – measured by
9 Number of remedial actions at all State Superfund sites that are completed
Commerce
Helping businesses to grow and create jobs – measured by
1 Percent change in Maryland employment from the 2001 baseline (12 month average)
2 Rate that adult employment trainees enter employment
3 Maryland Port Administration total general cargo tonnage, (thousands)
Estimated direct expenditures from film, television, and other production activities in
4
Maryland (Measure not audited - not included in the Comprehensive Plan reissued in November 2009)
5 Annual Baltimore Washington International Airport passenger growth rate
Improving the State’s transportation infrastructure – measured by
6 Percent of State system roadway mileage with acceptable ride quality
Percent of bridges on the State portion of the National Highway System that will allow
7
all legally loaded vehicles to safely traverse
8 Total ridership for bus and rail transit (in millions)
System Preservation Funding Levels in the Consolidated Transportation Program (in
9
millions) (Measure not audited - not included in the Comprehensive Plan reissued in November 2009)
Invigorating communities – measured by
10 Home ownership
11 Annual percent change in Maryland per capita personal income
12 Total acres enrolled in agricultural preservation districts
Making the most of Maryland’s history and culture – measured by
Value of rehabilitation expenditures approved for the State Rehabilitation Tax Credit for
13
restoration and preservation of historic properties
Fiscal Responsibility
Effective resource management – measured by
1 Number of fiscal years closed with a positive General Fund balance
Maintaining a triple A bond rating from all three nationally recognized bond rating
2
agencies for each issuance of State General Obligation Bonds
20

--- Page 23 ---
Exhibit 4
Managing for Results Audit Reports
Previously Issued by the Office of Legislative Audits
Pertaining to the 62 Measures
Number of
Report Report Date Measures
Audited
Public Safety and Safer Neighborhoods March 19, 2009 13
Education October 2, 2009 6
Fiscal Responsibility March 31, 2010 2
Health February 4, 2011 13
Commerce April 18, 2011 114
4 Two of the Commerce measures included in the 2005 Managing for Results – State Comprehensive
Plan (as detailed in Exhibit 3) were not included in the Plan when it was reissued by DBM in
November 2009. Furthermore, DBM had not reported on these two measures since March 2008
(reported fiscal year 2007 actual results). Consequently, these two measures were not included in this
audit.
21

--- Page 26 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
David S. Propper
Senior Auditor
Catherine M. Clarke, CFE
Carey L. Harper
Staff Auditors