Title: Inmate Healthcare Follow-up Review
Date: 03/26/2010
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3bcc9d72404c150a93
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:59:10.653329
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Inmate Healthcare
Follow-up Review
March 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
March 26, 2010
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – Office of Inmate Health
Services (OIHS), as of December 31, 2009, to address selected findings in our
February 21, 2007 performance audit report. The follow-up review was requested
by the Joint Audit Committee.
Our February 21, 2007 report contained 12 findings. In accordance with the
Committee’s request, we assessed OIHS’s progress in implementing the
recommendations for the 7 findings in that report most directly involving quality
of care issues. The degree of implementation, based on our follow-up review, is
as follows:
Number of
Degree of Implementation
Findings
Corrected 1
Substantial Progress 0
In Progress 3
Minimal Progress 3
No Progress 0
Total Findings Reviewed 7
OIHS had initiated at least some corrective action on all 7 findings and had
established a corrective action plan, which included timelines and processes to
monitor the implementation of the plan for all the findings in the audit report.
Nevertheless, full resolution of most of the 7 findings reviewed had not yet been
achieved.

--- Page 4 ---
The status of each of the 7 findings we reviewed is identified in Exhibit 1, which
also includes the DPSCS’ self-assessment of the implementation status for all 12
report findings. Exhibit 2 describes, in detail, the status for each of the
aforementioned 7 findings. DPSCS’ response is included as an appendix to this
report.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by DPSCS staff during
this review, especially the staff of OIHS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Effective July 1, 2005, the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
(DPSCS) entered into six new inmate healthcare service contracts with five
vendors. These new contracts were to provide for inmate healthcare services in
the following six areas: (1) medical, (2) dental, (3) mental health, (4)
pharmaceutical, (5) utilization management, and (6) electronic patient health
records.1 The contracts established the following four service delivery areas
(SDA) in Maryland: Baltimore, Jessup, Eastern, and Western. DPSCS exercised
contract options to extend these contracts through June 30, 2010.
The medical services contractor is the primary provider of healthcare services to
inmates and notifies the other contractors when additional services are required
(such as dental care, mental health counseling, prescription medication, and
specialty care). In general, the medical and mental health contractors are to
perform an immediate cursory exam of inmates upon arrival at a DPSCS facility
to determine whether hospitalization or infirmary care is necessary. The medical
contractor is responsible for performing a more detailed medical exam of each
inmate within seven days of arrival at a DPSCS facility to determine whether each
inmate requires routine follow-up care, specialty care, or no additional treatment.
The medical contractor is also responsible for responding to inmate sick call
requests within 48 hours during weekdays and within 72 hours on weekends.
The utilization management services contractor (UM contractor) is responsible for
controlling the costs of outside care (such as from hospitals or specialists) by
establishing a network of secondary care providers and by authorizing and
making all payments for usage of such providers. The UM contractor is also
responsible for conducting periodic peer reviews of all providers of healthcare
services, which includes employees of the other contractors and secondary care
providers.
The contractor for the electronic patient health records (EPHR) is responsible for
implementing a computer system that provides a full medical history, in an
electronic format, for each inmate that could be accessed from any EPHR system
terminal in DPSCS facilities and offices to allow users to readily determine
whether appropriate healthcare services were provided.
1 The vendor selected for the medical services contract was also selected to implement a
computer system for electronic patient health records.
3

--- Page 6 ---
The contract amounts are to be evaluated annually by the contractors and the
Office of Inmate Health Services (OIHS), and adjusted based on the consumer
price index. The total cost for these six contracts during fiscal year 2009 was
approximately $150 million, according to DPSCS records, and is summarized in
the following table:
Table 1
Inmate Healthcare Contract Costs
Fiscal Year 2009 Fiscal Year 2009
Contract
Contract Amounts Actual Expenditures
Medical Services $ 67,869,007 $ 66,646,547
Mental Health Services 12,384,915 12,069,813
Dental Services 7,797,800 7,712,897
Pharmaceutical Services 27,219,573 26,777,062
Utilization Management 34,627,318 34,937,505
Electronic Patient Health
1,639,324 1,693,519
Records (EPHR)
Total $151,537,937 $149,837,343
OIHS, within the DPSCS Office of Treatment Services, is responsible for
monitoring the five inmate healthcare contractors to ensure that services are
provided in accordance with the related contracts. Approximately 40 OIHS
employees (30 regular and 10 contractual employees) throughout the State have
been assigned to monitor the inmate healthcare contracts. The responsibilities of
OIHS include determining whether contractors met contract requirements to
provide sufficient qualified staffing and timely healthcare treatment services (such
as healthcare for inmates with infectious diseases or chronic health conditions).
For example, the medical, dental, and mental health contracts require each
contractor to submit work schedules, for OIHS approval, detailing the daily
working hours for all employees during each month. OIHS employees also
participate in investigations of inmate healthcare-related complaints received from
inmates, DPSCS corrections personnel, and contractor employees. All contractors
are required to attend monthly quality improvement meetings held in each SDA as
well as quarterly statewide meetings held at OIHS headquarters in Baltimore.
Invoice processing for contractor billings is handled by the DPSCS Office of the
Secretary. Specifically, OIHS is responsible for advising the Office to pay the
invoices after comparing the invoice totals to monthly budgeted amounts,
4

--- Page 7 ---
verifying hours billed, billing rates, and the mathematical accuracy of the
invoices. These responsibilities are addressed in our fiscal compliance audits of
DPSCS’ Office of the Secretary.
Historic Problems With Inmate Healthcare
In the past, numerous complaints had been made about deficiencies in Maryland’s
inmate healthcare program, particularly in the Baltimore jail system, and some
have resulted in investigations and lawsuits. For example, in August 2002, the
Federal Department of Justice (DOJ) cited the Baltimore City Detention Center
(BCDC, formerly the Baltimore city jail) for 107 different violations of health and
safety standards, including 45 violations related to medical care and mental health
patient treatment. In January 2007, the State reached an agreement with DOJ to
resolve these violations by January 2011. The aforementioned DOJ investigation
was conducted to determine whether the State had complied with provisions of a
1993 federal consent decree regarding health and safety conditions in the
Baltimore jail system that had not sufficiently improved since the initial lawsuit
was filed in 1971. In August 2009, the State reached a partial settlement
agreement with the American Civil Liberties Union and the Public Justice Center,
which represented the parties in the original lawsuit. This settlement requires the
State to make certain improvements in healthcare and living conditions for
inmates at BCDC.
Contract Settlements and Liquidated Damages
DPSCS entered into seven settlement agreements during the period from January
2007 through December 2008 for contract claims (such as for liquidated damages)
with contactors providing services under its inmate health service contracts that
resulted in certain contractors paying DPSCS $3,381,000, and DPSCS paying
certain contractors $141,383. Specifically, these settlements were with three
current contractors that provided services under the medical, mental health, and
utilization management services modules of the current inmate health
contracts that cover the period from June 1, 2005 through June 30, 2010, and one
former contractor whose inmate healthcare contract ended in June 30, 1998. The
inmate health services contracts permit DPSCS to assess liquidated damages
against any contractor that fails to perform in a manner consistent with the
contract provisions. The settlements were negotiated agreements, which specified
that DPSCS would hold the contractors harmless from any further claims related
to this period, including any claims associated with billing overpayments or
deviations from the contract terms as related to services provided. In addition, for
5

--- Page 8 ---
contract violations during calendar year 2009, we were advised by OIHS
management personnel that liquidated damages totaling approximately $278,000
had been assessed against the medical services contractor.
Electronic Patient Health Records Computer System (EPHR)
One of the six contracts executed in 2005 by DPSCS required a vendor to develop
and implement a computer system to electronically track patient health records.
That contract required that the patient health records include each inmate’s health
history while in DPSCS custody, including all medical exams, diagnoses,
laboratory test results, medications administered, and secondary care services
(such as visits to hospitals or specialists). Upon implementation, OIHS planned to
use the reporting capabilities of EPHR to analyze the adequacy of inmate health
services provided by the contractors (such as to track the timeliness of inmate sick
call visits and chronic care patient visits), thereby allowing OIHS to address
certain of the quality of care issues identified during our performance audit.
However, we were advised by OIHS management personnel that certain
limitations in EPHR’s reporting capabilities have prevented them from using the
system to monitor inmate health services on a global basis (such as the ability to
determine how many inmates received a particular drug) to the extent intended.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) – Office of Inmate Health
Services (OIHS) as of December 31, 2009 to address selected findings in our
February 21, 2007 performance audit report.
This review was conducted based on a request we received from the Joint Audit
Committee to determine the status of the corrective actions taken by OIHS to
address the findings related to the quality of inmate health care services. We
determined that 7 of the 12 findings in the February 2007 report were most
directly related to quality of care.
Our review consisted of obtaining the December 31, 2009 status report from
OIHS (describing the level of implementation of each prior audit report
recommendation), performing tests and analyses of selected information, and
holding discussions with OIHS personnel as we deemed necessary to determine
the status of OIHS’s corrective actions for the seven findings. Our review did not
constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards, other matters may have come to our
attention that would have been reported. Our review was conducted primarily
during December 2009 through January 2010.
DPSCS’ response to our follow-up review is included as an appendix to this
report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DPSCS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Exhibit 1: Status of Findings in February 21, 2007
Audit Report
Status Based on Status as
Prior Finding Auditor’s Review as Determined by
of 12/2009 OIHS as of 12/2009
Sufficiency of Contractor Staffing
1. Staffing levels provided, as reported by the medical
contractor, should be periodically verified to supporting N/A Corrected
documentation.
2. OIHS should closely monitor contractor compliance
N/A Corrected
with pre-approved work schedules.
3. OIHS should determine the appropriate contractor
staffing levels needed to provide all required services to
N/A Corrected
inmates.
Monitoring of Service Delivery Requirements in
Medical Services Contract
4. Medical exams of arrestees should be completed within
In Progress In Progress
seven days of arrest as required.
5. A process should be put in place to ensure that inmates
with chronic medical conditions receive appropriate Minimal Progress In Progress
treatment as required.
6. Corrective actions should be taken to address reported
Minimal Progress Corrected
healthcare deficiencies.
7. A methadone detoxification program should be
Corrected Corrected
implemented as required.
8. Action should be taken to address identified service
delivery problems and medical contractor reports should Minimal Progress In Progress
be verified for reliability.
9. A timely independent review should be conducted of the
adequacy of care rendered subsequent to each inmate In Progress In Progress
death.
10. OIHS should ensure that all significant healthcare
violations and performance deficiencies are identified
N/A Corrected
and documented timely and that full liquidated damages
are assessed as soon as practical.
11. Outstanding issues delaying the implementation of the
electronic patient records computer system need to be
N/A Corrected
resolved.
12. Actions should be taken to address contractor reported
In Progress In Progress
weaknesses in coordination.
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
Note: Shaded findings are more fully described in Exhibit 2.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 2: Status of Selected Findings
From February 2007 Inmate Healthcare Report
Arrestee Medical Exams
Prior Finding 4
Medical exams of arrestees should be completed within seven days of arrest
as required.
Prior Report Recommendation 4
We recommended that the Office of Inmate Health Services (OIHS) ensure that
medical exams are completed within seven days for all arrestees, as required in
the inmate medical contract.
Status – In Progress
OIHS had not established an adequate process to ensure that all intake medical
exams were completed timely. In this regard, although OIHS produced daily
reports of arrestees who were still in custody after seven days at the Baltimore
Central Booking and Intake Center (BCBIC), it did not compare these reports to
electronic medical records to ensure the inmates had received a medical exam as
required in the inmate medical contract. While we were advised that OIHS
personnel tracked the timeliness of medical exams, limited documentation of such
monitoring was available. Specifically, documentation indicated that OIHS
employees tested 10 inmates arrested from November 2009 to January 2010 and
determined that 9 inmates received medical exams within seven days and 1
inmate received an exam on the eighth day. Our test of 15 inmates arrested in
November 2009 disclosed that 12 of these arrestees had their medical exam within
seven days as required, two inmates had an exam on the ninth day after their
arrest, and one inmate was released on the ninth day without having an exam.
According to State records, BCBIC processed 73,326 arrestees during fiscal year
2009, although the number of arrestees that were in custody for more than seven
days was not determinable.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Inmates with Chronic Medical Problems
Prior Finding 5
A process should be put in place to ensure that inmates with chronic medical
conditions receive appropriate treatment as required.
Prior Report Recommendation 5
We recommended that OIHS establish a process to ensure that all inmates with
chronic care conditions receive required services from the contractor’s medical
staff.
Status – Minimal Progress
OIHS did not establish a process to ensure that all inmates with chronic medical
conditions (such as infectious diseases, heart disease, or diabetes) were added to
the medical contractor’s database of chronic care patients to receive services from
the contractor’s staff as required in the inmate medical contract. Our test of 70
inmates, whom the medical services contractor reported as having an infectious
disease that was considered to be a chronic medical condition during the period
from May 2009 through August 2009, disclosed that 15 of these inmates had not
been added to the contractor’s chronic care database as of November 2009.
We also noted that the contractor’s chronic care database did not include the dates
of inmates’ last medical visit as required. As a result, OIHS could not readily
determine whether all inmates with chronic conditions had received medical visits
every three months as required. OIHS did perform an audit during calendar year
2009 to determine if inmates with a specific chronic medical condition (HIV)
received appropriate treatment. OIHS’ April 2009 audit of 82 inmates with HIV
determined that 27% of these inmates were not visited quarterly as required for
their chronic medical condition. According to the medical contractor’s records
(which we noted above was incomplete), there were 9,319 inmates with chronic
medical conditions as of November 30, 2009.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Service Delivery Monitoring - Audits
Prior Finding 6
Corrective actions should be taken to address reported healthcare
deficiencies.
Prior Report Recommendation 6
1. We recommended that OIHS require corrective action plans from contractors
to address service delivery deficiencies identified in audits conducted by
OIHS and by the contractors, as well as service delivery weaknesses
discussed in the periodic meetings with the contractors.
2. We also recommended that OIHS establish procedures to ensure that the
corrective action plans are implemented, and retain documentation that
establishes corrective actions have been fully implemented.
Status – Minimal Progress
1. OIHS did not always require formal corrective action plans from contractors
to address service delivery deficiencies identified in audits conducted by
OIHS. Specifically, our review of eight OIHS audits completed between
September 2007 and November 2009 identified six audits where OIHS
should have required corrective action plans from the medical contractor to
address certain service delivery deficiencies identified by the audits (such as
failure to provide required services to inmates who were diabetic or had
HIV). However, as of January 2010, OIHS had only obtained three
corrective action plans from the medical contractor for these six audits.
Furthermore, one of these three corrective action plans did not address the
weaknesses discussed in the related audit findings.
OIHS also did not have a process to ensure all contractor performed audits
were submitted as required. These audits were self assessments to monitor
compliance with contract requirements. Specifically, the medical contractor
was required to complete 66 audits during calendar year 2009 according to
OIHS records, but OIHS had not determined how many of these audits were
actually completed, and did not have any of the audits on hand. As a result,
OIHS could not determine how many contractor audits required corrective
action plans based on service delivery deficiencies identified.
2. OIHS had established a policy to require that the corrective action plans be
implemented by contractors within four months of the date that the service
delivery deficiency was identified. However, we were advised by an OIHS
11

--- Page 14 ---
management employee that, due to limited staffing for this task, OIHS has
been unable to verify that all corrective action plans had been implemented;
consequently, documentation of plan implementation was not maintained.
Methadone Treatment Program
Prior Finding 7
A methadone detoxification program should be implemented as required.
Prior Report Recommendation 7
We recommended that OIHS ensure the required methadone detoxification
program is implemented as soon as possible.
Status – Corrected
In 2008, OIHS established a methadone detoxification program at the four intake
and pretrial correctional facilities located in Baltimore City, as required by the
medical services contract, after receiving federal licenses to operate the program.
According to DPSCS records, the methadone program treated 1,082 detainees
during fiscal year 2009.
Service Delivery Monitoring - Reports
Prior Finding 8
Action should be taken to address identified service delivery problems and
medical contractor reports should be verified for reliability.
Prior Report Recommendation 8
1. We recommended that OIHS ensure that contractor service delivery reports
contain all required information, that OIHS periodically review the
underlying medical records for contractor reports to ensure reliability, at least
on a test basis, and that OIHS investigate and resolve any discrepancies.
2. We also recommended that OIHS take action to address any identified
service delivery deficiencies.
Status – Minimal Progress
1. OIHS did not always obtain service delivery reports required by the medical
service contract and, for those reports that were received, it did not ensure
that the information contained on the reports was reliable. Our review of
12

--- Page 15 ---
OIHS records used to track contractor reports received indicated that the
majority of reports had not been received for the medical services contractor
as of December 2009. The contractor was required to submit various
reports to OIHS at intervals that were either daily, weekly, monthly, or
annually. For example, OIHS did not receive any of the fiscal year 2009
monthly incident review reports that the medical services contractor was
required to submit that would have detailed adverse incidents, such as
assaults on contractor staff and lapses in protocol. Furthermore, while OIHS
did verify that two reports related to infectious diseases, prepared by the
medical services contractor, included all applicable inmates, it did not verify
that medical data on these reports, or on any other reports received, were
accurate.
2. Our review of service delivery reports prepared by the medical contractor
during the period from July through November 2009 did not identify any
significant deficiencies that warranted follow-up actions by OIHS staff.
However, as noted above, many of the required reports were not received
from this contractor. In our follow-up review for Finding 6, we determined
that OIHS performed various audits that addressed the timeliness of sick
call visits and medication administration errors, which were the two areas
identified in our preceding performance audit Finding 8 as needing follow-up
actions.
Independent Death Reviews
Prior Finding 9
A timely independent review should be conducted of the adequacy of care
rendered subsequent to each inmate death.
Prior Report Recommendation 9
We recommended that OIHS establish a process to ensure that an independent
physician reviews each inmate death in a timely manner to evaluate the adequacy
of medical care provided to the inmate.
Status – In Progress
OIHS did not ensure that all inmate deaths were reviewed timely by an
independent physician to evaluate the adequacy of medical care provided to the
inmate. Specifically, of the 214 inmate deaths that occurred during the period
from January 1, 2007 through November 30, 2009, 124 of these deaths had not
been reviewed by an independent physician as of January 5, 2010 according to
13

--- Page 16 ---
OIHS records, including 98 deaths that had occurred from 181 days to 734 days
prior to our review. Although a DPSCS directive and an OIHS written policy
required that independent physician reviews be completed for each inmate death,
there was no requirement specifying the time frame within which these reviews
had to be completed.
OIHS revised its process to conduct inmate death reviews in 2008 to ensure that
OIHS nursing staff reviewed all deaths in a timely manner. In addition, OIHS
nursing staff now prioritizes such cases into one of five rankings and assigns
higher priority rankings to those deaths which may have been preventable so these
cases are reviewed first by the OIHS medical director. Our test of supporting
documentation for all 12 inmate deaths with the two highest priority rankings
during calendar years 2006 through 2009 (as of November 2009) disclosed that all
12 inmate deaths were reviewed by OIHS nursing staff within 21 days of the date
of death and were subsequently reviewed by OIHS’ medical director, which
serves as the required independent physician review to evaluate the adequacy of
care.
Coordination of Services Among Health Contractors
Prior Finding 12
Actions should be taken to address contractor-reported weaknesses in
coordination.
Prior Report Recommendation 12
We recommended that OIHS ensure that identified deficiencies in coordination
among contractors are resolved as soon as possible, and document the measures
taken to resolve the deficiencies and the results achieved. In particular, OIHS
should ensure that inmate health records are readily available to providers of
mental health services, require the utilization management contractor (referred to
as the UM contractor) to perform the required peer reviews of secondary care
providers, and ensure that the medical services contractor submits required
documentation to support emergency room admissions.
Status – In Progress
Regarding coordination of services among contractors, OIHS provided
documentation that it held routine meetings with the UM contractor to discuss the
adequacy of inmate health care services provided and coordination among the
other contractors. In addition, OIHS revised its medical recordkeeping policies to
require all contractors to store each inmate’s health records in the Electronic
14

--- Page 17 ---
Patient Health Records (EPHR) automated system maintained by the medical
contractor. We were advised that the mental health contractor (that was
specifically mentioned in the preceding performance audit) is now required to
access EPHR to obtain inmate medical records, and it has not advised OIHS of
any difficulties in accessing individual medical records since our previous audit.
Regarding another area of coordination, OIHS did not ensure that the UM
contractor performed the required peer reviews of secondary care providers.
Specifically, OIHS had not received any peer reviews from the UM contractor.
While OIHS acknowledged that it did not enforce secondary care peer reviews,
we were advised that OIHS management did not believe that such peer reviews
were necessary to achieve its care goals and that the requirement for such peer
reviews will be removed from future contracts.
Regarding a final area of coordination noted in our preceding performance audit,
the UM contractor reported that the medical contractor submitted required
documentation for 96 percent of emergency room admissions during calendar
year 2009, including 6 individual months where 98 percent of the required
documentation was submitted. However, OIHS had not established a process to
verify the accuracy of these UM contractor statistics to ensure emergency room
admissions were properly supported (such as reviewing the emergency room
referral documentation approved by a medical contractor physician), even on a
test basis.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
Office of the Secretary
300 E. JOPPA ROAD • SUITE 1000 • TOWSON, MARYLAND 21286-3020
(410) 339-5000 • FAX (410) 339-4240 • TOLL FREE (877) 379-8636 • V/TTY (800) 735-2258 • www.dpscs.state.md.us
March 19, 2010
STATE OF MARYLAND
MARTIN O’MALLEY
GOVERNOR
ANTHONY G. BROWN
LT. GOVERNOR
Mr. Gary D. Maynard, Secretary
GARY D. MAYNARD
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
SECRETARY
300 East Joppa Road, Suite 1000
G. LAWRENCE FRANKLIN
DEPUTY SECRETARY
Towson, Maryland 21286
ADMINISTRATION
PHILIP PIÉ
DEPUTY SECRETARY
RE: Performance Audit Report – Inmate Healthcare
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES
THOMASINA HIERS
ASSISTANT SECRETARY/
Dear Secretary Maynard:
CHIEF OF STAFF
DAVID N. BEZANSON
ASSISTANT SECRETARY
Below are the responses to the draft Performance Audit Report for Inmate
CAPITAL PROGRAMS
Healthcare. This was a follow up review of the Inmate Healthcare audit
DIVISION OF CORRECTION
published in February 2007. While not all of the items cited in that audit
DIVISION OF PAROLE AND
PROBATION
have been corrected, the Department continues to make significant
DIVISION OF PRETRIAL
progress in providing quality healthcare to inmates.
DETENTION AND SERVICES
PATUXENT INSTITUTION
Although it is reasonable to expect that the Department should monitor and
MARYLAND COMMISSION
ON CORRECTIONAL
STANDARDS document every element of a contract to ensure that services have been
CORRECTIONAL TRAINING rendered, a check list of completions does not always guarantee success in
COMMISSION
healthcare management. It also does not guarantee good outcomes. The
POLICE TRAINING
COMMISSION quality of healthcare received by inmates in Maryland is reflected by the
MARYLAND PAROLE
clinical outcomes achieved in disease management, as well as
COMMISSION
CRIMINAL INJURIES documentation by experts and agencies whose experience in the delivery of
COMPENSATION BOARD
services and care for inmates are nationally recognized and serve as the
EMERGENCY NUMBER
SYSTEMS BOARD reference for standards of care for inmate health services. An example of
SUNDRY CLAIMS BOARD some of the clinical outcomes we can be proud of are as follows:
INMATE GRIEVANCE OFFICE
• Maryland inmates, when compared to the community and other state
correctional systems, have a higher percentage of diabetics who
have exceptional performance outcomes related to Hemoglobulin
A1C, which exceeds national average standards. The control and
management of the complications of this disease is directly related to
this measurement. At a National Commission on Correctional Health
Care (NCCHC) conference in San Antonio, Texas, a DPSCS multi-
vendor presentation on Diabetic Care in Corrections scored one of
the highest evaluations of any of the other presentations, outlining
the steps for care of the chronic diseases in Maryland inmates, and
the outcomes from that management.

--- Page 20 ---
Page 2
• Five hundred and eighty HIV inmates identified as having chronic
diseases are monitored with Johns Hopkins as well as with a
University of Maryland Medical System (UMMS) Infection Control
Specialist. Documented data confirms that inmates who have HIV in
Maryland have achieved viral load suppression, a hallmark of good
care in over 64% of the Maryland inmates compared to less than
50% on average nationally.
• The Institute of Human Virology and Johns Hopkins consultants
confirmed that Maryland is treating over 300 inmates with Hepatitis
C, which is a greater number of inmates in treatment than the
surrounding states. This accomplishment has also been recognized
by the legislature in Annapolis, which tracks the care and
management of this disease in corrections.
While not reflected in this audit, the Office of Inmate Health Services (OIHS)
has continued to work closely with the vendors to achieve good overall
results. For example:
• Maryland retained healthcare certification by the American
Correctional Association for WCI and ECI;
• Baltimore pretrial NCCHC recertification was achieved;
• Medical contractors achieved Maryland Commission on Correctional
Standards (MCCS) certification in 98% of the facilities with only one
corrective action pending;
• Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) licensing
certification was achieved in 100% of the infirmaries statewide;
• Maryland is the only state correctional system to achieve program
certification for its Methadone Program;
• In a recent Department of Justice (DOJ) audit, Maryland received a
“substantial compliance” rating for access to emergency care,
mortality reviews, intake screening, and the care of pregnant
inmates;
• Prior finding #’s 1, 2 and 3 (Legislative Audit 2007) concerning
staffing were addressed through improved contract monitoring as
well as a review of staffing levels and a contract modification to
staffing levels as recommended in the past findings; and
• Prior finding # 10 (Legislative Audit 2007) concerning the
identification and securing of full liquidated damages was also
addressed through the establishment of the OIHS Liquidated
Damages Review Board, and fully assessed liquidated damages.

--- Page 21 ---
Page 3
The OIHS has recently been reorganized in order to better differentiate
between clinical and healthcare administration. This should position the
Department to be able to maintain the positive clinical outcomes while also
ensuring that corrective action is taken and contracts are closely audited for
compliance.
The OIHS responses to each of the legislative auditor’s status findings are
reflected below:
Finding #4 – Medical exams of arrestees should be completed within
seven days of arrest as required.
Auditor status determination – In Progress.
We agree. Although we did not properly document that we ensure the timely
medical exams of arrestees, this did not have a negative impact on inmate
healthcare. In fact, external auditing agencies such as the DOJ, NCCHC,
as well as the MCCS, who conducted audits related to the receiving
screening/intake process, found DPSCS in compliance with this standard.
Also, the medical consultant for the DOJ, upon review of the changes in the
intake process put in place to ensure the identification and processing of the
inmates medically, advised, and we quote, “The DOC is in substantial
compliance with this element of the Agreement.”
To achieve full compliance in this area, OIHS has or will implement the
following:
• The template for “Intake Exams” is presently being developed. By
May 15, 2010, it shall be in use, and summary data on completed
intake exams will be available.
• By June 1, 2010, the summary report generated will be recorded on
an Excel spreadsheet with a comparison of the date the arrestee was
received against the 7-day timeframe allotted to complete the exam.

--- Page 22 ---
Page 4
Finding #5 – A process should be put in place to ensure that inmates
with chronic medical conditions receive appropriate treatment as
required.
Auditor status determination – Minimal Progress.
We agree in part, disagree in part.1 The chronic care database does not
capture all inmates who are designated as having a chronic illness.
However, we believe inmates with chronic conditions are receiving care
substantial enough to alter the course of complications associated with their
disease. In addition, the electronic medical record has the last date of the
inmate visit for chronic disease care even if it is not in the chronic disease
database. When compared to the community and other state correctional
systems, Maryland inmates with chronic conditions, on average, have good
outcomes.
To achieve full compliance in this area, OIHS will enhance the data integrity
and monitoring. In fact, we have already begun Electronic Medical Records
(EMR) education that ensures that chronic care data entry is accurate.
OIHS has also audited HIV and Hepatitis C for data integrity with results
close to 98% accuracy. The final phase is to be implemented on June 1,
2010. This will include a random selection of 30 chronic care cases each
month from the vendor’s generated report. The 30 selected cases will be
reconciled against individual patient records confirming that these individual
patients have or have not been followed up in chronic care clinics. OIHS
will also continue to track and monitor positive clinical outcomes that include
HIV, diabetes, and heart disease.
1Auditor’s Comment: The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services’ (DPSCS)
response acknowledges that the chronic care database does not capture all inmates who are
designated as having a chronic illness, but implies that this condition is mitigated by the
inclusion of certain chronic care information in the electronic medical records (EMR).
However, the Office of Inmate Health Services (OIHS) could not use the EMR to determine if
all inmates with chronic conditions received required medical care due to limitations in EMR
reporting capabilities. The chronic care database was created to monitor this segment of the
inmate population. As the chronic care database is not comprehensive, OIHS had limited
assurance that all inmates with chronic conditions were fully receiving appropriate treatment.

--- Page 23 ---
Page 5
Finding #6 – Corrective actions should be taken to address reported
healthcare deficiencies.
Auditor status determination – Minimal Progress.
We agree in part, disagree in part.2 In the past, OIHS did not always
request corrective action plans in response to all deficiencies. However,
OIHS did utilize the quarterly CQI meetings and presentations by the vendor
to differentiate the systemic issues from episodic ones and addressed the
corrections utilizing a multi-vendor corrective action approach. For example,
when diabetic care outcomes related to poor control of blood sugar levels
were identified, each vendor addressed the contribution their discipline
offered to the correction of the problem utilizing a PowerPoint presentation.
The audit data was part of the presentation. The outcome was the lowering
of the hemoglobin A1C for the diabetic inmate. The same approach was
used for cardiac case management, ER, self injurious behavior, suicide
tracking, and medication administration audit issues. Also, OIHS internal
audits have indicated a reduction in ER admissions from FY08 to FY09.
Further, CQI monitoring of off-site trips to treat seizures resulted in the
establishment of an alcohol and drug detoxification unit at BCDC. The data
for the CQI monitoring of seizures is not contained in a traditional corrective
action plan but is incorporated within the follow-up presentations of the
outcomes. OIHS believes this method of tracking audit deficiencies, utilizing
outcome data and monitoring systemic core essentials produces better
results.
To achieve full compliance, the procedures for monitoring and responding to
contractor deficiencies, including monthly audits that are inclusive of, but not
limited to, intake, sick call, periodic physicals, and chronic care, will be
published no later than May 1, 2010. Prospectively, formal corrective action
plans will still be a part of the healthcare plan, but not the sole basis for
ensuring compliance.
Finding #7 – A methadone detoxification program should be
implemented as required.
Auditor status determination – Corrected.
2Auditor’s Comment: DPSCS’ response acknowledges that OIHS did not always request
corrective action plans in response to all service delivery deficiencies noted, but indicated that
various other procedures were performed that facilitated monitoring of corrective actions.
Without a systematic process to ensure that contractor corrective action plans are created and to
track the receipt and implementation of the plans, OIHS had limited assurance that all reported
healthcare deficiencies were being addressed. Furthermore, the response does not address our
comment that OIHS was not ensuring that all contractually required audits were completed.

--- Page 24 ---
Page 6
We agree. In 2008, after receiving federal licenses to operate the program,
OIHS established a methadone detoxification program at the four intake and
pretrial correctional facilities located in Baltimore City, as required by the
medical services contract. According to DPSCS records, the methadone
program treated 1,082 detainees during fiscal year 2009.
Finding #8 – Action should be taken to address identified service
delivery problems and medical contractor reports should be verified
for reliability.
Auditor status determination – Minimal Progress.
We agree in part, disagree in part.3 Actions taken to address the
deficiencies may not have been in a standard corrective action format, but
there are a number of emails that document that OIHS was providing
instruction and tracking deficiencies. The follow-up correspondence was
identified and made available for review to the legislative auditors.
Other actions were also taken to address problems and ensure vendor
compliance. For example, in the areas where disease management was a
part of the CQI reporting for diabetic inmates, the listing of inmates and lab
results were verified. HIV data is researched weekly and validated by
receipt of the lab results. There are specialists who depend upon the validity
of tests to offer care suggestions. Tele-medical conferences are conducted
every Tuesday to discuss and question labs and viral load levels.
In addition, on a weekly basis, medical contractors managing Hepatitis C
patients are questioned and corrections are made related to missing
information or faulty data that was submitted for approval for anti-viral
therapy. That data is on a lab report which is faxed for our review prior to
the presentation. Every month, data submitted for review related to HIV
testing, dialysis, ER reports, etc. are challenged and reviewed. Pregnancy
information submitted by the contractors is reviewed daily/weekly. This
includes testing for STD, HIV, Hepatitis, and urine pregnancy testing using
the Bio-Reference Laboratory and the electronic record. The State Venereal
Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) is tracked by OIHS internal auditors
using the state’s listing of inmates. The contractor enters the data received
so that most of the infectious disease information is not that of the medical
contractor, but a laboratory entity. We continue to monitor the contractor’s
requests, receipts and actions, if required, of those lab test results.
3Auditor’s Comment: DPSCS’ response indicates actions that are taken related to various
service delivery problems. Specifically, while the response cites monitoring of some aspects of
the contractor’s medical service delivery system, our review noted that OIHS did not ensure all
service delivery reports required by the medical service contract were received. Additionally,
for those reports received the response indicated that information on the reports was reviewed,
but we noted that OIHS did not ensure the information contained on the reports was reliable.
However, the DSPCS’ response does indicate that OIHS would create a spreadsheet to track and
summarize its monitoring efforts.

--- Page 25 ---
Page 7
Furthermore, follow-up audits related to sick call and medication
management were conducted by the state, and documentation of the efforts
of the contractor to correct medication management was submitted to the
legislative auditors.
Finally, serious incident reporting is part of the quarterly CQI submission
under risk management. Any other serious incident requirements more than
reporting are followed up by the regional agency’s on-site contract monitor.
To achieve full compliance in this area, effective May 2010, OIHS will create
an Excel spreadsheet to track and summarize the above-referenced
practices.
Finding #9 – A timely independent review should be conducted of the
adequacy of care rendered subsequent to each inmate death.
Auditor status determination – In Progress.
We agree. A physician reviewer is an essential component of the death
review process. However, given that the Department only has one physician
provider for an inmate population of 23,000 inmates, some additional steps
were taken to alert the DPSCS Medical Director of those incidents of death
that required a more urgent review. In the current process, the site level’s
master’s degree nurses review the case to participate in the 72 hour death
review on site. They have served to alert the DPSCS Medical Director
about deviations from standards of care and have also achieved a more
timely review.
The Department has recently completed the hiring of an additional master’s
level nurse, part time, who has been trained in mortality review to assist in
the identification of cases that require more immediate input. In addition, an
administrative nursing review is conducted by other nursing staff who will
also alert the mortality review nurses of cases requiring their immediate
input. Although those deaths that were related to terminal illnesses,
homicide, overdose, and expected deaths related to unstable chronic
conditions are important, the priority of cases that are unexpected,
suspicious, or deviations from the standards, will be given to the master’s
level nurse for input more expeditiously.
To achieve full compliance in this area, OIHS believes that with the ability to
fill the nursing FTE, we will soon be able to respond to these reviews in a
more timely manner.
Finding #12 – Actions should be taken to address contractor reported
weaknesses in coordination.
Auditor status determination – In Progress.

--- Page 27 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Howard A. Marzolf, III
Amber M. Schon, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors