Title: Talbot County Public Schools
Date: 12/03/2007
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d38cc9d72404c150a3c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:49:14.926120
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit Report
Talbot County Public Schools
December 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 3, 2007
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Nathaniel J. McFadden, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Talbot
County Public Schools (TCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. TCPS is the third smallest public school system in Maryland based
on the number of students enrolled. The educational services are delivered in
nine schools, with fiscal year 2006 operating expenditures of $47.9 million.
The objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether TCPS procedures and
controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and
whether its policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our report identifies several areas in which TCPS had implemented certain financial
and operational best practices. Nevertheless, it also contains 18 recommendations.
TCPS needs to make certain control enhancements to its existing financial
management systems and processes and needs to implement adequate safeguards
over procurement, payroll, and its equipment inventory. Furthermore, formal policies
or procedures should be developed for a number of financial and operational areas,
including those previously mentioned, and formal performance measures should be
established to monitor effectiveness and efficiency of facilities maintenance and bus
transportation. Also, more can be done to ensure cost-effective transportation
operations, such as purchasing smaller, less costly conventional school buses and
establishing a bus replacement program based on individual bus performances and
specific needs. We also found a number of information technology security practices
that need to be adopted.
An Executive Summary of our findings can be found on page i, immediately following
this cover letter, and our audit scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on
page 55. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit
by TCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
Executive Summary
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted an audit to evaluate
the effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management
practices of the Talbot County Public Schools (TCPS) in accordance
with the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. State law requires the Office to
conduct such an audit of each of the 24 public school systems in
Maryland and provides that the related audit process be approved
by the Joint Audit Committee. The Committee approved the audit
process in September 2004. The approved process included 11
functional areas to be audited at each system. The following are
summaries of the findings in these areas at TCPS.
Revenue and Billing Cycle (see pages 7 through 9)
According to the audited June 30, 2006 TCPS financial statements,
$47.6 million in revenue was received from all sources during fiscal
year 2006, the vast majority of which was received via electronic
funds transfer from other governmental entities. Procedures and
controls for these revenue sources and accounts receivable were
found to be adequate. Procedures over student activity funds were
also found to be adequate.
Federal Funds (see pages 11 through 14)
Annually, TCPS is subject to an audit of its federally-funded
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, a requirement of
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). Due to parallels between that work and the scope of
our audit, we placed significant reliance on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2006 grant activity, for which
reported expenditures totaled $3.5 million. The related report
stated that TCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. In addition,
with respect to internal controls over compliance with and the
operation of major federal programs, the auditors noted no
reportable conditions and no matters considered to be material
weaknesses.
Although TCPS has processes for the identification of children
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services and for recovering the
related costs, additional measures can be taken to ensure complete
i
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 6 ---
identification of eligible students and the timely recovery of
reimbursable costs.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle (see pages 15
through 18)
Adequate controls were in place over credit card usage and
employee travel. However, TCPS should implement effective internal
controls over its accounts payable and procurement systems, such
as segregating employee duties and restricting employee
capabilities on the procurement and disbursement system, and
should establish adequate controls over wire transfers. According
to TCPS records, accounts payable check disbursements totaled
approximately $19.1 million during fiscal year 2006. In addition,
deficiencies were noted in procurement and contract monitoring.
For example, TCPS policy allowed for the procurement of
architectural and engineering services without the solicitation of
competitive bids.
Human Resources and Payroll (see pages 19 through 22)
TCPS employed almost 600 employees during fiscal year 2006 with
direct salary and wage costs of $27.6 million. TCPS should address
internal control deficiencies in its human resource and payroll
system. We noted that five employees who processed human
resource and payroll transactions had unlimited system access,
allowing them to unilaterally add employees, change salaries, and
process payroll checks. For example, system capabilities and job
duties should be segregated and an independent review and
approval process should be established.
TCPS should also expand its workforce planning to include non-
instructional positions in critical operational units.
Inventory Control and Accountability (see pages 23 and
24)
TCPS has formal policies and procedures governing the purchase
and disposal of textbooks. However, TCPS should develop and
implement policies and procedures to ensure that accountability
and effective control is maintained over all of its equipment. Our
tests disclosed numerous discrepancies between property records
and equipment on hand. According to its records, TCPS equipment
had a June 30, 2006 net book value of $2.3 million.
ii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 7 ---
Information Technology (see pages 25 through 28)
A master technology plan, which is periodically updated to address
current and future school needs, has been developed. Also, TCPS
used several project management best practices when
implementing its new Integrated Financial Management System.
However, several areas are in need of improvement, including
information technology (IT) system access and security, and
computer center operations. For example, TCPS did not have a
formal IT disaster recovery policy in place and was not making full
use of certain IT system features designed to restrict or detect
unauthorized or unnecessary access to systems and programs.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance (see pages 29 through 33)
TCPS employs a staff of 51 custodial and maintenance personnel to
maintain its ten facilities, including nine schools. TCPS uses a
comprehensive and public process to plan for school construction
and renovation, and has been able to obtain alternative financing
towards certain projects which serves to enhance the usefulness of
its facilities to the community. Although TCPS has received or
qualified for a Governor’s Citation for “Superior” school
maintenance for fiscal years 2005, 2006, and 2007, TCPS needs to
ensure that preventive maintenance and routine inspections of all
facilities are completed as required by internal policies. TCPS should
also consider implementing performance measures and an
automated work order system to better manage its maintenance
operations and personnel.
Transportation Services (see pages 35 through 40)
TCPS operates its own fleet of 43 buses to transport all students.
Transportation costs per rider are next to the lowest among its peer
group of LEAs; however, its annual cost per mile is the highest. TCPS
used several practices that increased the efficiency of transporting
students, such as staggering school start and stop times so buses
can provide multiple trips on the same day and obtaining fuel price
caps through annual fuel purchase contracts. However, more can
be done to ensure cost-effective operations such as using smaller,
less costly conventional school buses, where appropriate, and
establishing a bus replacement program based on individual bus
performances and specific needs. Also, transportation performance
measures and goals should be established, and a periodic cost
analysis should be performed to determine whether the practice of
transporting all students using its own fleet and not using any
iii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 8 ---
contractor-provided transportation services is in the best interest of
TCPS.
Food Services Operations (see pages 41 through 44)
TCPS currently uses a number of best practices in its self-sustaining
food services operations. For example, it uses certain performance
measures (such as meals per labor hour) to monitor the efficiency
of its operations and participates in a nine-county purchasing
cooperative. TCPS also uses available USDA commodities and has
procedures in place designed to maximize participation in the
national school meal programs. However, internal controls over
food procurements should be improved.
School Board Operations and Oversight (see pages 45
through 49)
The seven-member elected Board has adopted policies to govern
the operations of the Board and TCPS; however, additional guidance
to TCPS management should be provided in a number of identified
areas. While the Board had processes in place to oversee the TCPS
financial operations, it did not use an internal audit function to act
as an independent reviewer of TCPS operations. Finally, the Board
had adopted a detailed ethics policy, but that policy should be
expanded to cover senior management positions that have
purchasing responsibilities. The Board should also ensure that the
annual disclosure reporting requirements of the policy are enforced.
Other Financial Controls (see pages 51 through 53)
TCPS has a policy in place to govern its risk management practices;
however, TCPS needs to adopt policies on cash investment and the
use of long-term lease/purchase agreements and other multi-year
debt.
iv
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 9 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary i
Background Information 5
Oversight 5
Statistical Overview 5
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2006 Activity 5
Special Education Consortium 6
Chapter 1: Revenue and Billing Cycle 7
Background 7
Revenue and Billing Cycle Procedures Were Generally Adequate 9
Chapter 2: Federal Funds 11
Background 12
TCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls over Federal 12
Grants and Complied With Federal Grant Requirements
Improvements Should Be Made to Identify Students Eligible for 12
Medicaid-Subsidized Services and to Recover Costs More Promptly
Available Funding from the Federal E-Rate Program 13
Was Obtained
Recommendation 14
Chapter 3: Procurement and Disbursement Cycle 15
Background 15
TCPS Should Strengthen Internal Controls over Its Disbursements, 16
Procurements, and Contract Monitoring
TCPS Has Established Policies and Procedures to Control the 18
Use of Credit Cards and Travel
Recommendations 18
1
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 10 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 4: Human Resources and Payroll 19
Background 19
Human Resource and Payroll Internal Controls 20
Need to Be Strengthened
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include 21
Non-Instructional Positions
TCPS Has Instituted a School Business Manager Program that 22
Allows Principals to Focus on Instructional Leadership
Recommendations 22
Chapter 5: Inventory Control and Accountability 23
Background 23
Existing Controls Over Equipment Should Be Enhanced and 23
Formal Policies Established
Formal Textbook Procedures Have Been Established 24
Recommendation 24
Chapter 6: Information Technology 25
Background 25
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place 26
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Adequate Security Over 27
IT Applications
Data Processing Functions Should Be Better Safeguarded From 27
Disruption
Recommendations 28
2
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 11 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 7: Facilities Construction, Renovation, and 29
Maintenance
Background 29
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place 30
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to Increase the 31
Effectiveness and Efficiency of Maintenance and Custodial
Operations
Cost-Effectiveness of Energy Management Program Should 32
Be Monitored
Recommendations 33
Chapter 8: Transportation Services 35
Background 36
Several Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance Bus Route 37
Efficiency and to Reduce Transportation Costs
More Can Be Done to Ensure Cost Effective Operations 37
Formal Performance Measures for Student Transportation Should 40
Be Developed and the Results Reported Regularly to the Board
Recommendations 40
Chapter 9: Food Services Operations 41
Background 42
Certain Best Practices Were in Place 43
Internal Controls over Purchasing Could Be Improved 44
Recommendation 44
3
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 12 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 10: School Board Operations and Oversight 45
Background 45
Certain Oversight Has Been Put in Place Regarding TCPS 47
Operations
Additional Guidance or Policies Should Be Provided to TCPS 47
Management
The Board Should Consider Additional Steps to Assist It in 47
Governing TCPS
TCPS Should Enhance and Enforce Its Code of Ethics 48
Requirements for Filing Financial Disclosure Statements
Recommendations 49
Chapter 11: Other Financial Controls 51
Risk Management Best Practices Were in Place 51
TCPS Has Implemented a Consortium Buying Organization for 51
Special Education Services
Formal Investment and Debt Management Policies Have Not 52
Been Established
Recommendation 53
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 55
Response of Talbot County Public Schools Appendix
4
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 13 ---
Background Information
Oversight
Talbot County Public Schools (TCPS) is governed by a local school
board, consisting of seven elected voting members and a student
representative. The vast majority of TCPS funding is provided by the
Talbot County and State governments. In addition, the Maryland
State Department of Education (MSDE) exercises considerable
oversight through the establishment and monitoring of various
financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with
certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also
works with TCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
the federal No Child Left Behind Act of 2001. The Talbot County
government exercises oversight principally through approval of the
TCPS annual operating and capital budgets.
Statistical Overview
TCPS provides the full range of school programs and services
including elementary, middle, and high schools; alternative
education; special education; and adult education. TCPS also
provides programs for remedial and enriched education. TCPS
served approximately 4,400 students as of September 2006, and
its operating expenditures totaled $47.9 million for fiscal year
2006. As of October 2006, TCPS staff in all positions totaled 592.
Of these, 360 positions were classified as instructional, including
those for library, guidance, and special education. The remaining
232 positions were non-instructional, which includes administrative
and support staff positions for areas such as plant operation and
maintenance, food services, and pupil transportation.
Certain statistical information contained in this report was taken
from unaudited reports distributed by MSDE and represents the
most current comparable information available at the time of our
audit.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2006 Activity
Annually, TCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its fiscal year-end financial statements.
Additionally, the auditor conducts what is referred to as a Single
Audit of TCPS federal grant programs (as required by federal
5
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 14 ---
regulations). The two resulting audit reports for the 2006 fiscal year
were issued in August 2006. Student activity funds are also subject
to annual audit by the firm, including a review of internal controls.
None of the resultant reports included any reportable conditions or
any significant findings on TCPS record keeping, processes, and
controls.
Special Education Consortium
A Mid-Shore Special Education Consortium, which was not included
within the scope of this audit, was organized in 1973 and comprises
the Boards of Education for Talbot, Caroline, Dorchester, Kent, and
Queen Anne's counties. The goal of the Consortium is to support
the individual counties in serving students with disabilities in a cost-
effective manner. Services provided by the Consortium include
occupational and physical therapy, audiology, vision, hearing, and
clinical psychology. TCPS serves as the fiscal agent for the
Consortium and, according to TCPS records, the fiscal year 2007
budget was approximately $1.3 million. The Consortium received
grant funding from MSDE of $375,000 for fiscal year 2007; the
remainder of its funding was received from the five local
jurisdictions. In addition to the TCPS staff noted earlier, there are 19
positions for the Consortium managed by TCPS.
6
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 15 ---
Chapter 1
Revenue and Billing Cycle
According to the TCPS audited financial statements for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2006, $47.6 million of revenue was received
by TCPS during fiscal year 2006. Due to similarities between the
work of the independent certified public accounting firm that
audited TCPS financial statements and the scope of our audit in this
area, we placed significant reliance on the results of the audit of the
fiscal year 2006 financial statements for revenue transactions,
including State, local, federal, and other sources of revenue (such
as student activity fund1 cash receipts of $1.01 million) and for
accounts receivable (for example, amounts due from other
governments). At June 30, 2006, the receivables balance was
$593,833. The auditor’s procedural review and testing disclosed
no reportable conditions related to revenue and accounts
receivable.
Background
TCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Talbot
County, the State, and the federal government, the vast majority of
which was received via electronic funds transfer. Other sources
include receipts from the sale of food, facility use reimbursement
1 The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that the school activity fund is
used only for intended purposes by those to whom the assets belong. Receipts
for the school activity fund are not included in the $47.6 million revenue total
because the Board cannot use these assets to finance its operations.
7
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 16 ---
fees, and interest income. Chart 1 (below) shows TCPS fiscal year
2006 revenues of $47.6 million by major source.
Chart 1
Sources of Fiscal Year 2006 Revenues
($47.6 Million)
Other
$1,624,220
Federal
(3%)
$3,124,088
(7%)
State
$12,288,511
(26%)
Talbot
$30,576,056
(64%)
Source: TCPS fiscal year 2006 audited financial statements
In addition to the revenues in Chart 1, schools also collected funds
for various purposes, such as for student activity groups including
yearbook and Future Farmers of America. These school activity
funds are accounted for separately by each school and are reported
in summary in the audited financial statements. According to the
audited financial statements, fiscal year 2006 school activity fund
revenues totaled $1.01 million, and the June 30, 2006 balance was
$381,864.
8
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 17 ---
Revenue and Billing Cycle Procedures Were Generally
Adequate
Due to similarities between the work of the accounting firm that
audited the TCPS financial statements and the scope of our audit in
this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2006 financial statements. The
auditor’s procedural review and testing disclosed no reportable
conditions regarding the collection of any accounts receivable or
revenues from local, State, federal, and other sources (such as food
service operations), including wire transfer transactions. Student
activity funds were also audited by the firm, including a review of
internal controls and bank account reconciliations. The results of
this work, likewise, disclosed no reportable conditions.
Recommendations
None
9
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 18 ---
10
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 19 ---
Chapter 2
Federal Funds
Annually, TCPS is subject to an audit of its federally-funded grant
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, and required by
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). The report on the audit of fiscal year 2006 federal
grant activity was issued by the independent certified public
accounting firm on August 29, 2006.
In that report, the auditor stated that TCPS complied, in all material
respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal grant
programs. In addition, with respect to internal controls over
compliance with and the operation of major federal programs, the
auditors noted no reportable conditions2 and no matters considered
to be material weaknesses.3
We also noted that, while TCPS has a process in place to identify
children eligible for Medicaid-subsidized4 services, enhancements
should be made to ensure that all eligible children are identified and
that the costs of eligible services are fully recovered in a timely
manner.
2 Reportable conditions are issues relating to significant deficiencies in the design or
operation of the internal control over compliance that, in the auditor’s judgment, could
adversely affect the grantee’s ability to administer a major federal program.
3 Material weaknesses are severe reportable conditions in which the existing internal
control components might not detect, in a timely manner, a material instance of
noncompliance with applicable requirements of laws, regulations, contracts, and grants
caused by error or fraud.
4 The Federal Medical Assistance Program, or Medicaid, is not a grant program under
Circular A-133 and is not included in the Single Audit.
11
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 20 ---
Background
TCPS receives funds primarily from Talbot County, the State, and the
federal government. Most funds received from Talbot County and
from the State are unrestricted; however, federal funds are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the
School Lunch Program or Special Education). According to the
audited Schedule of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2006 expenditures
of federal award funds totaled $3.5 million.
TCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls over
Federal Grants and Complied With Federal Grant
Requirements
Because of the accounting firm’s work on TCPS federal fund
expenditures, we relied on the auditor’s results. Besides expressing
an opinion on TCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure’s impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2006
required Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant-related expenditures). In its report, the firm stated
that TCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements
applicable to its major federal grant programs. In addition, with
respect to internal controls over compliance with and the operation
of major federal programs, the auditors noted no reportable
conditions and no matters considered to be material weaknesses.
Improvements Should Be Made to Identify Students
Eligible for Medicaid-Subsidized Services and to
Recover Costs More Promptly
TCPS should ensure that all available methods are used to identify
all students eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services and to recover
related costs. According to TCPS records, as of March 2007, there
were approximately 211 students deemed eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services. These records also indicate that fiscal year
2006 revenue for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled $49,824—
representing less than one-quarter of the fiscal year 2005 revenue
of $215,458.
Although TCPS had processes in place for identifying students
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services and for recovering eligible
costs, more can be done. Specifically, we noted that other local
12
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 21 ---
school systems in Maryland identify students who are eligible for
Medicaid-subsidized services by obtaining listings of all children
whose families are participating in Medicaid, as determined by the
Maryland Department of Human Resources (DHR). These school
systems regularly compare the DHR listings to their own student
information systems to identify newly-eligible students and to verify
the continued eligibility of previously identified students. Although
TCPS had such a process in place, it could not demonstrate that it
was using this process regularly.
TCPS also did not have an adequate process in place to ensure
timely recovery of Medicaid-eligible funding. Our test of 10 students
eligible to receive Medicaid-subsidized services based on their
Individual Education Plans disclosed that, for all 10 as of March
2007, TCPS had not yet billed and obtained reimbursement for
eligible services provided by certified service providers during
December 2006. We were advised that, in many instances, the
Medicaid-certified service providers had not provided all necessary
documentation to TCPS that was needed to ensure proper billing
and reimbursement. These services included case management,
speech therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy.
By State regulation, TCPS has nine months after services are
provided to request reimbursement for eligible Medicaid
expenditures. Our test, in May 2007, of 10 students receiving
services in May 2006 disclosed that Medicaid-subsidized services
provided to two eligible students had not been billed for, and
reimbursement for the related expenditures is now questionable.
These services included case management and speech therapy.
Delays in receiving documentation from service providers may have
contributed to TCPS’ failure to request reimbursement within the
allowed timeframe.
Available Funding from the Federal E-Rate Program
Was Obtained
TCPS has a detailed process in place to request and receive
reimbursement for technology expenditures from the federal School
and Libraries Universal Service Program (E-Rate). The E-Rate
program provides funding to schools for telecommunications
expenses (such as internet access). The funding is based on the
level of poverty and the rural status of the school district. We noted
that TCPS was approved for approximately $96,000 in federal E-
Rate funding for fiscal year 2006 and had a process in place to
recover these E-Rate funds.
13
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation
1. TCPS should enhance its efforts to ensure that all students
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services are identified and that
all eligible costs for Medicaid-subsidized services are fully
recovered in a timely manner.
14
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 23 ---
Chapter 3
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
The TCPS procurement and disbursement processes did not provide
sufficient control and accountability to adequately protect school
system funds, although adequate controls were present over credit
card and travel use. Our review disclosed weaknesses in internal
control over the automated TCPS accounts payable and
procurement system. These weaknesses included three finance
office employees who were provided system capabilities allowing
them to unilaterally record and process critical accounting and
procurement transactions. Certain internal control deficiencies
were also found in disbursements processed through the use of
wire transfers.
Furthermore, although certain procurement policies were in place,
the TCPS policy for negotiating architectural and engineering
services allowed the procurement of these services without the
solicitation of competitive proposals. Additional deficiencies were
noted in procurement and contract monitoring.
Background
TCPS used an automated system for purchasing and
disbursements. Requisitions were entered by departments and
schools and were subject to supervisory approval by the purchasing
office. Purchase orders, contracts, solicitations, and bids were
handled by the purchasing office. TCPS procurement policies
generally required that purchases exceeding $15,000 be obtained
through competitive procurement and that contracts exceeding
15
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 24 ---
$25,000 be approved by the Board. The receipt of goods and
services was recorded in the automated system by the receiving
school or department and payments were then processed by the
finance office using the automated system. According to TCPS
records, accounts payable disbursements, via check, totaled
approximately $19.1 million during fiscal year 2006.
TCPS Should Strengthen Internal Controls over Its
Disbursements, Procurements, and Contract
Monitoring
Accounts payable and procurement system controls need to
be strengthened – Our review identified significant internal
control deficiencies over the automated accounts payable and
procurement system. Specifically, three finance office employees
were provided system capabilities allowing them to unilaterally
record and process critical accounting and procurement
transactions. For example, these employees individually could add
vendors, create purchase orders, process invoices, and print
checks. Furthermore, authorized signatures were automatically
printed on the checks by the system. In addition, there were no
compensating controls, such as an independent review of system
transaction reports to detect inappropriate automated procurement
and disbursement activity. One of these finance office employees
also had the user names and passwords for all system users and
was capable of signing on as another user.
Disbursements processed through wire transfers were also poorly
controlled. One employee had unlimited access to initiate and
process wire payments to one particular vendor without any
independent approvals. Although a bank official stated that the
bank usually requires two signatures to set up a wire payment, we
were informed that the current agreement with TCPS for this vendor
only included the signature of the employee making the transfers.
Wire payments processed by this individual between July 2006 and
March 2007 totaled approximately $7.5 million.
Due to the aforementioned internal control weaknesses,
unauthorized transactions could be processed and not detected.
TCPS should seek competitive proposals for services
procured – TCPS did not always obtain competitive proposals for
services procured. We reviewed procurements from six vendors
16
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 25 ---
and, as described below, we noted two instances where competitive
proposals were not obtained to help ensure that services were
obtained at the lowest costs.
TCPS purchased architectural services for several of its renovation
projects from one firm without always obtaining competitive
proposals for the services. TCPS had worked with this firm on 10
projects from 1997 through May 2007, and our review of the most
recent 5 projects, found that, while one was subjected to a
competitive procurement and two were below the threshold
specifically requiring competitive procurement, the other two
projects, valued at $840,000, were not competitively procured.
The Board’s Purchasing Procedures state that “The Board of
Education declares its intention to purchase competitively without
prejudice and seek maximum educational value for every dollar.”
As previously mentioned, purchases exceeding $15,000 were
generally required to be obtained through competitive procurement
and contracts exceeding $25,000 are to be approved by the Board.
However, another Board policy allows for the Board to decide to
negotiate for architectural and engineering services with previously
approved firms when, in its judgment, TCPS students, staff, and
citizens will be better served. Although the Board may have had
reasons to obtain certain architectural services without obtaining
competitive proposals, we believe that, given the long-term nature
of this relationship, and the ultimate costs of this work, obtaining
competitive proposals would be a prudent step to ensure that the
best value is obtained.
TCPS also obtained mentoring services from one vendor without
obtaining competitive proposals for these services and without
documenting its justification for a sole source procurement, as
required by TCPS policy. Payments to this vendor for fiscal year
2006 totaled approximately $71,000. TCPS management advised
us that, at the time these mentoring services were procured, there
was no one else known in the region that could provide these
services. TCPS management also stated that procuring these
services was discussed with the Board and the contract amount
was in the Board-approved budget, but we found that the Board
took no formal action on the specific contract.
17
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 26 ---
Fuel Contract monitoring practices need to be improved –
TCPS entered into a prepaid fuel contract for $319,600 during fiscal
year 2006 to obtain fuel at discounted prices. Although TCPS
received monthly invoices showing the amount of fuel purchases
applied to the contract, it did not document any review of these
invoices to ensure mathematical accuracy and to verify fuel usage
was legitimate.
TCPS Has Established Policies and Procedures to
Control the Use of Credit Cards and Travel
TCPS has established policies and procedures designed to control
the use of corporate purchasing cards and employee travel.
Specifically, TCPS developed procedures to help ensure that credit
card usage is restricted to appropriate purchases and that these
purchases are reviewed and approved by supervisory personnel. In
addition, policies define the conditions under which employees may
be reimbursed for travel, including the requirement that all
conference travel be approved in advance by the TCPS
Superintendent. According to TCPS records, credit card and travel
expenditures were approximately $41,000 and $117,000,
respectively, during fiscal year 2006.
Recommendations
2. TCPS should implement effective internal controls over its
accounts payable and procurement system. Such controls
should include segregating employee duties, restricting
employee capabilities within the system, and establishing
adequate controls over wire transfers.
3. TCPS should ensure that all contracts are procured in
accordance with Board policies. With respect to architectural
services, the policies should be enhanced to ensure a
competitive procurement for significant projects.
4. TCPS should establish adequate procedures to ensure that fuel
amounts invoiced are proper.
18
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 27 ---
Chapter 4
Human Resources and Payroll
TCPS uses an automated system to maintain human resource
information and to record employee time, track leave, and process
payroll transactions. The hiring of new employees is initiated either
directly by the school or by the human resources office. Procedures
require that the related paperwork be submitted to the TCPS central
office where the final approval is made and a review is conducted to
ensure adequate funding prior to including the employee in the
automated personnel and payroll systems.
However, numerous employees were unnecessarily given
capabilities to process payroll-related transactions in the automated
records. We also noted that, while TCPS had implemented
elements of workforce planning, this planning did not address TCPS
needs and processes for employees other than teachers and
related instructional positions.
TCPS has implemented a formal School Manager program whereby
a business manager is assigned to every school, relieving principals
of most financial-related responsibilities and allowing them to focus
on instructional leadership.
Background
According to the TCPS audited financial statements, direct salary
and wage costs for fiscal year 2006 totaled $27.6 million, and TCPS
had approximately 592 FTE5 employees in fiscal year 2006 giving it
a 1 to 7.4 employee to student ratio (see Table 1 on the next page).
The TCPS automated system maintained human resources
5 FTE = Full-Time Equivalent. For example, two twenty-hour per week positions
would equal one FTE.
19
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 28 ---
information, and was used to process payroll and to track employee
leave balances. Time records were prepared manually by all
employees and were approved by supervisors. Time records and
leave taken were entered in the automated system every two weeks
by either payroll clerks at the central office or school-based clerical
personnel. After various system edit checks, the system generated
payroll checks and/or direct deposit advices. Leave accumulation
was automatically calculated by the system.
Table 1
Comparison of Employee to Student Ratios – Fall 2006 (unaudited)
Number of
Number of Full-Time Employee to
School System Students Equivalent Student
(as of September Employees Ratio
30, 2006)
(as of October 1,
2006)
Talbot County 4,398 592 1 to 7.4
Dorchester County 4,667 631 1 to 7.4
Garrett County 4,617 664 1 to 7.0
Kent County 2,356 341 1 to 6.9
Somerset County 2,941 454 1 to 6.5
Source: MSDE data as of Fall 2006
Note: School systems selected for comparison are those with student
enrollments closest in number to TCPS.
Human Resource and Payroll Internal Controls Need
to Be Strengthened
TCPS did not establish adequate internal controls over its
automated human resource and payroll system and related
processes. Five employees, who routinely processed human
resource and payroll transactions, had unlimited system access to
certain human resource and payroll functions that allowed them to
add employees to the payroll system, change salaries, change tax
withholdings, and process payroll checks and direct deposits.
Additionally, an independent review of accesses or transactions
posted by those employees was not performed. Although, based on
our tests, we found no evidence of unauthorized hiring or payments,
the improper separation of duties and access to the system could
be used to process unauthorized payroll payments.
20
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 29 ---
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include
Non-Instructional Positions
TCPS should enhance its existing workforce planning efforts to
include positions other than instructional personnel. The TCPS
Master Plan sets the strategic direction of the school system and
provides coordination and focus for initiatives to address challenges
faced by TCPS. The Plan includes a number of objectives and
strategies to address human resource needs—which is evidence of
workforce planning. However, it addresses only the recruitment and
retention of highly qualified instructional staff (that is, teachers and
certain instructional aids). The Plan does not address non-
instructional personnel employed by TCPS, such as central office
and critical support staff. About 39 percent6 of TCPS’ 592 full-time
equivalent employees fill non-instructional positions. These support
functions also play a key role in the ultimate success of TCPS in
providing quality education and, therefore, TCPS workforce planning
should include them.
Table 2
Comparison of Non-instructional Staff Per 1,000 Pupils for Select Categories
Fiscal Year 2007 (Unaudited)
Number of Non-instructional Number of Non-instructional Positions Per
Positions(cid:110) 1,000 Pupils(cid:111)
School System (cid:114) Professional Support Support
(cid:112) Staff(cid:113) Professional Staff Combined
Talbot County 77 156 17.42 35.36 52.78
Somerset County 41 93 13.94 31.55 45.49
Dorchester County 58 151 12.43 32.29 44.72
Garrett County 53 150 11.48 32.42 43.90
Kent County 22 81 9.13 34.47 43.60
Average of
Comparable
Systems 44 119 11.75 32.68 44.43
Source: MSDE Student/Staff Publications
(cid:110) - Excludes contractual and consulting positions
(cid:111) - Based on September 30, 2006 student enrollment
(cid:112) - Includes principals, vice principals, social workers, and other non-instructional
administrators including, for TCPS, the school manager positions.
(cid:113) - Includes bus drivers, technicians, secretaries, clerks, and trades personnel
(cid:114) - School systems selected for comparison are those with student enrollments
closest in number to TCPS.
6 (233 [77 +156] from Table 2, divided by 592 from Table 1)
21
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 30 ---
TCPS Has Instituted a School Business Manager
Program that Allows Principals to Focus on
Instructional Leadership
In July 2002, TCPS implemented a formal School Manager program
to assist principals in focusing on instructional leadership. The
program provides a division of responsibilities between principals,
who focus on instructional leadership, and the school managers,
who concentrate on the business aspects and daily operations of
TCPS schools. This type of program has been highly encouraged by
MSDE, and MSDE has commended and endorsed TCPS’
demonstrated commitment to the primary role of the principal being
one of instructional leadership through its School Manager program.
Recommendations
5. TCPS should take the necessary corrective actions to ensure
that adequate internal controls are in place over the human
resource and payroll system. For example, job duties should be
segregated and an independent review and approval process
should be established over payroll-related changes recorded in
the system.
6. TCPS should expand its workforce planning to include non-
instructional positions in critical operational units.
22
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 31 ---
Chapter 5
Inventory Control and Accountability
TCPS has established formal policies and procedures governing the
purchase and disposal of all property, including textbooks.
However, the policies and procedures governing the accounting for
and safeguarding of assets other than textbooks were insufficient or
non-existent.
Background
According to the TCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30,
2006, the net book value of TCPS equipment was $2.3 million.
Equipment items include computers, audio and video items, athletic
equipment, and various other items. All furniture and equipment
items with a cost of $500 or more are recorded upon purchase, and
items with a cost of $1,000 or more are capitalized for financial
statement reporting purposes. Generally, TCPS orders materials
and supplies on an as-needed basis and does not store inventory in
a centralized location.
Existing Controls over Equipment Should Be
Enhanced and Formal Policies Established
TCPS did not have written policies or procedures to establish
adequate accountability and control for its equipment. For example,
TCPS did not have a formal written policy addressing equipment
tagging, physical inventories, reporting of lost and stolen items, and
23
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 32 ---
segregation of duties. While equipment items costing $500 or more
are initially recorded in the property records, they are not otherwise
required to be accounted for or tracked (such as if they are
transferred), and are not subject to periodic physical inventories.
Consequently, our test of 20 equipment items, costing $61,939
found discrepancies between the property records and the related
physical assets on-hand. For example, we found that computer
equipment items costing $10,504, which were disposed of in
September 2004 and April 2006, were still listed on the records in
May 2007, and that a metal lathe, recorded in the records at a cost
of $9,499, could not be located. Of particular concern are sensitive
equipment items (such as digital cameras and other electronic
equipment), since these items are prone to loss or theft.
Formal Textbook Procedures Have Been Established
TCPS had established formal procedures for selecting, purchasing,
distributing, controlling, and disposing of textbooks. All potential
textbooks are reviewed and are submitted to the Board for its
review and approval. Textbooks are inventoried within the
individual schools, and can be transferred between schools.
Additionally, textbooks may only be sold or disposed of in
accordance with these formal procedures.
Recommendation
7. TCPS should develop and implement policies and procedures to
ensure that accountability and effective control is maintained
over all of its equipment, including sensitive items (for which
TCPS may want to establish a lower threshold).
24
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 33 ---
Chapter 6
Information Technology
TCPS maintains and administers a computer network, computer
operations, and a number of information systems applications,
including financial and academic applications. TCPS developed and
periodically updates a written technology plan that is linked to the
system’s Master Plan. The plan provides a vision and mission for
technology in TCPS, an assessment of technical needs, and defined
goals and objectives. Also, TCPS used several best practices when
implementing its new Integrated Financial Management System.
We did, however, identify deficiencies in a number of areas,
including system user access and security, and computer center
operations. For example, TCPS did not have a formal disaster
recovery policy in place and was not making use of certain IT system
features designed to restrict or detect unauthorized/unnecessary
access to systems and programs. Also, a comprehensive approach
to IT security had not been developed and physical access to its
computer room was not strictly controlled.
Background
TCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects each individual school’s local network to the
computer resources located at the TCPS central office. The
computer technology department at TCPS comprises seven
employees for instructional and technical support of the entire
25
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 34 ---
system. Several significant administrative and academic related
applications exist, including applications for student information,
food services point of sale, bus routing, and school energy control.
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place
Technology plans are regularly developed to address the
current and future needs of TCPS – TCPS has developed a
written technology plan, which includes a comprehensive
assessment of the technology needs of the schools. The plan
identifies each school’s IT needs and the actions to be taken to
address those needs. The plan also includes measurable goals and
objectives. The goal of the plan is to integrate technology into all
aspects of instruction and administration to enable students,
teachers, staff, administrators, and parents to access, gather,
analyze, evaluate, and communicate information. The plan also
includes Internet safety and telecommunications policies and an
inventory of current computer and media hardware and projected
needs. The plan is periodically updated and monitored for
implementation status of identified actions.
Industry best practices were used when implementing the
Integrated Financial Management System – TCPS used
several project management best practices when it implemented
the new Integrated Financial Management System during fiscal year
2007. For example, TCPS chose to purchase standardized software
typically used by education entities that posed fewer risks for
implementation and performance. Also, TCPS hired an experienced
project manager to lead the effort and had strong executive support
from the Superintendent, supplemented by a project committee
consisting of key accounting, human resources, and information
technology staff. Additionally, TCPS identified primary user
representatives with expert knowledge of the business functions to
explain operations in detail to technical developers, set a clear
statement of requirements, and implemented the project in
modules to maintain a manageable scope during each phase of the
project.
26
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 35 ---
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Adequate Security
over IT Applications
Changes should be made to existing procedures to ensure
that all access is appropriate – User access to computer
resources was commonly controlled through the use of individual
passwords and user logon ids; however, these tools could be more
effectively used. For example, certain users, including contractors,
had inappropriate or unnecessary privileges and capabilities, and
default system accesses were not disabled or otherwise modified.
Also, automatic password expirations (requiring periodic password
changes) were not enforced for all users and there was no standard
as to the complexity of passwords (to make them more difficult to
hack). TCPS did not fully use existing system audit software to
monitor security events, access permissions, and failed attempts to
access certain critical data. Finally, certain operating system
security options were not properly configured, which could enable
hackers to exploit vulnerabilities.
A comprehensive approach to IT security should be
developed – TCPS did not have a formal information technology
security policy in place. Such a policy should address key aspects of
IT such as access control rules, identification of nonpublic
information, workstation security, use of anti-virus software, and
encryption. Also, such a policy needs to provide information
technology security guidance with respect to all of an entity’s
computer applications and operations.
Data Processing Functions Should Be Better
Safeguarded From Disruption
Physical access to the computer room was not adequately
controlled as the door to the room was left open to provide
ventilation (due to heat from the servers) and the building housing
the computer room also contained student instructional space. In
addition, critical student information system backup files were not
always routinely created, and when they were, they were not stored
at an appropriate off-site location to protect the information in case
of catastrophic damage to the computer room.
27
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 36 ---
Finally, TCPS lacked a formal, comprehensive, disaster recovery
plan, which should include
• the identification of backup data centers or hot sites;7
• the identification and prioritization of all mission critical
applications, with the related software and hardware
required to accomplish recovery;
• the description of network restoration plans; and
• a listing of current emergency contact information and
responsibilities for staff.
Recommendations
8. TCPS should implement appropriate security measures to
safeguard its applications and data systems, and should adopt a
formal information technology security policy.
9. TCPS should establish physical controls and safeguards over its
computer operations, should institute appropriate backup
procedures, and should develop a comprehensive disaster
recovery plan.
7 Hot sites are locations containing equipment necessary to process information.
28
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 37 ---
Chapter 7
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance
TCPS maintains nine schools and one administrative support facility
with a staff of 51 custodial and maintenance personnel. TCPS uses
a comprehensive and public process to plan for construction and
renovation of school facilities. Plans are long-term, are updated
annually, and reflect input from the Board. We also noted that TCPS
had obtained alternative financing sources for renovation projects.
TCPS has received or qualified for a Governor’s Citation for
“Superior” school maintenance for fiscal years 2005, 2006, and
2007.
Nevertheless, TCPS had not established performance measures,
with related benchmarks and goals, for its maintenance and
custodial operations. Time and cost estimates were not tracked
and compared to actuals to assess program efficiency for both
operations and maintenance. In addition, TCPS could not provide
documentation that routine preventive maintenance had been
completed at all school facilities.
Background
TCPS uses a five-year Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to identify
ongoing and projected needs for new buildings and major
renovations. In the fiscal year 2006 CIP and operating budget,
necessary major renovations, repairs, and systemic improvements
29
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 38 ---
to existing schools over the next five years were estimated to cost
$26.3 million.
The following table compares TCPS fiscal year 2006 plant costs
(that is, maintenance and operational costs) with other similarly-
sized school systems in Maryland. The table presents two
measures used to assess plant costs: cost per student and cost per
square foot. These statistics show that TCPS facilities operations
and maintenance costs are generally in line with its peer group.
Table 3
Plant Cost Comparison Per Student and Per Square Foot
Fiscal Year 2006 (Unaudited)
Plant Costs Square Total
Per Per Footage Gross
School System
Total Student Square Per Square
(cid:110) Foot Student Footage
Talbot County $4,087,123 $920.11 $5.66 162.62 722,358
Somerset County 3,383,932 1,181.21 5.83 202.45 580,006
Kent County 2,737,238 1,125.05 4.73 237.96 578,957
Dorchester County 4,418,285 959.25 5.05 190.02 875,210
Garrett County 4,159,219 894.07 5.16 173.40 806,676
Average of
$3,674,669 $1,039.90 $5.17 200.96 710,212
Comparable Schools
Sources: MSDE Selected Financial Data, School System Capital Improvement and Maintenance Plans, and
School System staff.
(cid:110) - Based on Average Daily Enrollment 2005-2006 (most recent data available)
A Number of Best Practices Were in Place
TCPS had a continuous planning process to address major
facilities projects and repairs – TCPS had a continuous
planning process, which includes input from various sources, to
address future school construction and major renovation and repair
projects. For example, TCPS uses public meetings, student
demographic data, and internal sources (such as goals, objectives,
and policies of the Board and formal “wish lists” from each school
manager) to develop annual educational facilities master plans and
capital improvement plans (CIP). The educational facilities master
plan and CIP are presented to and approved by the Board.
30
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 39 ---
TCPS obtained alternative source funding for part of the
costs of major facilities projects –TCPS partnered with local
enterprises, with the support of the Talbot County government, to
obtain $822,496 in alternative funding toward the construction of
additional space at St. Michael’s Elementary School, which also can
be used for community programs and a day care center. TCPS also
has similar commitments toward $979,000 of the $1,350,000
estimated construction costs on the upcoming renovation project at
the Easton Elementary School – Dobson. One of the TCPS’ goals, in
concert with County government desires, is to extend opportunities
for community use of all the schools in the system.
Certain Processes Should Be Implemented to
Increase the Effectiveness and Efficiency of
Maintenance and Custodial Operations
TCPS should develop various tools to measure and assess
operational efficiency – TCPS has received or qualified for a
Governor’s Citation for “Superior” school maintenance for fiscal
years 2005, 2006, and 2007. Nevertheless, several tools—
including an automated work order system and performance
measures—should be considered that, collectively, would enhance
the effectiveness and efficiency of TCPS maintenance operations
and personnel.
• TCPS uses manual work orders, which include information
related to the actual resources used to perform each task
(including labor hours and equipment expenditures); however,
because the information is maintained in a manual format, it
cannot be easily accumulated and used to develop standard
estimates of resources needed to perform each task, based on
either past history or industry guidebooks. Consequently,
completed work could not be readily evaluated for efficiency nor
could it be used to assess the performance of both individual
employees and the entire department. An effective automated
work order system can be used to generate a variety of
statistical data including employee productivity, cost reports,
and facility assessments.
• TCPS had not implemented a performance measurement
system to assess the efficiency of its maintenance and custodial
operations, both for self-evaluation purposes and for
comparisons with other systems, both in Maryland and
nationally (which could identify other best practices). For
31
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 40 ---
example, other states (such as Michigan and Florida) have
mandated the establishment and use of measures and
benchmarks (such as maintenance expenditures per square
foot) to assist schools in the evaluation of costs and practices.
TCPS should maintain documentation that all required
preventive maintenance work was performed– TCPS could
not provide documentation that all required preventive maintenance
and school inspections were completed as scheduled by custodial
and maintenance staff. TCPS had developed a comprehensive plan
for preventive maintenance tasks, such as checking the operation
of air conditioning units and lubricating motors and pumps on other
mechanical equipment. Although supervisors conducted periodic
inspections and evaluations of the work, neither the staff nor the
supervisors had documented that all tasks required by the
comprehensive maintenance plan had been performed.
Specifically, based on our review, there were only a limited number
of maintenance forms and no fully completed inspection forms on
file.
Cost-Effectiveness of Energy Management Program
Should be Monitored
TCPS has implemented an energy management program, as a best
practice, to control energy costs. Specifically, TCPS contracted for
energy management consulting services, including computer
software that monitors and accounts for energy usage at all
facilities, and has hired a part-time energy management program
coordinator who monitors energy practices at all facilities. However,
TCPS did not verify the contractor reports of energy savings.
Furthermore, TCPS did not periodically quantify or validate cost-
savings and assess the cost-benefit of its energy management
program by comparing those cost savings with the associated
program costs. According to reports we obtained from the
contractor’s energy management system, the school system has
had energy cost avoidance totaling approximately $285,400 for the
period from November 2005 through January 2007. According to
TCPS records, total energy management program costs since
initiation of the program in July 2005, including the program
coordinator, were approximately $178,400.
32
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 41 ---
Recommendations
10. TCPS should enhance its maintenance and custodial operations
by developing a performance measurement system, coupled
with an automated work order system that, together, can be
used to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of the custodial
operations and maintenance departments and staff members.
TCPS should also ensure that all preventive maintenance and
custodial tasks are performed timely and are documented.
11. TCPS should periodically obtain and verify the contractor reports
of cost savings of its energy management program and
determine whether it is cost-effective by comparing those cost
savings with the associated program costs.
33
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 42 ---
34
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 43 ---
Chapter 8
Transportation Services
TCPS transports its students fewer miles than most of the other
similarly-sized public school systems in Maryland. Transportation
costs per rider are next to the lowest among its peer group;
however, the annual cost per mile is the highest (See Table 4
below). TCPS operates its own fleet of 43 buses to transport all
students. TCPS faces some obstacles in providing efficient
transportation services to its students, including serving sparsely
populated areas, and coping with the lack of sidewalks in certain
areas to facilitate walking to schools or bus stops.
Table 4
Comparison of Transportation Costs per Rider and per Mile
Fiscal Year 2006 (Unaudited)
Number of Eligible Miles Annual
Riders (in thousands) Expenditures Cost per
School System
Non- Non- (in thousands)
Disabled Disabled Rider Mile
Disabled Disabled
Talbot County 2,721 15 535 30 $1,849 $676 $3.27
Garrett County 4,529 36 1,072 72 3,509 769 3.06
Somerset County 2,860 57 651 102 2,048 702 2.72
Dorchester County 4,321 80 879 165 2,524 574 2.42
Kent County 2,140 52 531 99 1,502 685 2.38
Average of
Comparable 3,463 56 784 110 $2,396 $681 $2.68
Schools
Source: MSDE 2005-2006 Fact Book (Note that this MSDE document is based on self-reported data
from the 24 Maryland public school systems, and that MSDE does not warrant the comparability or
completeness of the data.)
35
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 44 ---
TCPS used several practices that increased the efficiency of
transporting students, such as staggering school start and stop
times so buses can provide multiple trips on the same day, using
central pick-up points to reduce overall mileage and transportation
time, and serving more than one school with a single bus trip.
Nevertheless, we noted several areas where reevaluation of
transportation operations at this time would be prudent. For
example, TCPS has not conducted a cost-benefit analysis of its
decision to continue operating student transportation services
entirely in-house, nor has it investigated the feasibility and
economic benefits of using conventional full-size 66-passenger
school buses on routes with lower ridership instead of the 84-
passenger buses currently used. As discussed later in this chapter,
the student ridership count sheets, prepared in the fall of 2006,
disclosed that many elementary school routes were consistently
operated at levels significantly below bus capacities. Since nine new
buses are scheduled to be purchased in fiscal year 2009, and TCPS
pays $20,000 more for the larger buses than it would for
conventional school buses, TCPS should analyze and consider
whether certain routes can be more effectively operated by
independent contractors, and whether less costly conventional
school buses can be used effectively.
Furthermore, TCPS generally holds each bus for its regulated 12-
year life, and had not established a formal policy for replacing
school buses that considered other factors, such as early disposal
of problematic buses and needed capacities at time of replacement.
In addition, we noted that TCPS had not established policies
regarding the expected utilization of school buses (for example,
setting a target capacity percentage) and for maximum student ride
times. Finally, we noted that TCPS had not developed and
monitored performance measures to provide essential operational
and financial information regarding student transportation services
to the Board.
Background
The TCPS fiscal year 2006 student transportation costs totaled
approximately $1.8 million. Approximately 2,700 students are
eligible to ride the bus each day on one of 43 buses owned and
operated by TCPS that have 10 primary destinations (that is, nine
schools and TCPS headquarters for alternative classrooms).
Disabled students are also transported using TCPS-owned buses. Of
36
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 45 ---
the 565,362 transportation miles for the 2005-2006 school year,
about 5 percent was for disabled students.
Several Best Practices Were In Place to Enhance Bus
Route Efficiency and to Reduce Transportation Costs
The Transportation Department used several practices to enhance
bus route efficiency and/or to reduce associated costs:
• Staggering school arrival and dismissal times so buses can
make multiple runs in mornings and afternoons8
• Using routing software to assist in developing and revising
routes
• Establishing a walking distance policy to determine eligibility for
transportation services
• Arranging multiple drop-off points to reduce the number of bus
runs and to increase the number of students transported on
each run (for example, transporting middle and high school
students together)
• Using central pick-up points when appropriate (usually in
concentrated housing areas) to reduce the number of stops and
ride time
• Obtaining maximum fuel price caps through annual fuel
purchase contracts
More Can Be Done To Ensure Cost-Effective Operations
Routing procedures should consider additional factors and
should be formalized –TCPS performs extensive planning,
reviewing, and revising of bus routes, and uses computer software
to assist in the process. This computer software interfaces with the
student information system to ensure students are transported to
the appropriate schools based on residences. However, the route
planning and scheduling process did not consider all relevant
factors such as bus capacity, ridership levels, and student ride
times when determining bus routes, and the process was not
formally documented. In addition, written procedures did not exist
for identifying needed route changes or when to implement the
changes.
8 The current staggering allows TCPS buses to typically make one run to a middle-
high school and one run to an elementary school each morning and afternoon.
37
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 46 ---
Smaller buses should be considered if ridership on bus
routes cannot be increased – Based on actual bus utilization
percentages, TCPS should consider using smaller 66-passenger
conventional school buses on routes with low ridership. For
example, as disclosed in Table 5 (below), the student ridership
count sheets for 32 of TCPS’ 35 regular use buses (excluding
spares and special use buses), prepared in the fall of 2006 for the
2006-2007 school year, disclosed that many elementary school
routes were consistently operated at levels significantly below bus
capacities. This was true when the ridership counts were compared
to the three-students per seat standard used by other school
systems in Maryland and was also true based on a two-student per
seat capacity.
Table 5
Conventional School Bus Utilization (unaudited)
Number of Buses Reviewed
Bus For Elementary School
For
Capacity Runs
Middle and
Used At Two At Three
High School
(cid:88)(cid:89) Students Students
Runs
Per Seat Per Seat
> 80% 11 2 18
61% - 80% 3 5 8
41% - 60% 6 7 4
21% - 40% 6 12 2
≤ 20% 0 0 0
Total Buses 26 (cid:112) 26 (cid:112) 32
(cid:88) Utilized bus capacity was based on average bus ridership
data provided by the TCPS transportation manager for the
months of September and October 2006. The sizes of the
32 buses for which data was provided were as follows:
seventeen 72-passenger, ten 84-passenger, three 69-
passenger, one 78-passenger, and one 57-passenger.
(cid:89) For elementary school runs, capacities were based both on
3 students per seat (usually the bus’ rated capacity) and on
2 students per seat. Middle and high school runs were
based on 2 students to a seat.9
(cid:112) Six of the 32 buses did not make elementary school runs.
9 We have found that many school systems, to accommodate student comfort, do
not attempt to run buses at manufacturers’ stated capacity for middle and high
school students, a practice that appears reasonable.
38
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 47 ---
TCPS primarily used 84-passenger and 72-passenger buses for
routine student transportation. Smaller conventional school buses
(for example, 66-passenger buses) are less costly to purchase and
are generally less costly to operate. For example, the purchase
prices for 66-passenger buses recently purchased by other
Maryland school systems have averaged approximately $70,000,
whereas 84-passenger buses purchased by TCPS in 2006 cost
$90,471 each (this will increase to $98,089 for 84-passenger
buses purchased in 2007). To achieve savings, TCPS should
consider using smaller 66-passenger conventional school buses for
routes where this would be appropriate. This is especially important
for TCPS to consider now since it is estimated that nine buses are to
be replaced in fiscal year 2009.
Bus replacement policy was based only on vehicle age – Age
of the vehicle (presently 12 years) was the sole factor used by TCPS
for bus replacement, without regard to the vehicle’s mileage, repair
history, and maintenance costs. If a school system adopts a State-
approved preventive maintenance plan, including periodic
inspections, it is permissible, under State law, to operate buses for
up to 15 years, which is 25 percent longer than the regular statutory
limit of 12 years. Accordingly, TCPS should establish a bus
replacement policy that considers extending the lives of those
specific buses with excellent service and safety records, and should
also consider retiring buses early that have a history of problems.
The replacement policy should also consider expected ridership
characteristics. We noted that TCPS routinely replaced buses with
similarly-sized and equipped vehicles (for example, with lifts for
disabled students) without formally evaluating its needs based on
expected ridership and route scheduling.
Periodic cost-benefit analysis should be performed – TCPS
had not formally reevaluated its 1997 decision to directly operate
all student transportation services to determine whether this
continues to be cost-beneficial. Such an evaluation should at least
consider whether the most significant factors and assumptions for
deciding to bring bus operation in-house are still valid. In this
regard, decisions can be made on components of transportation
operations separately to achieve the highest cost-efficiency and
effectiveness. For example, TCPS already uses a mixture of in-
house and contracted services for bus maintenance. Bus routes
can be similarly operated with a mixture of in-house and contracted
bus operations, as is done in several local school systems in
Maryland.
39
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 48 ---
Formal Performance Measures for Student
Transportation Should Be Developed and the Results
Reported Regularly to the Board
To monitor performance and to ensure accountability, TCPS should
develop, track, and report to the Board formal performance
measures and related results that provide essential operational and
financial information regarding student transportation services. We
were advised that the Transportation Department informally
evaluated certain operating statistics, which could form the basis of
a formal performance measurement system, but it had not
documented these statistics. The Transportation Department also
had not developed formal benchmarks against which its operational
effectiveness and efficiency could be measured (for example,
ridership compared to bus capacity, transportation cost per student,
bus operating costs per mile). The Government Finance Officers
Association (GFOA) recommends that program and service
performance measures be developed and used as an important
component of long-term strategic planning and decision making
which should be linked to governmental budgeting.
Recommendations
12. TCPS should take action to increase the cost-effectiveness of
bus operations. Specifically, TCPS should establish policies for
student capacity and travel time and, because of low ridership
on many bus runs, TCPS should analyze the cost/benefit of
using smaller, less expensive conventional school buses on
routes with fewer passengers. TCPS should also establish a bus
replacement policy that defines specific criteria to identify buses
that can be safely maintained in service beyond 12 years and
that addresses when problem buses should be retired early. In
addition, a periodic cost analysis to determine the most
appropriate mix of system and vendor provided transportation
services should be prepared.
13. TCPS should develop, track, and report to the Board appropriate
and reliable performance measures for transportation services
and related results.
40
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 49 ---
Chapter 9
Food Services Operations
TCPS has implemented a number of best practices to help reduce
food service costs, such as the use of performance measures,
participation in the United States Department of Agriculture
commodity program, and membership in a nine-county food-
purchasing cooperative. TCPS also has adequate procedures in
place to identify students eligible for free and reduced-price meals
under the federal national school meal programs. However, TCPS
needs to improve internal controls over its purchasing of food
services supplies.
Table 6
Comparison of Cost per Meal
Fiscal Year 2006 (Unaudited)
Meals Served
Average
School Total Lunch and
Breakfast Cost Per
System Expenditures Snacks
(paid, free, Total Meal
and reduced)
(paid, free, and
reduced)
Talbot County $1,579,905 169,415 388,443 557,858 $2.83
Garrett County 2,460,115 245,732 483,453 729,185 3.37
Dorchester County 1,979,116 242,652 503,804 746,456 2.65
Kent County 1,094,444 127,509 305,424 432,933 2.53
Somerset County 1,331,273 219,901 342,593 562,494 2.37
Average of
Comparable $1,716,237 208,949 408,819 617,767 $2.78
Schools
Sources: MSDE 2006 Data
41
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 50 ---
Background
Seven of the nine TCPS schools have cooking cafeterias. The
remaining two schools receive food prepared at another school.
TCPS operates a self-sustaining food services operation. For fiscal
year 2006, TCPS reported that food service revenues exceeded
expenditures by approximately $57,000.
Table 7
Food Service Facts for FY 2006
Average Cost per Meal $ 2.83
Number of Meals Served:
Breakfast Paid 84,044
Free 70,007
Reduced Price 15,364
169,415
Lunch Paid 226,664
Free 130,923
Reduced Price 30,856
388,443
Total Meals Served 557,858
School locations served /kitchens 9/7
Full-time employees 30
Part-time employees 9
Revenues:
Federal Cash payments $552,270
USDA Commodities 82,256
$ 634,526
Sales and other sources 921,703
State aid 80,854
Total Revenue (all sources) 1,637,083
Total Expenditures 1,579,905
Excess of Revenues over Expenditures $57,178
Sources: MSDE 2006 Data and TCPS FY 2006 Audited Financial Statements.
42
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 51 ---
Certain Best Practices Were in Place
TCPS has implemented several practices to contain food
services costs – These measures helped both to increase
operational efficiency and to reduce food supply and material costs.
• TCPS used performance data, such as meals per labor hour and
monthly financial reports, to track and monitor the operating
efficiency at each of its school cafeterias.
• TCPS participated in the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) commodities program, which is a free food program.
According to TCPS records, $82,256 in USDA commodities was
received in fiscal year 2006.
• TCPS participated in a nine-county food-purchasing cooperative
in order to maximize its buying power and reduce food costs.
• TCPS used standard serving sizes and recipes to economize on
food purchases.
• TCPS used two schools as support schools (for food preparation)
for two smaller schools. Managers of the support schools
oversee staff at the smaller schools.
TCPS uses several best practices to encourage participation
in its free and reduced-price meal programs – These
practices include using a family application process—instead of
individual student applications—to simultaneously qualify more
students for the free or reduced priced meal programs, advertising
in the local newspaper, and obtaining information from the local
Department of Social Services to identify eligible students. Although
TCPS has some of the lowest percentages of free and reduced price
meals served among Maryland public school systems10 (see Table 8
on next page), for fiscal year 2006, 79 percent of the TCPS students
eligible to receive free lunches and 70 percent of the students
eligible to receive reduced-price lunches actually participated in the
programs, which is nearly identical to the Statewide average
participations.
10 This could be because Talbot County has the second highest Local Wealth
among Maryland subdivisions. Local Wealth includes adjusted real property
assessment, public utility operating property, and net taxable income. Source:
State Aid Calculations in the MSDE 2004-2005 Factbook.
43
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 52 ---
Table 8
Free and Reduced Meal Participation 2005 – 2006 (Unaudited)
Percent of
Students
Qualified Total Percent
Qualified Total Free
Qualified for Breakfast Free and
School Student for Free and
for Free Reduced and Reduced
System Enrollment and Reduced
Meals Price Lunches Price
Reduced Price Meals
Meals Served Meals
Price
Meals
Talbot 4,483 973 258 27% 557,858 247,150 44%
Somerset 2,902 1,421 266 58% 550,225 407,341 75%
Dorchester 4,702 1,896 458 49% 741,778 497,651 67%
Garrett 4,666 1,299 610 41% 723,697 409,532 57%
Kent 2,441 758 225 40% 401,333 220,235 55%
Peer Group 19,194 6,311 1,817 42% 2,974,891 1,781,909 60%
Statewide 859,399 212,938 62,325 32% 92,591,943 50,616,740 55%
Sources: MSDE Schedule of Free/Reduced Priced Meal Participation FY 2006,
and MSDE 2006 Data.
Internal Controls over Purchasing Could Be Improved
TCPS should improve internal controls over the purchasing
of food supplies – Our test of food service purchasing procedures
identified internal control weaknesses that could result in
unauthorized purchases being made without detection, as
independent verifications were not performed to ensure that all
purchases were appropriate. Specifically, 2 of the 10 invoices
tested did not contain evidence of supervisory review and approval
and 4 of the 10 purchases were not documented as having been
actually received.
Recommendation
14. TCPS should ensure that each food supply invoice is verified as
correct and supported by valid documentation establishing that
goods were actually received.
44
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 53 ---
Chapter 10
School Board Operations and Oversight
Detailed policies have been adopted to govern actual Board
operations, and the Board meets each year with the certified public
accounting firm to review the results of the annual TCPS financial
statement audit and the federal Single Audit. In addition, the Board
is actively involved in the development of the TCPS annual budget.
Several opportunities exist for the Board to improve operations and
oversight. While the Board had developed governing policies over
certain TCPS operations, policies had not been developed or
needed enhancement in a number of areas, including human
resources, debt management, transportation, procurement, and
inventory. In addition to developing better policy guidance to TCPS
departments, the Board should work toward establishing an internal
audit function to act as an independent reviewer of TCPS operations
for the Board and to receive confidential information about
suspected waste, abuse, or fraud.
Although the Board had implemented a Code of Ethics, the
requirement for filing financial disclosure statements was not
actively enforced.
Background
TCPS is governed by a seven-member board elected by the voters of
Talbot County. Due to its size, the Board generally acts in whole to
carry out its oversight duties; the Board, however, may form
standing or special committees at its discretion. To assist in
45
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 54 ---
oversight, the Board contracts for independent audits of the TCPS
financial statements and federal programs, and receives monthly
updates from TCPS management personnel on a broad range of
financial and academic topics.
The Board is ultimately accountable for the success of the TCPS in
providing the children of Talbot County with a quality education,
while wisely spending local, State, and federal funds. Following is
the TCPS Board’s stated vision and beliefs:
Vision and Beliefs
Exemplary student achievement is the first priority of the Talbot
County Public Schools; we affirm that high expectations result in
higher quality individual student performance.
Every child deserves a safe, respectful and caring learning
environment.
A passionate commitment to lifelong learning assists staff and
students to thrive in a changing society.
Strong partnerships among the home, school, and community with
open and honest communication are essential to high quality
learning.
Diverse, dedicated, highly qualified teachers make an important
difference in the lives of students.
Although children may learn at different rates and in different ways,
all children can achieve extraordinary results.
Decisions about educational programs for students must be guided
by valid, reliable data, professional judgment and informed
stakeholder involvement.
Source: Annual Report at http://www.tcps.k12.md.us/
46
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 55 ---
Certain Oversight Has Been Put in PlaceRegarding
TCPS Operations
The Board uses a number of methods to oversee the operations of
TCPS. For example, the Board contracts with an independent
certified public accounting firm to perform audits of its financial
statements and federally-funded grant programs and annually
meets with that firm to review the results. The Board is also actively
involved in the development of TCPS annual budgets.
Additional Guidance or Policies Should Be Provided to
TCPS Management
The Board should adopt additional guidance and enhance
certain policies related to financial and support services –
The Board needs to develop, enhance, and adopt policies governing
a number of areas related to financial and support services. Based
on our review of the Board’s Policies and our audit work in a
number of audit sections, the Board should provide additional
guidance or policies in numerous areas, including procurement,
inventory, and transportation. We also noted that school system
management needs to develop adequate administrative procedures
in several of these areas.
The Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) recommends
that an entity document its accounting policies and procedures and
that these documents be reviewed and updated on a periodic basis.
The GFOA also has identified financial and operational best
practices that should be considered when developing such policies
and procedures.
The Board Should Consider Additional Steps to Assist
It in Governing TCPS
The Board should consider establishing an internal auditor
function – TCPS does not have an internal auditor reporting to the
Board. The use of an internal auditor, independent of direct
management, is a recommended best practice of the Government
Finance Officers Association (GFOA). The GFOA notes that internal
auditors commonly assist management in monitoring the design
and proper functioning of internal controls and procedures, and can
47
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 56 ---
play a valuable role in conducting performance audits, special
investigations, and studies. As cited in this report, our audit
identified certain deficiencies in the TCPS system of internal control,
such as a lack of supervisory review of payroll adjustments and lack
of a physical inventory process. We also noted that a process, such
as a confidential hotline, had not been implemented to enable
employees and others to confidentially report operational concerns
and suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement. If such a
process was established, the internal auditor position could conduct
the initial investigations of information received via the hotline or
could direct the information to appropriate officials, such as law
enforcement.
Due to its small size, TCPS may not be able to justify an internal
audit position; however, it could consider sharing a position with
other local school boards.
TCPS Should Enhance and Enforce Its Code of Ethics
Requirements for Filing Financial Disclosure
Statements
During our review of Board Policies, we noted that all seven Board
members, the three Ethics Panel members, four members of
executive management, and nine principals are required to file
disclosure statements; nevertheless, this requirement should be
expanded to certain other staff. Specifically, the Board’s Ethics
Policy, originally adopted in 1997, does not require the food service,
transportation, and plant operations department managers to file
disclosure statements with the Ethics Panel, even though these
managers are responsible for significant procurement activity in
their respective departments.
Our audit also disclosed that, in calendar year 2005, 4 (2 ethics
panel members, 1 board member, and 1 principal) of the 23 TCPS
personnel who were required to submit disclosure statements had
not done so, and in calendar year 2006, 2 (1 ethics panel member
and 1 board member) of the 23 had not filed as of our testing in
May 2007. Statements are required to be filed by January 31 for
the preceding year. TCPS was not aware that the required financial
disclosure statements had not been filed until we brought this
matter to its attention.
48
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 57 ---
Recommendations
15. The Board should provide increased financial and support
service guidance to management by developing, enhancing,
and adopting policies. In addition, the Board should ensure
that related administrative procedures are developed by
management as appropriate.
16. TCPS should consider the feasibility of establishing an internal
audit position and a hotline for the confidential reporting of
operational issues and suspected fraud, waste, and
mismanagement.
17. TCPS should expand its ethics requirements for filing
disclosure statements to include all management employees
responsible for procuring goods and services. TCPS should
also actively monitor compliance with its Code of Ethics by
verifying that all required financial disclosure requirements are
met.
49
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 58 ---
50
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 59 ---
Chapter 11
Other Financial Controls
This chapter addresses the management of cash, risk, and long-
term debt, such as lease/purchase agreements entered into by
TCPS, and the potential for outsourcing opportunities. While TCPS
had procedures in place to govern its risk management, it needs to
adopt policies governing its use of long-term debt, and enhance its
policies for cash management.
Risk Management Best Practices Were in Place
For risk management, the TCPS policy is to protect itself from losses
through its memberships in the Maryland Association of Boards of
Education Group Insurance and Workers Compensation Pools,
which provide casualty and property insurance, and workmen’s
compensation coverage. The notes to the fiscal year 2006 audited
financial statements stated that settled claims had not exceeded
coverage in any of the past three fiscal years. TCPS has also joined
with the Eastern Shore of Maryland Boards of Education to form the
Eastern Shore of Maryland Education Consortium Health Insurance
Alliance, a public entity risk pool currently operating as a common
risk management and insurance program for health insurance
coverage.
TCPS Has Implemented a Consortium Buying
Organization for Special Education Services
TCPS sought efficiencies through a consortium buying approach
when it joined the Mid-Shore Special Education Consortium in
1988. The Consortium was organized in 1973 and comprises the
Boards of Education for Caroline, Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne's,
51
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 60 ---
and Talbot Counties. The goal of the consortium is to support
individual counties in serving students with disabilities in a cost-
effective manner. Services provided by the consortium include
occupational and physical therapy, audiology, vision, hearing, and
clinical psychology. TCPS serves as the fiscal agent for the
Consortium and, according to TCPS records, the fiscal year 2007
budget was approximately $1.3 million. The consortium received
grant funding from MSDE of $375,000 for fiscal year 2007; the
remainder of its funding was received from the five local
jurisdictions.
The Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) recommends
consortium buying as a best practice for local government
implementation. An article in the Government Finance Review on
cooperation between governments states that consortium buying is
a way to provide greater service to stakeholders at a better cost.
Formal Investment and Debt Management Policies
Have Not Been Established
A deposit policy should be established to protect cash
investments – TCPS uses the State’s cash management policies
and procedures for guidance on how to invest funds, but it does not
have a deposit policy to address custodial credit risk. The notes to
the fiscal year 2006 audited financial statements disclosed that
$632,183 of TCPS’ $992,445 bank balance at June 30, 2006 was
exposed to custodial credit risk because it was not insured by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and, although fully
collateralized by securities held by the pledging financial
institution’s trust department, the collateral was not held in the
Board’s name. Many local school systems use the Maryland Local
Government Investment Pool, which is administered by the
Maryland Office of the State Treasurer, for investment purposes.
Debt management policies need to be established – The TCPS
Board had not adopted formal policies governing management’s
use of long-term lease/purchase agreements to finance operations,
as recommended by the GFOA. TCPS is not permitted to issue
bonds or other long-term debt instruments to finance capital or
operational needs. However, TCPS management does use
lease/purchase agreements to purchase items such as copiers.
According to the TCPS 2006 audited financial statements, long-term
lease/purchase agreements totaled $219,558.
52
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 61 ---
In addition, TCPS has an outstanding debt to the State Retirement
and Pension System of Maryland, totaling $341,076 at June 30,
2006, to cover an actuarially-determined unfunded pension liability.
State law permits TCPS to pay the unfunded liability using a
payment schedule through 2036 which also includes total interest
payments for all years of $1,895,572.
Funding for multi-year agreements is especially important as a
budget consideration to TCPS due to potential limited revenues in
future years. By County Charter, there is a two percent maximum
annual increase in the amount of revenue that Talbot County
government can raise in any fiscal year from real property taxes.
This cap limits the benefit the County receives from growth of the
assessable tax base for real property. Given its significant reliance
on local government funding (see page 8), TCPS believes that the
cap could severely restrict the County’s ability to raise revenue to
meet educational and service needs accompanying population
growth.
Recommendation
18. TCPS should adopt a formal policy governing cash investments
and a formal policy governing long-term lease/purchase debt,
in accordance with GFOA best practice recommendations.
53
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 62 ---
54
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 63 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives,
and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the financial management practices of the Talbot
County Public Schools (TCPS). We conducted this audit under the
authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland and performed it in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards.
Objectives
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the TCPS procedures and controls were
effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the TCPS policies provided for the
efficient use of financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major
financial-related areas of operations based on assessments of
materiality and risk. Our audit approach, including the specific
objectives of our local school system audits, was approved on
September 14, 2004 by the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland
General Assembly in accordance with the enabling legislation. As
approved, the audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing
student achievement, curriculum, teacher performance, and other
academic-related areas and functions. We also did not review the
activities, financial or other, of any parent teacher association,
55
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 64 ---
group, or funds not under the local board of education’s direct
control or management. Finally, we did not evaluate the TCPS
Comprehensive Education Master Plan or related updates.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws
and regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary
education, as well as policies and procedures issued and
established by TCPS. We also interviewed personnel at TCPS, the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at other
local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate11). Our audit
procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of TCPS operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary
to achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2005
through December 31, 2006. For our audit work on revenue and
federal grants, we primarily relied on the results of an independent
audit of fiscal year 2006 activity; accordingly, our revenue and
federal grants work was limited to this period.
In addition, we contacted a number of other state auditors’ offices
and legislative program evaluation agencies that had a history of
conducting audits or reviews of local school systems. We
interviewed those officials and inspected their work programs and
resultant reports to identify specific audit techniques and
operational practices at schools that could be adapted for our
school system audits. Finally, we used certain statistical data--
including financial and operational--compiled by the MSDE from
various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for
background or informational purposes. For comparison purposes,
information provided was generally limited to those Maryland school
systems of similar sizes, based on student enrollment and/or
system budget. In many cases, this information was self-reported by
the school systems. The data were neither audited nor
independently verified by us.
Other Independent Auditors
When developing the approach for the audits of school system
financial management practices, a consideration was the reliance
on the work of other independent auditors to the extent practicable
to avoid unnecessary duplication of audit effort. With respect to
TCPS, the results of other auditors that we considered were
11 During the course of the audit it was necessary to contact other systems to identify
policies or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
56
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 65 ---
reported in three distinct audit reports: one related to the
administration of its federal grants, another was the management
letter from the audit of its financial statements audit, and the third
was the independent audit of the School Activities Fund.
During the course of this audit, we relied on these results. We
performed certain steps to satisfy ourselves as to the reliability of
the reported results of the independent federal grants audit of the
TCPS fiscal year 2006 federal financial assistance programs for
compliance with federal laws and regulations and the TCPS fiscal
year 2006 financial statement and School Activity Fund audits.
Accordingly, we significantly reduced the scope of our work in
Chapter 1 “Revenue and Billing Cycle,” and in Chapter 2 “Federal
Funds.”
Limitations of Internal Control
TCPS management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of
operations including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud
may nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of
any evaluation of internal control to future periods are subject to the
risk that conditions may change or compliance with policies and
procedures may deteriorate.
In addition to the conditions included in this report, other less
significant findings were communicated to TCPS that did not
warrant inclusion in this report.
Fieldwork and TCPS Responses
We conducted our fieldwork from November 2006 to May 2007.
The TCPS response to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report.
57
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 67 ---
November 28, 2007
Talbot County Public Schools response to the office of Legislative Audits
recommendations:
#1 Medicaid-Subsidized Services – The cited example of ten student-eligible files
applies a three-month standard to a nine-month window for billing during a period
immediately following the October 2006 regulation change that required securing
new parent authorization signatures for all reimbursements. The example
inaccurately represents TCPS effectiveness in MA recovery. TCPS accepts the
recommendation regarding more timely recovery of MA costs.
#2 Accounts Payable and Procurement System – TCPS accepts your
recommendation and will proceed accordingly. TCPS will request additional
finance office staff in the FY 2009 Budget to improve the segregation of duties.
The Finance Department will request the IT Department to generate reports on all
unauthorized transaction attempts.
#3 Procurement and Disbursement Cycle – TCPS accepts your recommendation and
will proceed accordingly.
#4 Procurement and Disbursement Cycle – TCPS accepts your recommendation and
fuel invoices will be initialed after review by the appropriate department
supervisor for payment.
#5 Human Resources and Payroll – TCPS objects to the term “unnecessarily” in
paragraph 2 of this chapter as an editorial comment. TCPS accepts your
recommendation and will request additional finance and personnel office staff in
the FY 2009 Budget to improve the segregation of duties.
#6 Workforce Planning – TCPS accepts your recommendation and will proceed
accordingly.
#7 Inventory Control and Accountability – TCPS accepts your recommendation and
will proceed accordingly.
#8 Information Technology – TCPS accepts your recommendation and has already
implemented certain security measures.
#9 Information Technology – TCPS accepts your recommendation and is in the
process of establishing more physical controls and safeguards. The staff is
in the process of developing a comprehensive disaster recovery plan.

--- Page 68 ---
November 28, 2007
#10 Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance – TCPS accepts your
recommendation and will proceed accordingly. The maintenance department
has been investigating the purchase of an automated work order system that
will allow TCPS to track work request progress, productivity and provide
statistical information.
#11 Energy Management – TCPS accepts your recommendation and will proceed
accordingly.
#12 &
#13 Transportation – TCPS believes recommendation number 12 is not supported
by either cost or qualitative service data. Nevertheless, TCPS accepts these
recommendations and will proceed accordingly.
#14 Food Service -TCPS accepts your recommendation and in the fall of 2007
developed a checklist that will ensure items received match vendor invoices.
#15 School Board Oversight – TCPS accepts your recommendation and will develop
formal written policies and procedures over the next twelve months in
conjunction with our independent auditors, Mayer Hoffman McCann .
#16 Internal Auditor – TCPS accepts your recommendation and will request the
additional staff position of internal auditor in the FY 2009 Budget.
#17 Ethics Disclosure Reporting – TCPS accepts your recommendation and has
expanded the list of staff members having contact with vendors.
# 18 Financial Controls – TCPS accepts your recommendation and is already working
with the independent auditors and custodial bank to ensure compliance with
GFOA standards.

--- Page 69 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Timothy R. Brooks, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
A. Jerome Sokol, CPA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Nichole M. Becker
Ken H. Johanning, CFE
Staff Auditors
Veronica Arze
Information Systems Staff Auditor