Title: Wicomico County Public Schools
Date: 03/05/2014
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d39cc9d72404c150a42
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:50:09.226667
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Wicomico County Public Schools
March 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Federal Funds 9
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – User Access to the Automated Procurement and Accounts 11
Payable System Was Not Adequately Restricted
Finding 2 – WCPS Does Not Have a Formal Policy on Acceptable Uses 11
of Corporate Purchasing Cards
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 3 – User Access to the Automated Human Resource and Payroll 13
System Was Not Adequately Restricted
Finding 4 – Certain WCPS Employees Received Pay Increases Larger 13
Than Provided For in the Labor Agreement
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 5 – Proper Controls Had Not Been Established 15
Over Equipment
Information Technology
Finding 6 – Account, Password, and Monitoring Controls Over 16
Critical Systems Were Not Adequate
 Finding 7 – WCPS Did Not Have a Disaster Recovery Plan and Backup 17
Procedures For Critical Network Devices Were Not Sufficient
Finding 8 – WCPS’ Network Was Not Adequately Secured 18
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 19
Transportation Services
* Finding 9 – Bus Routing Procedures Were Not Comprehensive and 20
WCPS Did Not Fully Utilize Its Automated Routing Software
 Finding 10 – Certain Payments to Bus Contractors Were Not Based 22
on Market Conditions or Actual Costs
Finding 11 – WCPS Did Not Ensure the Accuracy of Data Used to 24
Compute Certain Payments to Bus Contractors
Food Services
Finding 12 – Invoices Were Not Adequately Verified Prior to Payment 25
School Board Oversight 26
Other Financial Controls
Finding 13 – WCPS Did Not Competitively Bid Certain Health Care 27
Service Contracts
Finding 14 – WCPS Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Payments for 27
Certain Employee and Retiree Health Care Costs
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 29
Agency Response Appendix A
Auditor’s Comments on Agency Response Appendix B
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Wicomico County Public Schools (WCPS)
March 2014
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
WCPS ranks 15th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems
in Maryland. In fiscal year 2012, WCPS had a total full-time regular and
special education pupil population of 14,489 at its 24 schools. WCPS’
operating and capital expenditures totaled $186 million during that year.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of WCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated December 8, 2008. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for WCPS to improve internal controls, to adopt more cost
effective processes, and to enhance policy direction.
WCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability
WCPS needs to improve internal controls in several financial areas. For
example, we noted that WCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that
critical payroll transactions processed were proper. WCPS also needs to
restrict user access capabilities to record critical transactions on its
automated human resources and payroll system and its procurement and
accounts payable system. Internal controls over the purchasing of food
supplies need to be improved. WCPS also needs to implement adequate
security measures and monitoring procedures to protect its network and
related critical devices from security risks. Account and password controls to
protect critical systems were not sufficient. In addition, WCPS did not have an
information technology disaster recovery plan in place.
WCPS needs to verify the propriety of billings for health care services and
student bus services provided by contractors. WCPS is self-insured for
employee medical benefits and uses a third-party administrator to process
related claims. The propriety of claims paid on WCPS’ behalf by the
administrator was not audited to ensure the related services were actually
provided. Payments to the administrator totaled $25.8 million in plan year
2012, including $1.4 million for the administrator’s fee. In addition, WCPS
did not always ensure the accuracy of bus contractor reported time and
mileage information that was used to pay certain operating costs.
5

--- Page 8 ---
WCPS Should Consider Implementing Certain Steps to Improve Cost
Effectiveness
WCPS should establish payment rates to bus contractors in a manner that
ensures that the amounts are reasonable, considering market conditions and
actual costs. For example, we estimated potential cost savings of $3.2 million
over the estimated 15-year life of 35 buses owned by contractors if a
particular payment component was based on market rates. WCPS did not
fully utilize its automated bus routing software to ensure the efficiency of bus
routes. Our analysis disclosed that ridership for many bus runs was
significantly less than bus capacities. According to WCPS records, in fiscal
year 2012 transportation costs totaled $7.9 million with 92 percent paid to
contractors.
WCPS Needs to Establish or Modify Certain Policies and Ensure Compliance
with Existing Policies
WCPS corporate purchasing card policies permitted certain transactions that
would be prohibited under State purchasing card policies. For example, for
one two-year period we identified over 250 potential gift card purchases
totaling $27,000. Gift cards are prohibited by State policy, are difficult to
control, and have been a mechanism for committing fraud at other
government entities.
WCPS participates in a consortium to procure employee and retiree health
care services, but did not have a policy requiring that these services be
competitively procured on a periodic basis. For example, the consortium
members, including WCPS, are self-insured for health care costs and the
consortium contracts with a vendor to provide administrative services, such
as claims processing. The consortium’s administrative services contract had
not been competitively procured since 2001. For the year ended August 31,
2012, WCPS had paid $25.8 million for health care, including administrative
fees of $1.4 million.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Wicomico County Public Schools (WCPS)
ranks 15th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2012 total full-time student population was 14,489
students. For the 2012–2013 school year, WCPS had 24 schools, consisting
of 16 elementary, 1 combined elementary/middle, 3 middle, 1 combined
middle/high school, and 3 high schools.
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements and supplementary
information, expenditures totaled $186 million in fiscal year 2012. The
largest expenditure category was salaries and wages, including benefits,
which accounted for 74 percent of total operating expenditures during fiscal
year 2012. According to MSDE records, during the 2012-2013 school year,
WCPS had 2,227 full-time equivalent positions which consisted of 1,599
instructional and 628 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
WCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven appointed
voting members and one non-voting student member. The State and
the Wicomico County government provide the vast majority of WCPS funding.
In addition, MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment
and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with WCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Wicomico County government exercises authority over WCPS,
primarily through review and approval of WCPS’ annual operating and capital
budgets.
External Audits
WCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what
is referred to as a Single Audit of WCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). The resulting financial statement and Single Audit
reports for fiscal year 2012 were issued in September 2012.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited WCPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit of federal grants, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain
areas, we relied on the results of the independent audit of the fiscal year
2012 financial statements. This reliance allowed us to reduce the scope of
our audit work related to revenues and federal grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 15 of the 21 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated December 8, 2008 (the 21
findings resulted in 13 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed
up on these 15 findings based on our current assessment of significance and
risk relative to the audit objectives. We determined that WCPS satisfactorily
addressed 12 of these findings. The remaining 3 findings are repeated in this
report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Wicomico County Public Schools (WCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Wicomico County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the WCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $186 million during fiscal year 2012. In addition to these
revenue sources, schools also collect funds for various purposes, such as for
student activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not
considered school revenue, these student activity funds are accounted for
separately by each school and are reported in summary in the audited
financial statements. Although this revenue is raised through student-related
activities, WCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year
2012, school activity fund collections totaled $2.43 million and the June 30,
2012 balance was $432,000.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the WCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the
results of that audit for revenues including school activity funds. The auditor’s
procedural review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or
deficiencies regarding student activity funds and material revenue types, the
majority of which related to electronic fund transfers from other government
entities.
Federal Funds
Background
WCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of Federal
Awards, fiscal year 2012 expenditures of federal award funds totaled $16
million.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to the work performed by the independent certified public accounting
firm that conducted the Single Audit of the WCPS federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results.
Besides expressing an opinion on WCPS compliance with the terms of several
grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure's impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2012 required
Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant-
related expenditures). The related report stated that WCPS complied, in all
material respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal
programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance with major
federal programs, the auditor did not identify any material weaknesses.
Medicaid Funds Were Received for Eligible Services
WCPS had established a procedure to identify students eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services. Medicaid is an entitlement program for which certain
service costs can be reimbursed to WCPS. Medicaid activity is not covered by
the Single Audit of federal grants. Our tests disclosed that reimbursement
was requested for all Medicaid-subsidized services provided. According to
agency records, fiscal year 2012 reimbursement for Medicaid-subsidized
services totaled approximately $1.7 million.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to WCPS records, non-payroll disbursements (excluding the State’s
share of retirement contributions) totaled $35.5 million during fiscal year
2012. Requisitions are computer generated by the requesting department
and are to be approved by supervisory personnel (such as a respective
department head). The WCPS Purchasing Department is responsible for
procuring goods and services requested by individual schools and
departments. WCPS procurement guidelines require that procurements over
$25,000 be competitively bid (except architectural services) and approved by
the Board. The guidelines also require solicitation of quotes (either verbal or
written depending on the value of the procurement) for purchases over $500.
Payments are processed by the finance department through an automated
system that prints vendor checks and also posts the payment to the financial
records.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 1
WCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system.
Analysis
WCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system. Certain employees were
assigned capabilities that allowed them to perform incompatible functions.
For example, four employees could initiate and approve purchase requisitions
and two of these employees could also change and add vendors to the
system. Two employees could initiate and approve invoices. Furthermore,
WCPS had not established independent electronic approval requirements for
certain critical documents, such as requisitions and invoices. As a result,
employees could initiate and approve purchasing requests or disbursement
transactions without independent approvals. Additionally, there was no
independent approval of changes to user access capabilities on the
automated system.
Our test of procurement and accounts payable transactions processed by
WCPS disclosed that the transactions tested were for appropriate WCPS
disbursements and were properly supported.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes. Specifically, we
recommend that WCPS restrict user access capabilities to eliminate the ability
of users to perform incompatible duties and establish independent electronic
approval requirements for all critical purchasing and accounts payable
transactions, as well as changes to user access capabilities.
Finding 2
WCPS does not have a formal policy on acceptable uses of corporate
purchasing cards (CPC).
Analysis
Although WCPS procurement guidelines specify that card purchases may only
be made from particular types of vendors or businesses pre-selected by the
Purchasing Department, the guidelines did not specify the acceptable uses
(that is, the types of items that may be purchased) for the card. We noted
certain WCPS purchases would have been restricted under the State’s
corporate purchasing card policy. Specifically, our review of purchasing card
activity between April 11, 2011 and April 10, 2013 disclosed WCPS
11

--- Page 14 ---
purchasing card expenditures from local fast food or restaurant merchants
totaling $162,000. During the same period, our analysis of CPC activity
identified 257 transactions totaling $27,349, which based on the vendor’s
identity and the even dollar amount (for example, $100), appeared to be gift
card purchases. The State of Maryland Corporate Purchasing Card Policy,
while not binding on WCPS, prohibits purchases from restaurants and the
purchase of gift cards with the State’s corporate purchasing cards. In our
opinion, unless formally approved the Board, such uses should be restricted
by WPCS, especially the purchase of gift cards. Gift cards can be difficult to
control and have been the mechanism for committing fraud at other
government entities.
As of May 2013, WCPS had approximately 300 CPC cards. Between April 11,
2011 and April 10, 2013, WCPS credit card expenditures totaled $3.9 million.
Recommendation 2
We recommend WCPS establish formal guidelines, subject to Board approval,
on what constitutes acceptable and unacceptable uses for corporate
purchasing cards.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the WCPS
budget. According to WCPS records, fiscal year 2012 salary, wage, and
benefit costs totaled $141 million. According to Maryland State Department
of Education reports, during the 2012 - 2013 school year, WCPS had 2,227
full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 1,599 instructional and 628
non-instructional positions.
WCPS uses an automated integrated human resources and payroll system to
maintain human resources information, record employee time, track leave
usage, and to process and record payroll transactions. The system
automatically generates semi-monthly time records and any adjustments are
processed by central payroll personnel. The system generates payroll checks
and direct deposit advices. Payroll processing involves both automated
processes (such as compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual
processes (such as data entry of new employee information).
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 3
WCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities on its automated
human resources and payroll system and certain payroll transactions were not
independently reviewed.
Analysis
Adequate internal controls had not been established over user access to the
automated human resources and payroll system and certain payroll
transactions.
 WCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities to perform
certain critical functions, such as changing employee salary and direct
deposit information. Specifically, our review of 14 critical functions related
to human resources and payroll processing disclosed 15 of 21 active
system users were assigned to perform certain of these functions even
though they were not needed by these individuals to perform their
assigned job duties.
 WCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that employee payroll
transactions were proper. We noted that system transaction reports of
payroll changes, such as overtime, were not generated and verified to
source documentation by an independent employee.
Our tests of payroll changes and adjustments did not disclose any
inappropriate or erroneous transactions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that WCPS
a. assign capabilities to perform critical functions on the automated system
only to those employees who require it to perform their job responsibilities,
and
b. ensure that a documented review of payroll transactions is performed by
an independent employee.
Finding 4
Certain WCPS employees received pay increases larger than provided for in
the labor agreement.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Analysis
WCPS increased the salaries of certain employees more than specified by the
negotiated agreement between the Board and the bargaining unit for support
personnel and did not present the increases to the Board for approval.
According to the agreement, classified employees who receive a promotion or
an increase in pay grade must be moved back one step for every pay grade
they are promoted. Our review of 98 pay grade increases for classified
employees for fiscal years 2011 to 2013 disclosed 25 increases in which this
methodology was not used, resulting in additional annual wages totaling
approximately $69,000. For example, one employee was promoted from
grade 9, step 2 to grade 10, step 11. According to the agreement, the
employee should have been moved back to step 1 (within grade 10), but the
failure to do so resulted in the employee’s annual salary being increased from
$28,957 to $37,908, which was $8,951 more than required under the
method specified in the agreement. According to WCPS management, this
was done to encourage quality employees to remain at WCPS. WCPS
management indicated that it believed that certain types of personnel actions,
such as reclassifications, did not fall under the agreement; however, we found
no language in the agreement that would exclude specific types of personnel
actions.
Further, although the labor agreement indicates that the Board makes the
final decision as to who will receive promotions, we noted that these
promotions were not presented to the Board for approval. Section 4-103,
Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires school boards to
set all employees’ salaries.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that WCPS
a. ensure that salary increases are determined in accordance with the terms
of the labor agreement, and
b. ensure all promotions, including those we identified, are approved by the
Board as required.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to WCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled approximately $31.2 million as of June
30, 2012. WCPS uses automated records to track equipment inventory with a
cost of $1,000 or more (including items capitalized for financial statement
purposes).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 5
Internal controls and procedures over equipment disposals, records, and
access to records were not adequate.
Analysis
Our review disclosed that WCPS should improve its procedures and controls to
ensure accountability over equipment.
 Changes were made to the equipment inventory records without adequate
supporting documentation. For example, our test of 9 items with a cost
totaling approximately $44,000 for fiscal year 2012 and 2011 disclosed
that 6 items totaling approximately $29,000 were deleted from the
records without the disposals having been approved, as required.
Equipment disposals for fiscal year 2012 totaled approximately $1.2
million.
 WCPS inventory records frequently lacked information to identify specific
items. Our test of inventory records for 703 equipment items (such as,
lawn mowers and custodial equipment) disclosed that 128 items lacked
both a property tag number and serial number for identification purposes.
 Employees were granted access capabilities that enabled them to modify
the automated inventory records even though such access was not
required as part of the employee’s routine job responsibilities.
Specifically, 8 of the 11 employees that had full access to the inventory
system, which included the capability to add and delete items, did not
require this access to perform their job duties.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that WCPS improve its procedures and controls over
equipment. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. verify that all changes to equipment records, including disposals, are
properly supported and approved prior to posting adjustments;
b. ensure that appropriate identifying information is maintained in the detail
records; and
c. assign capabilities to perform critical functions on the automated
inventory record keeping system only to employees who require such
capabilities to perform their job duties.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Information Technology
Background
The WCPS Department of Technology maintains and administers the WCPS
computer network, computer operations and information systems
applications. WCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects the individual schools to the computer resources located at
the WCPS Board of Education building. The Department maintains devices
including the Internet firewall and computer servers which support critical
applications including its student information system and its finance
management system, which includes financial, human resources, and payroll
information.
Finding 6
Account, password, and monitoring controls over critical systems were not
adequate.
Analysis
Account, password, and monitoring controls over critical systems were not
adequate.
 Account and password controls were not sufficient to properly protect
critical resources. With respect to network authentication, the student
information system and the finance management system, password
length, age, complexity, history and/or account lockout were not in
accordance with best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) Information Security Policy.
For example, although the Policy requires user level passwords to be
changed at least annually, WCPS did not enforce password aging for
network authentication.
 Critical security and audit events (such as grant database privileges to
users and to stop the audit function) on the student information and
finance management databases were not logged. As a result, an audit
trail to establish accountability of these events did not exist. In addition,
there was no documentation supporting any reviews of the finance
management application server’s security logs. Without effective
monitoring, critical security incidents and events affecting operations and
data could occur and not be detected.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that WCPS
a. establish account and password controls in accordance with the best
practices prescribed by the State of Maryland DoIT Information Security
Policy; and
b. log critical security and audit events on the student information and
finance management databases, routinely review all security event logs,
investigate questionable items, document these reviews and
investigations and retain the documentation for audit verification
purposes.
Finding 7
WCPS did not have an Information Technology Disaster Recovery Plan and
certain backup files for critical network devices were not properly stored.
Analysis
WCPS did not have an Information Technology Disaster Recovery Plan for
recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for example, a fire or
flood) and backup procedures for critical network devices were not sufficient.
Without a complete disaster recovery plan, a disaster could cause significant
delays (for an undetermined period of time) in restoring operations above and
beyond the expected delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario.
Specifically, the following critical elements of a recovery plan should be
addressed according to the best practices outlined in the State of Maryland
Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines, dated July 2006:
 Concept of operations
 Notification and activation procedures
 Recovery strategies (including use of alternate sites)
 Reconstitution procedures
 Periodic testing of the disaster recovery plan
In addition, backup files for the configurations of critical firewalls and a core
network device were not stored in a secure, environmentally-controlled
location. Accordingly, in the event of corruption or loss of these production
configurations, restoration of these configurations could be delayed.
Similar conditions regarding a lack of a disaster recovery plan and critical file
backups were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that WCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive and consolidated disaster
recovery plan that is in accordance with the State of Maryland Information
Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines, (repeat) and
b. backup files of critical network device configurations at an offsite, secure,
environmentally-controlled location.
Finding 8
The WCPS computer network was not adequately secured against intrusions.
Analysis
The WCPS computer network was not adequately secured.
 Firewall rules allowed numerous insecure and unnecessary connections to
critical network devices. Specifically, firewall rules were not configured to
adequately secure connections into the WCPS network from the Internet.
Best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland DoIT Information
Security Policy require that critical systems be configured to monitor and
control communications at external boundaries.
 Ten publicly accessible servers were located in the WCPS internal network
rather than isolating these servers in a separate protected network zone.
These ten servers, if compromised, could expose the internal network to
attack from external sources. Recommended security procedures, per the
National Institute of Standards and Technology Guidelines on Firewalls
and Firewall Policy, include placing publicly accessible servers in an
external protected zone to protect those servers as well as the entity’s
internal network.
 Certain traffic flowing from the Internet to the WCPS internal network was
not subject to Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) monitoring. A properly
utilized IPS can aid significantly in the prevention of, and response to
potential network security breaches and attacks. Also, as a best practice,
the State of Maryland’s DoIT Information Security Policy requires that
agencies protect against malicious code and attacks by implementing
protections including the use of Intrusion Detection Prevention Systems to
monitor system events, detect attacks and identify unauthorized use of
information systems and/or confidential information.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that WCPS
a. properly configure the firewall rules to implement a “least privilege”
security strategy for better protecting its critical network devices;
b. relocate all publicly accessible servers to the external protected zone to
limit security exposures to critical systems on the internal network; and
c. assess network security risks, and based on this assessment, implement
IPS coverage, where necessary, for Internet traffic entering its network.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
WCPS maintains a total of 24 schools (totaling 2.1 million square feet) and an
administrative building and annexes with a staff of approximately 180
employees. According to the fiscal year 2013 Capital Improvement Plan (CIP)
necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic improvements to
WCPS facilities over the next six years were estimated to cost $266 million.
An Inclusive Process is Used to Plan for School Facility Construction, Major
Renovation, and Repair Projects
WCPS uses a comprehensive process, which includes the solicitation of input
from various sources, to plan for future school construction, major renovation,
and repair projects. For example, WCPS uses public meetings, student
demographic data, and other internal sources (such as current curriculum
mandates) to develop its six-year CIP. The CIP is presented to and approved
by the Board, as well as elected local officials. In addition, the Educational
Facilities Master Plan that is used to guide overall WCPS operations
incorporates CIP objectives and strategies related to school facilities. Our
review of the fiscal year 2013-2018 CIP disclosed that it appeared to address
the needs of WCPS based on items such as student demographics and facility
assessments.
WCPS Procedures and Practices for Bidding, Awarding, and Monitoring
Projects Appeared Proper
Our review of seven construction-related procurements totaling $78.2 million
disclosed that WCPS had used appropriate processes to procure all seven
contracts, including obtaining Board approval. In addition, our test of invoices
totaling $15.2 million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were
properly reviewed and approved and the amounts invoiced were in
accordance with the related contract terms.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
WCPS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. For example, WCPS
participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore entities to purchase
energy at the best possible terms for the members of the consortium. In
addition, WCPS utilizes an energy management system that monitors and
accounts for energy usage and employs an energy management program
manager trained in conservation techniques and monitoring energy practices
(such as usage reports and year-to-year comparisons). According to reports
prepared by the program manager (which we did not audit), WCPS has
avoided over $1.8 million in energy costs since implementation of the
program in 2001.
Transportation Services
Background
WCPS has approximately 12,600 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported daily using 123
contractor-owned buses. According to WCPS audited financial statements,
fiscal year 2012 transportation costs totaled $7.9 million, with $7.3 million
(92 percent) representing payments for contracted services. Of the
1,937,000 reported route miles for the 2011-2012 school year, 17percent
represented miles traveled to transport disabled students. Payments to bus
contractors consist of amounts for the purchase of a bus (known as a per
vehicle allotment or PVA which consists of a reimbursement for the cost of the
bus and a flat rate of return on investment) and for operating costs (such as
driver salaries, fuel use, maintenance costs, and certain administrative costs).
Finding 9
WCPS’ bus routing procedures were not comprehensive and automated
routing software capabilities were not adequately utilized to develop more
efficient routes.
Analysis
WCPS had not formalized its policies and processes for planning, reviewing,
and changing bus routes. For example, the bus routing processes did not
consider all relevant factors, such as busloads (that is, WCPS’ desired
utilization of bus capacity) and student ride times, when determining the most
appropriate bus routes. Although the number of buses used by the system
has declined from 130 in fiscal year 2009 to 123 in fiscal year 2012, it
appears that additional efficiencies could be achieved.
20

--- Page 23 ---
WCPS’ transportation department used certain capabilities of its routing
software; however, it did not use its routing software to evaluate the efficiency
of its bus operations by compiling and analyzing route data, including the
number of riders per bus, the route times, and the miles traveled per bus.
WCPS’ automated routing software was used primarily to map out existing
routes. In practice, WCPS used existing bus routes and made modifications to
accommodate students’ school assignments without periodically reviewing all
routes for efficiency on a system-wide basis. The lack of a system-wide route
analysis could have a potentially negative impact on route efficiency.1 Our
analysis of student ridership disclosed that ridership for many bus runs was
significantly less than the bus capacities. Our review of WCPS’ September
2012 bus stop reports for 192 bus runs disclosed that 86 runs (45 percent)
were below 75 percent of WCPS’ capacity goal2. On 20 of these 86 runs,
student capacity was less than 50 percent.
Using routing software is a recognized best practice that can be used to
reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce student ride time
and help ensure that routes minimize the number of buses needed to
transport students. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that WCPS take steps to determine if buses can be used
more efficiently. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive bus routing policies and procedures that
include guidance regarding the impact of bus capacities and student ride
times; and
b. utilize its automated routing software to develop more efficient bus routes
on a system-wide basis (repeat).
1Subsequent to our audit, WCPS advised that it had attempted to do a system-wide route analysis using
a new routing software package but was not satisfied that it had been implemented properly since the
results indicated two additional routes needed to be established.
2 School bus capacities are lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ depending on the
school. For example, the capacity for high school and elementary school routes is 48 and 63 students,
respectively based on 72-passenger buses (manufacturer stated capacity).
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 10
WCPS did not base certain elements used to determine payment amounts to
bus contractors on market conditions or actual costs.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did
not reflect market conditions or actual costs. The Per Vehicle Allotment (PVA)
is one of several elements used to determine payment amounts to bus
contractors. WCPS’ bus contracts are for one-year or five-year terms with
renewals generally granted over the 15-year useful life of the bus. Our review
of the terms of existing contracts disclosed the following conditions:
 WCPS pays contractors an annual PVA for each bus. However, WCPS
could not substantiate the basis for the return on investment (ROI) rate
used in the formula. The PVA formula includes reimbursement for the cost
of the bus (for example 1/15th of the cost of the bus paid each year for a
bus with a 15-year life) and a flat 9.46 percent ROI rate (a percentage of
the total cost of the bus paid each year for the operator investing money in
the bus instead of another investment option). The ROI used was
considerably higher than the prime interest rate3, which is recommended
for use in other studies.
To estimate the financial impact to WCPS of using the 9.46 percent ROI
over the life of a bus, we calculated the PVA for each of the 35 new buses
placed into service from the beginning of fiscal year 2009 through October
2012 using the prime interest rate and WCPS’ 15-year estimated useful
life in the PVA formula, and compared our PVA results to the WCPS PVAs.
This comparison showed that the annual PVA payments per bus were
$4,735 to $8,102 higher than the payments would have been had the
prevailing prime rate been used in the calculation. The effect is that, over
the 15-year life of these 35 new buses put into service by contractors
since 2009, WCPS will pay out approximately $3.2 million more by using a
ROI that was higher than the then prevailing prime interest rate. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
In addition to the PVA, WCPS paid the bus contractors $0.775 per mile in
fiscal years 2011 and 2012 for maintenance costs. However WCPS could
not support the basis for the maintenance rate paid to the bus
3The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study commissioned by
another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study recommended the prime rate as a
reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a lending rate that nearly always exceeds the
available market investment rate: therefore, it is deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation.
22

--- Page 25 ---
contractors. For example, it was not related to the actual costs incurred by
the contractors.
 Each year WCPS established a minimum fuel rate and increased
contractors pay whenever fuel prices rose above this amount but did not
decrease contractor pay when fuel prices declined below the established
minimum. Therefore, contractors were unnecessarily compensated for
fuel costs in excess of their costs. For example, during February 2009, the
price of diesel fuel was $1.999 per gallon yet contractor fuel payments
were based on the established minimum fuel rate of $3.319.
The average fuel costs fell below WCPS’ minimum fuel rate factor during
parts of fiscal years 2009 and 2011. Using WCPS’ actual contractor bus
mileage for fiscal years 2009 and 2011, we estimated excessive fuel
payments to the contractors for the periods in which fuel costs decreased
below the base rate totaling approximately $236,000 and $40,000,
respectively.
 WCPS did not exclude the exempt portion of federal excise taxes from fuel
payments to its bus contractors. As described above, WCPS pays
contractors for fuel usage based on the market rate for diesel fuel prices.
However, according to federal law, WCPS contractors are exempt from the
$0.244 per gallon excise tax on diesel fuel and may receive a credit on
their federal income tax returns for the taxes paid. As a result of WCPS
not considering this exemption in its fuel calculations, we estimated that
payments to contractors for the exempted tax in fiscal years 2009 through
2012 totaled $271,000.
The above conditions indicate that cost savings could be realized from current
transportation practices. In addition, in 2011 WCPS requested a proposal
from a national bus transportation company to operate all bus transportation
for WCPS that identified significant potential cost savings of $400,000 to
$500,000 per year over a five-year period.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that WCPS reevaluate its method of establishing payment
amounts to bus contractors in future contracts (repeat). Specifically, we
recommend that WCPS use prevailing market rates (when determining
investment rates), maintenance costs, and fuel costs (including consideration
of the federal diesel fuel excise tax exemption) as the basis for establishing
and documenting the annual per vehicle allotment, maintenance rate, and
fuel rate.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 11
WCPS did not adequately ensure the accuracy of data used to compute
certain payments to the bus contractors.
Analysis
WCPS did not ensure the accuracy of the time and mileage payments to bus
contractors. Three times each school year, the contractors completed a
manifest, which included the total time and miles driven on each route. WCPS
uses the data on these manifests to calculate the hourly pay and
maintenance and fuel cost components of the semi-monthly payments to the
contractors. Although all buses had GPS devices which recorded mileage and
time driven, WCPS only used the GPS data to verify a small portion of the
manifest information reported by the contractors. Specifically, as of
December 2012, WCPS had only compared GPS data to contractor reported
time and mileage for 18 percent of the 94 manifests prepared in September
2012 that exceeded the minimums for mileage or time.
Our test of another 15 manifests prepared by contractors in September 2012,
which involved long routes, disclosed that for 11 of the manifests the daily
billed times and/or mileage exceeded the GPS data. For example, one
manifest reported daily mileage of 112 miles while the GPS data indicated the
route was only 74 miles for a daily overstatement of 38 miles. For the first
half of the 2012 - 2013 school year, we calculated that WCPS overpaid for
mileage and time by a total of $23,000 for the 11 route manifests identified
in our test.
During our testing, we noted that the two manifests with the largest variances
were for buses owned by one contractor. We reviewed all of this contractor’s
fiscal year 2012 and 2013 manifests (through February 2013) and calculated
total mileage overpayments of approximately $19,700. WCPS is in the
process of recovering overpayments made to this contractor by reducing the
monthly payments. In 2002, WCPS performed an audit of the contractor's
manifests and noted overstated mileage on manifests that resulted in
overpayments to the contractor totaling $8,804.
During fiscal year 2012, hourly payments and base mileage (maintenance
and fuel payments) to contractors totaled approximately $2.37 million and
$2.4 million, respectively.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 11
We recommend that WCPS
a. independently verify all bus contractor’s manifests to ensure that the
payments to the contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services
provided;
b. document the verification process; and
c. recover any overpayments to the bus contractors, including amounts
identified in our test.
Food Services
Background
WCPS has a cooking cafeteria at 14 of its 24 schools. Food and related
supplies are received and stored in each school. In fiscal year 2012, WCPS
had 200 cafeteria positions (comprised of 195 cafeteria positions and 5
administrative positions). According to the fiscal year 2012 audited financial
statements, food service operation revenues exceeded food service
operation expenditures by approximately $508,000, after considering a
$750,000 revenue transfer from the WCPS general fund. We noted the same
amount was annually transferred during fiscal years 2008 through 2011, in
accordance with WCPS’ budget.
Finding 12
Food services invoices were not adequately verified prior to payment.
Analysis
WCPS should strengthen its internal controls over the purchasing of food
supplies. Our test of 10 invoices totaling $98,218 related to 5 contracts with
fiscal year 2012 food expenditures totaling $2.8 million disclosed that for all
10 invoices evidence of a documented review for propriety prior to payment
was lacking. Specifically, there was no indication that the invoice prices were
compared to the contract prices or approved price list. Furthermore, we noted
that price lists from one vendor were not maintained to substantiate that the
proper prices were paid for the two invoices tested from this vendor, which
totaled $12,851. Purchases from this vendor totaled $200,549 during fiscal
year 2012 and food expenditures for fiscal year 2012 totaled $3.2 million.
Our tests of food services purchases did not disclose any inappropriate
purchases.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Recommendation 12
We recommend that WCPS
a. compare invoice prices with contract or agreed-upon prices, and
b. maintain price lists for all contracts.
School Board Oversight
WCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In 2012 the Board of Education adopted a detailed ethics policy that,
according to the State Ethics Commission, conforms to State Law and
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure.
Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all WCPS
employees. WCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members to
interpret ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The
Panel also reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations.
According to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are
required to be filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the
Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent, and a number of other
administrators (such as the Chief Financial Officer and Director of Human
Resources) by April 30th of each year.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
WCPS is a member of a consortium for employee and retiree health care. The
Consortium is self-insured for healthcare costs of its three members up to
stop-loss limits. The Consortium contracts with a vendor to provide
administrative services, such as claims processing for participants’ medical,
dental and vision costs, and for stop-loss coverage. WCPS is the largest
member of the consortium as its claims represent 68 percent of the
consortium’s total claims for plan year 2012. WCPS verifies the eligibility of
employee dependents prior to enrollment in the health care plans.
The administrator bills WCPS for health care premiums and medical providers
submit claims to the administrator who pays them on behalf of WCPS. WCPS
pays an administrative fee for these services. According to the
administrator’s settlement document for the plan year ended August 31,
2012, amounts paid for health care totaled $25.8 million, including
administrative fees of approximately $1.4 million.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 13
WCPS did not competitively bid health care contracts for administrative
services and stop-loss coverage.
Analysis
WCPS obtained certain health care services without using competitive
procurements.
 The contract for third-party administrative services has not been bid since
2001. We were advised by WCPS management that this provider was
selected through a bidding process in fiscal year 2001, and retained on a
year-to-year basis thereafter.
 Services for stop-loss medical insurance have not been bid since 2001.
WCPS payments to the insurer for stop-loss coverage (for claims in excess
of $250,000 in a year for any individual) plus administrative fees totaled
$1.3 million during plan year 2012. This contract was with the same
vendor that provides the third-party administrative services.
The Consortium uses a consultant to negotiate prices for claims
administration services and stop-loss coverage; however, in order to help
ensure that the best value is obtained, bids or proposals from other interested
firms should be solicited.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that WCPS work with its healthcare consortium members to
select healthcare services vendors (third-party administration and stop-loss
coverage) through competitive procurement processes.
Finding 14
WCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for certain employee and
retiree health care costs.
Analysis
WCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that certain amounts paid to
the third-party administrator were proper. Our review of WCPS’s procedures
and controls over the contract and related payments for medical claims and
administrative fees disclosed the following conditions:
 WCPS did not audit the propriety of the claims paid on its behalf by the
program administrator to ensure that the services were actually provided,
27

--- Page 30 ---
were covered by the health plans, and were appropriately priced.
Furthermore, WCPS did not verify that all claims exceeding the stop-loss
limit were reimbursed by the administrator under the stop-loss coverage.
WCPS relies on the administrator to notify it of any payments above the
stop-loss limit. According to the administrator, WCPS paid $1.3 million for
stop-loss coverage and received $473,000 in plan year 2012 related to
claims exceeding the stop-loss limit.
 WCPS did not ensure that administrative fees (which are based on the
number of plan participants) for health and stop-loss claims processing
paid to the administrator were proper by comparing its enrollment records
to administrator invoices.
The State of Maryland contracts with a private firm to audit the administrators
of the State’s health insurance, prescription drug, dental benefit, and mental
health benefit plans, which includes conducting reviews to ensure the
propriety of claims paid.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that WCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid
for health insurance. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and ensure
audits of the claims paid by the administrator are conducted;
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that all claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer; and
c. compare its records of enrolled employees, retirees, and dependents to
invoices from the administrator and determine the propriety of all
administrative fees billed.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Wicomico County
Public Schools (WCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the WCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the WCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of WCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on WCPS dated December 8, 2008, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the WCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by WCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at WCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
29

--- Page 32 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).4
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of WCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2012.
For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits WCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from WCPS automated finance management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure, inventory, and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
WCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to WCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from August 2012 to June 2013. The WCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as Appendix A to
this report. Auditor comments related to certain of the WCPS’ responses can
be found in Appendix B. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise WCPS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
4During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies or
practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
30

--- Page 35 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCPS strengthen its controls over the automated procurement and
accounts payable system and processes. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS restrict
user access capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform incompatible duties and
establish independent electronic approval requirements for all critical purchasing and
accounts payable transactions, as well as changes to user access capabilities.
Wicomico County Board of Education (WCBOE) Response:
a. WCBOE restricted user access capabilities as soon as this was brought to management’s
attention while the auditors where on‐site. This prompt action has not been mentioned in
the audit report.
b. WCBOE does have in place independent electronic approval processes for all purchasing
and accounts payable transactions. The Board’s Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system,
through which all purchasing and accounts payable transactions are processed, requires
“independent electronic approval.” As an additional control feature, WCBOE has created an
automated email report that is forwarded to the Accounting Manager weekly which
discloses any procurement or disbursement transactions approved by the System
Administrator in the Technology Department. The Accounting Manager investigates such
instances, maintains a log of all outcomes, and reviews with the Comptroller. We reviewed
this action with the auditors in a previous meeting.
Recommendation 2
We recommend WCPS establish formal guidelines, subject to Board approval, on what
constitutes acceptable and unacceptable uses for corporate purchasing cards.
WCBOE Response:
a. WCBOE does have established formal guidelines that have been approved by the Board of
Education for the use of corporate purchasing cards. Board management reviewed the
Board’s current Procurement Policy, guidelines, and corporate purchasing card procedures
with the auditors.
b. WCBOE is unaware of a requirement to follow the State of Maryland’s corporate purchasing
card policy. We take exception to the fact that the auditors are basing their findings on
guidelines which are not applicable to the Board of Education.
c. Purchasing card expenditures from local fast food or restaurant merchants totaling
$162,000 is a necessary business expenditure. The nature of a people‐oriented business
such as the Wicomico County Public Schools requires local food purchases that support
many student and staff initiatives. With students, parents, staff, and community as our
customer base and focus, food is often an avenue utilized to enhance parental involvement,
celebrate student successes, show staff appreciation, and conduct imminent business that
might otherwise have to wait for days or weeks due to busy schedules and scheduling
Page 1 of 10

--- Page 36 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
conflicts. Many of these “local” purchases have been made with school based purchasing
cards. A majority of these purchases are charged to the School Activity Fund (SAF). The SAF
records all funds raised and donated, as well as expended at the school level. As part of
each SAF, an Employee Fund is required. The Employee Fund is established in accordance
with the negotiated contract and requires that all commissions from vending machines
located in the Faculty Lounges be accounted for in this account. Expenses from this account
are managed by each school’s approved Social Committee Guidelines, which are approved
by the Principal and school staff and reviewed by staff in Business Support Services. Such
guidelines typically include recognition for special occasions/events for all staff and staff
appreciation events, which typically include food purchases. In fact, a close look at the
transactions examined by the auditors reveals the following statistics:
Transaction # of
Source of Funds % of $ % of # Explanation for Use
Total $ Transactions
Our 27 school sites utilize procards to
purchase food from local vendors for student,
parent and staff appreciation. These funds for
the most part come from Employee Funds or
Office of the Principal funds. Very little, if any,
School Activity Funds $103,339 63% 983 60% funds are General Funds.
Grant budgets are pre‐approved by Grantor
agencies and the budgets disclose the use of
Grants $21,596 13% 189 11% the funds for such expenditures.
Staff Development exercises involves multiple
staff members in attendance and to show
appreciation, encourage attendance and
Staff Development $13,055 8% 85 5% participation, food is purchased.
The majority of these expenditures are
related to actual student activities in the
Special Education $6,164 4% 125 8% schools.
A Board Travel Card is assigned for a specific
use that requires prior approval for the
Board Travel Card $3,014 2% 28 2% expenditure.
Board meetings where multiple Board
members and staff members meet to discuss
Board of Education $2,201 1% 20 1% Board of Education business.
The remainder of these purchases over the
two (2) year period are from 23 different card
holders and result in an average annual spend
Other $14,307 9% 214 13% of $311.
Total examined $163,676 100% 1,644 100%
As noted in the summary table above, there are many scenarios that would explain and
justify these purchases including but not limited to:
1. Staff gatherings where each staff member contributed his/her personal money, or
used the commissions from vending machines (Employee Fund), but the total bill
was paid using the Pro‐card
Page 2 of 10

--- Page 37 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
2. Student appreciation events such as MD School Assessment pizza celebrations,
perfect attendance incentives, etc. across all of our schools
3. Grant‐funded initiatives such as parent involvement nights, after‐school activities,
and professional development initiatives, for example, must utilize food as a part of
the event
4. Business meetings and gatherings where WCBOE staff does not utilize their lunch
time in order to conduct important and timely business that otherwise could not fit
into their schedules.
d. The use of the purchasing card to acquire gift cards is an approved transaction by the Board
of Education of Wicomico County. The business of public schools involves the daily
interaction with students, parents, community volunteers, and staff. The Superintendent
and staff have found the use of gift cards as a very effective tool to recognize, encourage,
support, and reward actions or events. Gift cards are welcomed incentives for our students
and excellent tools for staff recognition and encouraging parental involvement. WCBOE
believes that adequate controls exist over the acquisition and distribution of gift cards. Our
current guidelines: 1. restrict when and for what a gift card can be acquired, 2. restrict the
recipients of gift cards, and 3. limit their value to $100 or less.
NOTE, the auditors did not identify in their report, nor bring to WCBOE’s attention any
purchasing card transactions they examined that were abusive or in violation of the Board of
Education’s policy, guidelines, or procedures.*
Recommendation 3
We recommend that WCPS
a. assign capabilities to perform critical functions on the automated system only to those
employees who require it to perform their job responsibilities, and
b. ensure that a documented review of payroll transactions is performed by an independent
employee.
WCBOE Response:
a. WCBOE restricted user access capabilities as soon as this was brought to management’s
attention while the auditors where on‐site. This prompt action has not been mentioned in
the audit report.
b. WCBOE reviewed with the auditors our approval processes that clearly demonstrate an
adequate system of internal controls in light of current budget constraints. Because of the
size of our organization we understand that not only is it impractical to independently
approve 100% of all payroll transactions, it is impossible to hire sufficient staff to review and
*See Appendix B for related auditor’s comment.
Page 3 of 10

--- Page 38 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
provide independent approval of 100% of the Board’s payroll transactions each payday. In
fact, over the past several years, due to budget cuts WCBOE has lost a payroll position.
Therefore, in order to establish an adequate system of internal controls surrounding the
payroll process, we have utilized today’s technology to enhance the approval process and to
ensure the accuracy of all payroll transactions.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that WCPS
a. ensure that salary increases are determined in accordance with the terms of the labor
agreement, and
b. ensure that all promotions, including those we identified, are approved by the Board as
required.
WCBOE Response:
a. WCBOE takes strong exception to this recommendation. The Board of Education is in
complete compliance with the terms of all of our negotiated labor agreements. We are
concerned that the auditors have attempted to interpret a legal contract without a legal
interpretation.
b. WCBOE also disagrees with the auditors’ interpretation of the annotated code section 4‐
103(a)(2) concerning the Board’s requirement for all employees to “set their salaries.”
WCBOE interprets that statement to mean set the salary table which drives all salaries paid
to our employees. We do not believe this means approving each employee’s individual
placement on the approved salary scale. Placement of individual employees on the Board
of Education’s approved salary scale is designated to the Superintendent of Schools.
c. The Board of Education has approved the Superintendent’s procedures for hiring staff when
issues such as critical needs, shortage areas, creating an acceptable pool of candidates or
promoting an employee in order to retain a highly qualified staff arise.*
Recommendation 5
We recommend that WCPS improve its procedures and controls over equipment.
Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. verify that all changes to equipment records, including disposals, are properly supported
and approved prior to posting adjustments;
b. ensure that appropriate identifying information is maintained in the detail records; and
c. assign capabilities to perform critical functions on the automated inventory record
keeping system only to employees who require such capabilities to perform their job
duties.
*See Appendix B for related auditor’s comment.
Page 4 of 10

--- Page 39 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
WCBOE Response:
WCBOE agrees with this recommendation. WCBOE staff have already taken the necessary
steps to ensure: 1. the verification of all changes to equipment, 2. the appropriate identifying
information is recorded, and 3. that system access is restricted.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that WCPS
a. establish account and password controls in accordance with the best practices
prescribed by the State of Maryland DoIT Information Security Policy; and
b. log critical security and audit events on the student information and finance
management databases, routinely review all security event logs, investigate
questionable items, document these reviews and investigations and retain the
documentation for audit verification purposes.
WCBOE Response:
a. WCBOE updated password controls, including file servers, databases, web services, and
server‐based applications as noted on the recommended list. This was done while the
auditors were onsite. WCBOE implemented new network authentication services as part of
the recommendation, and as noted in the Discussion Notes for ISA, this installation was
completed in October 2013 as planned. This was a major implementation as part of our
migration to a new platform and was underway when the auditors were onsite. User
accounts were also migrated to the new network authentication services. MDoIT best
practices for user account password management are in the design phase.
b. WCBOE implemented a logging tool while the auditors were onsite. This logging tool was
implemented May 2013.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that WCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive and consolidated disaster recovery plan that is
in accordance with the State of Maryland Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery
Guidelines, (repeat) and
b. backup files of critical network device configurations at an offsite, secure,
environmentally-controlled location.
WCBOE Response:
a. WCBOE agrees with this recommendation. While the auditors were onsite, we contacted
several 3rd party disaster recovery vendors and consultants, along with SunGuard our ERP
vendor. Analysis and pre‐project planning work is underway.
Page 5 of 10

--- Page 40 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
b. WCBOE agrees with this recommendation. Plans are underway to package the backup and
send to a secure vendor already established for other backups done by WCBOE.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that WCPS
a. properly configure the firewall rules to implement a “least privilege” security strategy for
better protecting its critical network devices;
b. relocate all publicly accessible servers to the external protected zone to limit security
exposures to critical systems on the internal network; and
c. assess network security risks, and based on this assessment, implement IPS coverage,
where necessary, for Internet traffic entering its network.
WCBOE Response:
a. WCBOE agrees with this recommendation, and we implemented the recommended security
strategy while the auditors were onsite.
b. WCBOE agrees with this recommendation, and we implemented the recommended server
moves and firewall changes while the auditors were onsite.
c. WCBOE agrees with this recommendation.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that WCPS take steps to determine if buses can be used more efficiently.
Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive bus routing policies and procedures that include
guidance regarding the impact of bus capacities and student ride times; and
b. utilize its automated routing software to develop more efficient bus routes on a system-
wide basis (repeat).
WCBOE Response:
WCBOE disagrees and objects to the tone of this “repeat” audit finding. It would appear from
the auditors’ statement that WCBOE has done nothing to address this prior recommendation.
We provide the following reasons for our strong objections:
a. Using primarily Transfinder routing software, the WCBOE school bus fleet has been
reduced from 131 routed school buses in FY'08, to 122 school bus routes in FY'14.
b. Since FY 2010, using Transfinder, and more recently Edulog, the Transportation
Department has been able to create cost avoidance of in excess of $461,000 in the
transportation budget.
Page 6 of 10

--- Page 41 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
c. When auditing routing efficiency, the auditor failed to consider factors unique to
Wicomico County that impact bus routing and scheduling: 1) the county extends
approximately 19 miles north to south and 32 miles east to west, 2) school buses must
travel to Rt. 50 to cross the Wicomico River, 3) 19 out of 26 school sites are within 4
miles of the Rt. 50/Rt13 intersection, 4) three of the four high schools are located
within 2 miles of the Rt. 50/Rt.13 intersection and within 1.5 miles of each other, 5)
Parkside HS students reside up to 17 miles from the school, 6) JM Bennett and Salisbury
Middle School students reside up to 24 miles from their assigned school, and 7) 69% of
all WCBOE students reside within 5 miles of the Rt. 50/Rt.13 intersection.
d. Transfinder was replaced with a more comprehensive software routing system, Edulog,
just prior to the audit period, to accomplish the tasks listed above due to Transfinder's
inability to handle buses with varying combinations of ridership groups and no
"optimization feature." Note: When the optimization feature of the Edulog routing
software was activated using existing parameters for school start/ending times, first
student pick up time of 6 a.m., last drop off time of 5 p.m. and target loads of 44 for
high school, 51 for middle school and 58 for elementary, the program identified a need
for two additional contracts. Efficient routing involves bus capacity and time.*
Recommendation 10
We recommend that WCPS reevaluate its method of establishing payment amounts to bus
contractors in future contracts (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that WCPS use
prevailing market rates (when determining investment rates), maintenance costs, and fuel
costs (including consideration of the federal diesel fuel excise tax exemption) as the basis
for establishing and documenting the annual per vehicle allotment, maintenance rate, and
fuel rate.
WCBOE Response:
The Superintendent of Schools disagrees with this audit finding for the following reasons:
a. The majority of WCBOE families depend on the school buses to transport their children
to and from school. Developing a reimbursement formula or instituting a completely
different methodology to provide qualified transportation services that satisfy the
recommendations of the auditors, but disrupts the delivery of safe student
transportation services is unacceptable.
b. Continued evaluation of routes, mileage, and hours of the fleet using Transfinder, and
more recently Edulog, has resulted in nine (9) less contract routes and a cost avoidance
of in excess of $461,000.
*See Appendix B for related auditor’s comment.
Page 7 of 10

--- Page 42 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
c. Comparing WCBOE to the 15 other Maryland public school systems with contractor
owned buses, WCBOE ranks 8th in PVA, 12th in the hourly rate, and 9th in the mileage
rate. See below chart of school year 2013‐2014 rates for the school systems that utilize
contractor owned buses:
Maint. Total Admin. Sample Contract @
County PVA Rank Hourly Rank Rate Fuel* Mileage Rank Fee*** 4.25 hours/55 miles Rank
Allegany $15,567 11 $18.93 9 $0.9800 $0.6154 $1.5954 1 $800 $46,642.91 8
Calvert** $11,936 15 $23.60 1 $0.8964 $0.6057 $1.5021 3 $5,100 $49,960.79 2
Caroline $16,995 7 $20.56 3 $0.7900 $0.5714 $1.3614 7 $2,832 $49,033.26 3
Carroll $17,916 4 $19.36 7 $0.9100 $0.5714 $1.4814 4 $1,100 $48,492.26 4
Cecil $16,653 10 $19.11 8 $0.7543 $0.5714 $1.3257 10 $600 $44,996.58 11
Charles $17,648 5 $21.35 2 $0.8074 $0.5517 $1.3591 8 $900 $48,335.84 6
Dorchester $18,100 3 $18.00 14 $0.7800 $0.6700 $1.4500 5 $1,160 $47,385.00 7
Garrett $14,390 13 $17.82 16 $0.8200 $0.8585 $1.5885 2 $800 $44,548.45 12
Harford $18,765 1 $20.20 4 $0.7100 $0.4131 $1.1231 16 $3,150 $48,486.69 5
Kent $15,306 12 $18.90 10 $0.7500 $0.5000 $1.2500 14 $0 $42,139.50 16
Queen Anne's $16,700 9 $18.30 13 $0.0000 $0.0000 $1.2890 12 $450 $43,910.60 14
Somerset $17,200 6 $18.00 15 $0.6000 $0.6500 $1.2500 15 $800 $44,145.00 13
St. Mary's $13,159 14 $19.75 6 $0.7300 $0.5330 $1.2630 13 $4,661 $45,432.45 10
Washington $8,862 16 $18.81 11 $0.7517 $0.5408 $1.2925 11 $6,675 $42,721.90 15
Wicomico $16,715 8 $18.75 12 $0.8170 $0.5430 $1.3600 9 $1,560 $46,082.75 9
Worcester $18,400 2 $20.05 5 $0.7510 $0.6700 $1.4210 6 $3,400 $51,206.15 1
State Avg. $15,895 $19.47 $1.37 $46,470.01
* Fuel Calculations based on $4.00 per gallon
**Calvert has 5.75 hour/day minimum
As seen from the above chart, when applied to a sample route of 4.25 hours and 55
miles per day using FY 2014 rates, WCBOE ranks 9th out of 16 school systems.
d. Based on the 2011‐2012 MSDE Fact Book, only 2 other Maryland school systems had a
per‐pupil transportation cost less than WCBOE, see the following link:
http://www.marylandpublicschools.org/MSDE/divisions/bus_svcs/fb.htm
The Superintendent would like to remind the auditors of the MSDE “Per Vehicle Allowance
Workgroup Report” released by the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) in 2010.
The workgroup was created in response to the first round of Legislative Audit findings
concerning the methodologies used by local school systems to pay independent school bus
contractors. The final report concluded that there is no “single approach to how an LEA should
determine its PVA” and that the determination of how to “fairly and equitably determine
compensation to school bus contractors……is the choice of the local jurisdiction as each best
knows its own unique transportation needs. Clearly, it is essential that the basis of and process
Page 8 of 10

--- Page 43 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
for such a determination be thoroughly documented and reviewed in an ongoing manner.”
WCBOE would also like to remind the auditors that the rates paid to our bus contractors are
approved and posted annually in the Board budget document so as to permit complete
transparency.*
Recommendation 11
We recommend that WCPS
a. independently verify all bus contractor’s manifests to ensure that the payments to the
contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services provided;
b. document the verification process; and
c. recover any overpayments to the bus contractors, including amounts identified in our
test.
WCBOE Response:
WCBOE agrees with the auditors’ recommendation and notes the following:
a. Student Transportation staff will audit approximately 50% of the bus manifests completed
and submitted by school bus contractors (7 randomly selected manifests each month, Oct. –
May, of each year).
b. Student Transportation staff will develop written procedures identifying the audit process.
c. WCBOE has completed monetary recovery from the contractor who was overpaid.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that WCPS
a. compare invoice prices with contract or agreed-upon prices, and
b. maintain price lists for all contracts.
WCBOE Response:
The Superintendent will ensure that Food Service staff will develop a process to compare
invoice prices with contract prices during FY 2013‐2014.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that WCPS work with its healthcare consortium members to select
healthcare services vendors (third-party administration and stop-loss coverage) through
competitive procurement processes.
*See Appendix B for related auditor’s comment.
Page 9 of 10

--- Page 44 ---
WICOMICO COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION
RESPONSES TO DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AUDIT REPORT
FEBRUARY 24, 2014
WCBOE Response:
The auditors have failed to acknowledge in their report the actions taken by WCBOE (even prior
to the auditors making this recommendation) to proceed with a competitive procurement
process for healthcare:
 In December, 2012, after reviewing with our consultant, Bolton Partners, the WCPE
healthcare consortium’s annual settlement results for contract year ended August 31,
2012, the members discussed the possibility of developing a formal request for
information (RFI) process for the coming contract year.
 At the April 2013 meeting of the WCPE healthcare consortium, the members
unanimously decided to seek a contract for the provision of services from a consultant
to assist the consortium with the development of a formal RFI for the acquisition of
healthcare services for FY 2015.
 At the June 2013 Board of Education meeting, a contract was awarded to Bolton
Partners to assist the WCPE healthcare consortium with completing a formal RFI process
to secure our healthcare insurance contract for contract year commencing September 1,
2014.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that WCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for health
insurance. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and ensure audits of the claims
paid by the administrator are conducted;
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that all claims paid above the stop-loss limit
are reimbursed by the insurer; and
c. compare its records of enrolled employees, retirees, and dependents to invoices from
the administrator and determine the propriety of all administrative fees billed.
WCBOE Response:
a. WCBOE’s Procurement Department will investigate the possibilities of securing such a
service to audit our health insurance claims data. We will then bring this information to the
attention of the other members of the Wicomico Public Entities Healthcare Consortium.
b. Same as a. above.
c. The Superintendent informed the auditors that the Board utilizes the services of an
independent consultant to verify the data reported by our healthcare provider on the
annual settlement document to include claims payment data and claims paid above the
stop‐loss limit.
Page 10 of 10

--- Page 45 ---
APPENDIX B
Auditor’s Comments on the Wicomico County Public School’s Response
Wicomico County Public Schools (WCPS) disagreed with certain of our findings in its
response (Appendix A) to the audit report. We continue to believe that the audit report
findings are valid. Our comments addressing these disagreements are presented below. In
accordance with State law, all areas of disagreement will be addressed through separate
correspondence between this Office and WCPS.
Superintendent’s Letter:
The Superintendent’s letter indicates that WCPS agrees with some of the 14 audit report
findings, but that WCPS feels certain of the findings were incomplete and inaccurate. The
letter further mentions certain general reasons for the disagreements, which relate primarily
to audit report presentation and criteria for findings. As stated above, OLA believes the
findings are valid and the comments below provide explanations for specific findings. OLA’s
reports are presented in accordance with government auditing standards and the format
and presentation are consistently applied to all school audits. With respect the criteria used
to assess policies and performance, OLA relies on laws that apply to the local school
systems and best practices established by other entities, including the State of Maryland for
its agencies.
Finding 2:
The report acknowledges that WCPS has guidelines for its corporate purchasing cards;
however, the guidelines did not specify the acceptable uses for the cards, including whether
the uses discussed in the response are appropriate. Considering the sensitive nature of
some of these purchases, including meals at local restaurants and gift cards, and the risk of
abuse or misuse, OLA continues to maintain that the Board should define what constitutes
acceptable and unacceptable uses for the cards. As stated by OLA in the finding, WCPS is
not required to follow the State’s corporate purchasing card policy; however, as also noted,
the State’s policy incorporates many generally accepted practices to control purchasing card
disbursements.
Finding 4:
When this issue was discussed with WCPS, its management acknowledged that the
methodology used for the salary increases cited in the audit report was not delineated in the
labor agreement. Therefore, we believe WCPS should follow the terms of Board-approved
labor agreements or submit personnel actions that deviate from the agreements to the
Board.
OLA’s citation of §4-103(a)(2), Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland was
correct in this circumstance and was previously confirmed by advice from the Office of the
Attorney General.

--- Page 46 ---
Finding 9:
OLA determined this to be a repeat finding because WCPS, as was the case during the prior
audit, had not established comprehensive bus routing policies and procedures and was not
fully using automated routing software. The report finding did recognize the decline in the
number of buses used by WCPS, which acknowledges that some actions were taken by
WCPS to address the prior recommendation. However, based upon OLA analysis of bus
ridership versus capacity, it appears that additional efficiencies can be achieved.
Finding 10:
OLA did not recommend that WCPS develop a completely different reimbursement
methodology or to take any action that would disrupt the “delivery of safe student” bus
transportation services. OLA did recommend that WCPS use prevailing market rates and
actual costs when determining reimbursement amounts, a recommendation that is both
fiscally prudent and consistent with recommendations made in similar circumstances in
other school system audit reports. Finally, OLA has included similar findings and
recommendations in many other school system audit reports on the same lack of a sound
basis for the amounts paid to bus contractors. Consequently, WCPS’ comparison of its
transportation costs to other school systems is not a valid measure of cost effectiveness.

--- Page 47 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Christopher D. Jackson
Information Systems Senior Auditor
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors