Title: Video Lottery Operation Licensees - Minority Business Participation
Date: 11/10/2011
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a80
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:56:55.596074
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Video Lottery Operation Licensees
Minority Business Participation
April 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities.
The Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Video Lottery Facilities 5
Minority Requirements Studies 5
Minority Participation Requirements 6
Status of Licenses 6
Governor’s Office of Minority Affairs 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 9
Conclusions 11
Findings and Recommendations 13
Establishment of Minority Participation Requirements
 Finding 1 – Certain Amended Minority Participation Goals Were Not 13
Established by MLGCC for Four Licensees
Reported Minority Participation
* Finding 2 – GOMA Did Not Have a Comprehensive Process to Verify 15
that Expenditure Data Reported by Licensees Was Accurate and
Complete and Did Not Take Follow-up Action to Obtain the
Required Information Not Reported by Certain Licensees
 Finding 3 – MLGCC Did Not Review the Reported Licensee 18
Information Received From GOMA to Ensure It Was Complete
and Accurate
Agency Responses Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Video Lottery Facilities
The General Assembly passed legislation to license video lottery terminal (VLT)
gaming in Maryland at six locations in the State (Anne Arundel County,
Baltimore City, Cecil County, Allegany County, Worcester County, and Prince
George’s County). Current law authorizes 16,500 VLTs with a maximum of
4,750 VLTs at any one location, and allows VLT licensees to operate certain
table games such as roulette, baccarat, blackjack, and poker. VLT equipment
is owned or leased by either the Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control
Commission (MLGCC) or the VLT licensees.
The video lottery operation licenses required by law to operate a VLT facility
were awarded by the Video Lottery Facility Location Commission. The MLGCC
oversees VLT facility operations, and is required to ensure that licensees
comply with the regulatory framework of the VLT program, including minority
business participation.
Minority Requirements Studies
Section 4 of Chapter 4, Special Session, and Laws of Maryland 2007 required
the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), in consultation with the
General Assembly and the Office of the Attorney General, to initiate two
studies to evaluate the continued compliance of the minority participation
requirements of Section 9-1A-10 of the State Government Article with any
federal and constitutional requirements. The studies were also to evaluate
race-neutral programs or other methods that could be used to address the
needs of minority investors and minority businesses. The first study was
submitted to the Legislative Policy Committee by the Secretary of MDOT with a
letter (dated August 9, 2011), to address the aforementioned Special Session
requirements. In response to the completion of the first study, the Attorney
General of Maryland advised on August 11, 2011 that a minority business
participation program for VLT licensees could now be implemented in
compliance with the VLT law.
The report of the second study was due to the Committee by September 30,
2013. In a letter dated November 20, 2013, the Secretary of MDOT notified
the Committee that the second study would not be completed. The letter
stated that the 2011 study fulfilled the obligations for the studies outlined in
the law.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Minority Participation Requirements
Section 9-1A-10 of the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland specifies that, for construction and procurements related to the
operation of VLTs, video lottery operation licensees must meet, at a minimum,
the same minority participation requirements specified for State agencies in
Title 14, Subtitle 3 of the State Finance and Procurement Article. According to
this law, if the Governor’s Office of Minority Affairs (GOMA) reports that a
licensee is not in compliance with the minority participation requirements,
MLGCC may take immediate action to ensure compliance of the licensee.
The request for proposals (RFP) issued in December 2008 by the Video
Lottery Facility Location Commission delineated the minority participation
goals, with overall goals of 25 percent for Allegany, Cecil, and Worcester
counties, and 35 percent for Anne Arundel County and Baltimore City, and
sub-goals for African-American and women-owned businesses. However,
because of constitutionality issues, the Attorney General advised, on August
11, 2011, that the RFP provisions relating to these goals needed to be
amended to set separate goals for each VLT facility and, where appropriate,
for each separate contract of significant duration, scope, and size entered into
by licensees. This advice also stated that these goals need to be based on
the availability of minority businesses to perform the work at each location,
and waivers must be available for instances in which a licensee is unable to
meet the goals after making good faith efforts.
To address the requirements and prior legal concerns noted in the Attorney
General’s August 2011 memorandum, MLGCC worked collaboratively with
other State agencies and stakeholders, including GOMA and MDOT, to
develop an amended Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) goal-setting process.
In May 2013, MLGCC established a minority participation goal for the
Horseshoe Casino Baltimore in accordance with the Attorney General’s August
2011 letter. That is the first time that an amended minority participation goal
was established.
Status of Licenses
For each casino, Table 1 provides the dates that the license was awarded and
when VLT gaming operations began. In accordance with Section 9-1A-04 of
the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, MLGCC
granted MGM National Harbor (MGM) in Prince George’s County a six-month
extension to open its VLT gaming operations, which will require MGM to open
no later than August 14, 2016 unless an additional extension is granted.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Table 1
Video Lottery Facility License and Operations Data
Date Date
Local
Casino License Operations
Jurisdiction
Awarded Began
Hollywood Casino Perryville Cecil 10/21/2009 9/27/2010
Casino at Ocean Downs Worcester 9/23/2009 1/4/2011
Anne
Maryland Live! Casino 12/7/2009 6/6/2012
Arundel
Rocky Gap Casino Resort Allegany 4/26/2012 5/22/2013
Baltimore
Horseshoe Casino Baltimore 7/31/2012 8/26/2014
City
Prince
MGM National Harbor 8/14/2014 Future
George's
Source: Governor’s Office of Minority Affairs October 7, 2014 MBE Compliance Report and
MLGCC Licensee Information
Governor’s Office of Minority Affairs (GOMA)
Section 9-1A-10 of the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires GOMA to monitor licensees’ compliance with minority
business participation requirements and to report at least every six months to
the MLGCC on the licensees’ compliance with the requirements. MLGCC uses
the information obtained from GOMA to prepare an annual report to the
Governor and the General Assembly on the attainment of the minority
business participation goals by the licensees and their efforts to maintain
those goals. MLGCC’s report for calendar year 2013 was issued on November
3, 2014.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the three findings
contained in our preceding audit report, dated May 14, 2014. We determined
that one of these findings was satisfactorily resolved. The remaining two
findings are repeated as three findings in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope and Objectives
Section 9-1A-34 of the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires the Office of Legislative Audits to annually audit and
evaluate the information submitted by video lottery operation licensees to the
Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (MLGCC) on the attainment
of minority business participation goals specified for construction and
procurements related to their operations and the efforts to maintain those
goals. We conducted a performance audit to assess the accuracy of the
calendar year 2013 information reported by the six video lottery operation
licensees identified in Table 2. We also assessed whether MLGCC
established procedures to monitor the efforts of licensees to achieve minority
participation goals.
Table 2
Licensee VLT Data as of December 31, 2013
Number of
Number of
VLTs
Licensee Casino VLTs Initially
Authorized as
Authorized
of 12/31/13
Hollywood Casino
Penn Cecil Maryland, Inc. 1,500 1,158
Perryville
Ocean Enterprise 589, Casino at Ocean
800 800
LLC Downs
PPE Casino Resorts
Maryland Live! Casino 4,750 4,270
Maryland, LLC
Rocky Gap Casino
Evitts Resort, LLC 850 558
Resort
Horseshoe Casino
CBAC Gaming, LLC 3,750 2,500
Baltimore
MGM National Harbor,
MGM National Harbor 3,600 3,600
LLC
Source: MLGCC Licensee data reports
9

--- Page 12 ---
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the
audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe
that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed employees of the licensees,
MLGCC, and the Governor’s Office of Minority Affairs (GOMA). We reviewed
GOMA’s and MLGCC’s data collection process and reporting. We also
evaluated the minority participation calculations for accuracy, and reviewed
and tested the records of the licensees, including contractor classifications,
expenditure data, invoices, and reports of minority participation levels and
outreach efforts.
Our audit fieldwork initially commenced during May 2014; however, GOMA
requested that we defer our audit to a later date because it had not
completed a review of licensee data that it uses to prepare its annual report
to MLGCC on the attainment of licensees’ minority business participation
goals. GOMA advised us that a primary factor attributable to the delay in the
completion of its review of the licensee data was that it was no longer using
the services of an outside contractor to assist with collection and reporting of
minority participation data and outreach efforts. GOMA solicited assistance
from the Department of Budget and Management to complete the necessary
review and organization of information from the licensees, which required
additional time to complete. Our fieldwork resumed during September 2014
and continued though February 2015, with subsequent fieldwork undertaken
to update the status of amended minority participation goals through February
2016.
A copy of the draft report was provided to MLGCC and GOMA. Their responses
to our findings and recommendations appear as an appendix to this report.
As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MLGCC and GOMA regarding the results of
our review of their responses.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Conclusions
The Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (MLGCC) had not
established certain amended minority participation goals related to
architectural and engineering, construction, and operations for four of the six
video lottery terminal (VLT) licensees, as formally advised by the Attorney
General of Maryland. Without properly established goals, MLGCC will be
unable to encourage and assess licensee achievement of those goals, or for a
licensee failing to achieve those goals, take appropriate action to ensure
compliance.
MLGCC’s statutorily required calendar year 2013 report to the Governor and
General Assembly on VLT licensee minority participation (dated November 3,
2014), contained erroneous information due to both Governor’s Office of
Minority Affairs (GOMA) and licensee errors that were undetected. This
situation was due to MLGCC not having a process in place to ensure that the
minority participation results it received from GOMA were reasonably
complete and accurate.
Specifically, GOMA inadvertently miscalculated construction costs related to
one licensee resulting in a $1.3 million understatement of these amounts.
MLGCC did not detect the error due to a lack of a review of the licensee’s
information initially submitted to GOMA. Additionally, certain licensee
information provided to GOMA during calendar year 2013 was inaccurate. For
example, one licensee misclassified architectural and engineering costs as
construction costs and listed the same payment twice in its construction
costs. The net result was an understatement of architectural and engineering
costs and an overstatement of construction costs of $17.8 million and $24.5
million, respectively. Because GOMA did not verify the accuracy of the
expenditure data used to determine licensees’ minority participation levels
reported to MLGCC, the information in GOMA’s October 7, 2014 report to
MLGCC was inaccurate.
Finally, in its report to MLGCC, GOMA did not obtain certain expenditure data
as required related to the achievement of minority participation goals for
construction and operations for two VLT licensees resulting in GOMA omitting
the data from its annual report to MLGCC for those licensees. Specifically,
GOMA disclosed that operations expenditures totaling $14.4 million for one
licensee were not reported due to the licensee’s inability to segregate its
casino activity from its other non-casino related activities and that expenditure
data provided by a second licensee totaling $13.2 million was not reported
because it was not complete and had not yet been verified.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Although not all goals had been established, GOMA and MLGCC monitored the
efforts taken by the licensees to find and encourage minority business
participation by requiring the licensees to submit documentation to
substantiate their efforts, which we verified on a test basis. MLGCC
subsequently listed the efforts, by licensee, in its 2013 report to the Governor
and General Assembly. While the report disclosed many strategies to attract
minority business participation, one common example we noted was that
nearly all of the licensees attended Minority Business Expos in which minority
business enterprises showcased their products and services.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Establishment of Minority Participation Requirements
Finding 1
The Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission has not established
certain amended minority participation goals for four of the video lottery
terminal licensees.
Analysis
As of February 4, 2016, the Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission
(MLGCC) had not established certain amended minority participation goals for
four of the six video lottery terminal (VLT) licensees. Each of the six licensees
should have three goals established – one each related to
architectural/engineering, construction, and operational procurement
activities.
MLGCC had only established 8 of the 18 VLT licensees’ minority participation
goals. Table 3 presents the current minority participation goals for the VLT
licensees and the dates those goals were established. Regarding the 10
goals that had not been established, it is our understanding that there are no
significant current expenditures (calendar year 2016) pertaining to 6
activities; however, there are 4 open casinos (licensees) functioning without
operational procurement goals.
For the period covered by this audit (calendar year 2013), only the goal for
construction procurement activity for the Horseshoe Casino Baltimore had
been established. There were calendar year 2013 expenditures incurred in
nine other categories for which goals had not established (see Table 4 in
Finding 2).
The law specifies that if the Governor’s Office of Minority Affairs (GOMA)
reports that a licensee is not in compliance with the minority participation
requirements, MLGCC may take immediate action to ensure compliance of
the licensee. Consequently, without properly established goals, MLGCC will be
unable to encourage and assess achievement of those goals and take
appropriate actions against licensees that fail to achieve those goals.
Although State law requires VLT licensees to meet the same minority
participation requirements specified for State agencies, the Attorney General
of Maryland formally advised in August 2011 that, to address constitutionality
issues, MLGCC should amend the goals to set separate goals for each
13

--- Page 16 ---
licensee, and perhaps for each contract, and consider the proposed contract
work and the availability of minority businesses to perform the work. The
Attorney General also advised that waivers must be available for instances in
which a licensee is unable to meet the goals after making a good faith effort.
The waiver provisions are in place.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In our
prior report dated May 14, 2014, we commented that goals had not been
established for most licensees, and that MLGCC advised it has been working
since September 2011 to establish goals for the remaining licenses.
Table 3
Current Video Terminal Licensee Amended Goals as of February 2016
(Date Licensee Notified by MLGCC of Current Minority Participation Goal)
Licensee Activity Type
Casino
Architectural and Operational
Construction
Engineering Procurements
Hollywood Casino Perryville Not Established Not Established Not Established
Casino at Ocean Downs Not Established Not Established Not Established
19%
Maryland Live! Casino Not Established Not Established
(May 30, 2014)
12% 17%
Rocky Gap Casino Resort (November 30, (November 30, Not Established
2015) 2015)
22% 24% 20%
Horseshoe Casino Baltimore
(May 30, 2014) (May 7, 2013) (August 25, 2014)
19% 26%
MGM National Harbor Not Established
(June 4, 2014) (December 5, 2014)
Source: MLGCC
 - No goal has been established, but there were either no expenditures incurred during
calendar year 2016 related to the specific activity at the casino or the expenditures were
insignificant.
 - No goal has been established even though there is expenditure activity during calendar
year 2016.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MLGCC establish amended minority participation goals
for all categories in which VLT licensees have expenditures (repeat).
Reported Minority Participation
Finding 2
GOMA did not have a comprehensive process to verify that the expenditure
data reported by VLT licensees was accurate, complete, and in the proper
format, and did not initiate follow-up action to obtain the required information
not reported by certain licensees.
Analysis
GOMA did not have a comprehensive process in place to verify that the
expenditure data reported by the VLT licensees was accurate, complete, and
in the proper format, nor take follow-up action to obtain the required
information that certain licensees failed to report during calendar year 2013.
Since State law requires GOMA to monitor licensees’ compliance with minority
participation requirements and report on that compliance to MLGCC, this
condition resulted in inaccurate and incomplete GOMA-reported data being
included in MLGCC’s related report of 2013 activity to the Governor and
General Assembly.
All activities reported by the licensees to GOMA and MLGCC, and verifications
by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) in calendar 2013 are included in
Table 4. For the period reported, our tests concluded these data were not
always accurate, as certain reported net expenditures (total expenditures less
excludable expenditures1) were improperly omitted, excluded, or classified.
 GOMA did not verify the accuracy of the expenditure data reported by the
licensees for calendar year 2013 that was used to determine minority
participation levels. Specifically, GOMA did not perform a comprehensive
review of licensee submitted information for obvious errors nor request
independent supporting documentation (such as bank statements and
vendor invoices) from the licensees to verify the completeness and
accuracy of the submitted total and minority-related expenditure data. Our
1 Excludable expenditures are those amounts (for example, taxes and licenses, utilities) that
licensees are permitted to deduct from their total expenditures when calculating their
minority business enterprise percentage in accordance with Title 36 Subtitle 03 of the Code
of Maryland Regulations.
15

--- Page 18 ---
review of the calendar year 2013 licensee submissions and GOMA
reported expenditure data to MLGCC disclosed that the Horseshoe Casino
Baltimore misclassified $17.8 million of architectural and engineering
costs as construction costs and listed the same payment totaling $6.7
million twice in its construction costs. We also found that the Maryland
Live! Casino improperly excluded $900,000 of non-employee insurance
costs from its operations costs. None of the three aforementioned
conditions were detected by GOMA.
 Specific requirements regarding the content and format of expenditure
and related minority participation information data to be submitted by
licensees had not been established, which resulted in the omission of this
data for two licensees in GOMA’s calendar year 2013 report to MLGCC.
Specifically, Rocky Gap Casino Resort’s 2013 operations expenditures,
which totaled $14,424,376 with related minority business enterprise
(MBE) expenditures of $21,283, were not reported because the licensee
was unable to segregate expenditures related to its casino operations
from those expenditures attributable to its hotel, convention center, and
golf course operations. Also, calendar year 2013 expenditures reported to
GOMA by MGM National Harbor for architectural/engineering were
$6,022,404 and for construction were $7,220,302, with related MBE
expenditures of $1,987,659 and $361,461, respectively; however, GOMA
omitted these from its 2013 report as some of the information submitted
was not complete or verifiable. For example, GOMA had not received
confirmation of MBE payments directly from the MBE firms.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Table 4
Comparison of GOMA Reported Data and OLA Verifications
For Calendar Year 2013
Net Total
Data Licensee MBE
Type of Expenditures Expenditures
Reported Participation
Casino Activity to All Vendors to MBEs for
By/ For Period
Reported For Period Period
Verified By Reported
Reported Reported
Hollywood
GOMA $6,657,298 $271,312 4.08%
Casino Operations
Perryville OLA $6,657,298 $271,312 4.08%
Casino at GOMA $4,693,695 $335,980 7.16%
Operations
Ocean Downs
OLA $4,693,695 $335,980 7.16%
Maryland GOMA $71,700,515 $7,645,505 10.66%
Operations
Live! Casino
OLA $72,601,190 $7,645,505 10.53%
Architectural/ GOMA $524,398 $0 0.00%
Engineering OLA $524,398 $0 0.00%
Rocky Gap GOMA $17,850,840 $1,530,927 8.58%
Construction
Casino Resort
OLA $17,850,840 $1,530,927 8.58%
GOMA Not Reported Not Reported Not Reported
Operations
OLA - - -
GOMA $6,715,149 $89,226 1.33%
Architectural/
Horseshoe Engineering OLA $24,520,757 $89,226 0.36%
Casino
Baltimore GOMA $57,000,610 $10,212,657 17.92%
Construction
OLA $33,733,845 $10,212,657 30.27%
Architectural/ GOMA Not Reported Not Reported Not Reported
MGM Engineering
OLA - - -
National
Harbor Construction GOMA Not Reported Not Reported Not Reported
OLA - - -
NOTE: With the exception of the Horseshoe Casino Baltimore construction activity, minority
participation goals had not been established for the remaining nine activities with licensee
reported calendar year 2013 expenditures (see Finding 1).
 - MLGCC’s 2013 annual report did not provide 2013 licensee expenditure data related to the
activities that began during calendar year 2013; therefore, the data was included in and/or
combined with the corresponding licensee data reported by GOMA for calendar year 2014.
 - MLGCC’s 2012 annual report did not provide 2012 licensee expenditure data related to the
activities that began during calendar year 2012; therefore, the data was included in and/or
combined with the corresponding licensee data reported by GOMA for calendar year 2013.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Section 9-1A-10 of the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that GOMA monitor each licensee’s annual compliance with
the minority participation requirements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that GOMA
a. establish a formal process to verify the accuracy and completeness of
expenditure data reported by the licensees (repeat);
b. in conjunction with MLGCC, require licensees to submit all required
expenditure data in the proper format and ensure that it includes the
required content to facilitate its verification; and
c. report to MLGCC the complete licensee minority participation information,
including architectural and engineering, construction, and operations
activity (repeat), and provide notification in writing of any licensees that
have not complied with the aforementioned requirements.
Finding 3
MLGCC did not review the reported VLT licensee information received from
GOMA to ensure that it was complete and accurate.
Analysis
MLGCC did not review the reported VLT licensee information received from
GOMA to ensure that it was complete and accurate. Specifically, in addition to
the unidentified errors attributable to incomplete or inaccurate licensee
expenditure data submissions noted in Finding 2, we noted an undetected
miscalculation by GOMA during our verification of the VLT licensee data GOMA
used in preparing its 2013 annual report to MLGCC. This GOMA
miscalculation was not detected by MLGCC and resulted in an omission of
approximately $1.3 million in Horseshoe Casino Baltimore’s construction
expenditures (the impact of this omission is included in OLA’s related net
expenditure total in Table 4). Because MLGCC did not review the information
initially submitted by the licensees to GOMA supporting GOMA’s subsequent
report to MLGCC, errors went undetected and were included in MLGCC’s
annual report of calendar year 2013 participation activity to the Governor and
General Assembly on the VLT facilities dated November 3, 2014.2 Similar
conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
2 MLGCC only receives information on minority participation through the information the
licensees provide to GOMA. MLGCC did not receive any minority participation information
directly from any licensee.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Title 9 Subtitle 1A of the State Government Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that MLGCC submit an annual report to the Governor and
the General Assembly on licensees’ minority participation goals and efforts to
maintain them. MLGCC, as part of the license requirements, can require
licensees to provide information in specific formats and to have the
information audited by an independent certified public accounting firm.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MGLCC
a. ensure the minority participation results it receives from GOMA are
reasonably complete and accurate (repeat); or
b. as an alternative, consider requiring licensees to provide audited
information in a format that presents the minority participation levels
achieved for construction and operational procurements (repeat).
19

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (MLGCC)
Responses to Performance Audit on Video Lottery Operation Licensees -
Minority Business Participation for Calendar Year 2013
Establishment of Minority Participation Requirements
OLA Finding 1
The Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission has not established certain
amended minority participation goals for four of the video lottery terminal licensees.
OLA Recommendation 1:
We recommend that MLGCC establish amended minority participation goals for all
categories in which VLT Licensees have expenditures (repeat).
MLGCC Response 1:
MLGCC agrees with the recommendation to establish amended Minority Business
Enterprise (MBE) participation goals for all categories in which VLT Licensees have
current expenditures.
As noted by the auditors, the request for proposals for the video lottery facilities delineated
minority participation goals for each VLT Licensee. In August 2011, the Attorney General
issued an advice letter recommending that these goals not be enforced due to
constitutionality concerns and recommended that amended goals be established for
architectural/engineering, construction and operational procurement activities. However,
when the advice letter was issued in August 2011, two VLT Licensee locations had already
opened and were operating and a third VLT Licensee location opened 10 months later. By
this time, the architectural/engineering and construction activities at these VLT Licensee
locations had already been completed or were almost completed.
Moving forward, MLGCC plans to establish MBE participation goals for VLT licensees’
ongoing operations expenditures. MLGCC has issued or will be issuing MBE goals for
other Licensee projects. On December 14, 2015, for example, MLGCC sent the
Architectural and Engineering budget and Construction budget for the Casino at Ocean
Downs’ planned addition to the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) for its
input in MLGCC’s goal setting methodology. We have not received MDOT’s final
analysis. Meanwhile, MLGCC is in the process of reviewing Licensees’ ongoing operating
budget submissions and will be issuing these MBE participation goals for the ongoing
operations phase in the very near future.

--- Page 24 ---
Reported Minority Participation
OLA Finding 3
MLGCC did not review the reported VLT licensee information received from GOMA to
ensure that it was complete and accurate.
OLA Recommendations 3(a)-(b):
We recommend that MLGCC
a. ensure the minority participation results it receives from GOMA are reasonably
complete and accurate (repeat); or
b. as an alternative, consider requiring licensees to provide audited information in a
format that presents the minority participation levels achieved for construction and
operational procurements (repeat).
MLGCC Responses 3(a)-(b):
MLGCC agrees to ensure that minority participation results it receives from GOMA
are reasonably complete and accurate by documenting its review and by having its
internal auditors independently verify, on a test basis, the data contained in the
report.
MLGCC did review the information submitted by GOMA but agrees that the
review should have been adequately documented and more comprehensive.
MLGCC receives vendor spending data on a monthly basis from existing Licensees
for licensing purposes. This vendor spending data captures mainly ongoing
operations data from all vendors doing business with the respective Licensee.
MLGCC has been and continues to review the data submitted by the Licensee and
compiled by GOMA to ensure that it is reasonably complete and accurate. MLGCC
will continue to compare and verify the Licensee’s overall spending and MBE data
that is submitted to GOMA with the Licensee’s vendor spending data that is
submitted to MLGCC for licensing purposes and will adequately document this
review. Furthermore, MLGCC has developed its own audit process to review and
test the Licensees’ overall spending and MBE data submitted to GOMA in order to
help improve our verification process of ensuring that the data reported is complete
and accurate.
As an additional measure, MLGCC and GOMA have developed a certification form
that each Licensee must complete when submitting annual overall spending and
MBE data to GOMA. MLGCC and GOMA implemented this form in January
2016, and VLT Licensees will be required to submit this form to GOMA every six
months for its reporting requirements to MLGCC. The Licensee will be affirming
that the data submitted to GOMA and MLGCC is complete and accurate.

--- Page 28 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Senior Auditor
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Staff Auditor