Title: Montgomery County Public Schools
Date: 05/19/2016
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d37cc9d72404c150a26
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:45:41.794594
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Montgomery County Public Schools
May 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities.
The Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External and Internal Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle
* Finding 1 – Checks Received at Certain Locations Were Not 10
Recorded Nor Restrictively Endorsed Immediately Upon
Receipt, and Accountability Over the Transfer of Collections to
the Controller’s Office for Deposit Was Not Established
* Finding 2 – MCPS Had Not Sufficiently Pursued Collection of 11
Delinquent Accounts Receivable and Non-Cash Credits Could
Be Processed Without Independent Approval and Adequate
Supporting Documentation
Federal Funds 12
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 3 – A Number of Employees Had Procurement And 13
Disbursement System Capabilities Assigned Which Allowed
Them to Perform Incompatible Functions
Finding 4 – MCPS Awarded a $900,000 Contract Without Using a 14
Competitive Procurement Process or Justifying That Decision
and, for Five Other Contracts Tested, MCPS Did Not Assess the
Benefits of Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing
Agreements as Required by State Law
Finding 5 – MCPS’ Monitoring of Certain Contracts Did Not Ensure 16
that the Best Value Was Obtained or that Payments Did Not
Exceed the Contract Amounts
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 6 –Independent Reviews Did Not Provide Sufficient 17
Assurance that Certain Personnel Transactions, Such as
Changes to Employee Information and Salary, Were Proper
Inventory Control and Accountability 18
Information Technology
Finding 7 – The MCPS Core Network Firewalls Were Not 19
Configured to Properly Secure the MCPS Network, Allowing
Overly Broad Network Level Access with Insufficient Security
Event Logging and Monitoring
Finding 8 – The MCPS Network Was Not Sufficiently Secured to 20
Assist in the Detection/Prevention of Potential Network
Security Breaches and Attacks, and Restrict Access to Critical
Servers
* Finding 9 – Workstations And Servers Were Not Sufficiently 21
Protected Against Malware, as Administrative Access Was Not
Properly Restricted and Systems Were Running Outdated or
Unsupported System Software
* Finding 10 – Network, Application, and Database Account and 23
Password Controls Were Not Sufficient to Properly Protect
Critical Resources, as They Did Not Meet Minimum Thresholds
in Accordance with Recognized Best Practices
* Finding 11 – Controls Over the Critical Student Information and 23
Financial Management System Databases Were Not Sufficient,
as Security Activity Was Not Logged, and Various Software in
Use Was No Longer Supported by the Respective Developers
Finding 12 – MCPS Did Not Have a Complete Information 24
Technology Disaster Recovery Plan for Recovering Computer
Operations
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 13 – Maintenance Supervisors Did Not Ensure Work 26
Orders Were Completed Timely and that the Completion of
Work Was Properly Recorded in the Automated System
Transportation Services
* Finding 14 – MCPS Did Not Use Formal Targets for Revising Bus 27
Routes or Fully Use Its Automated Routing Software to Improve
Route Efficiency and 300 Routes Were Found with Ridership
Significantly Below Bus Ridership Goals
Finding 15 – Bus Maintenance Work Order Records Frequently Did 28
Not Reflect the Current Status of Assigned Maintenance Work,
and Discrepancies in the Maintenance Parts and Supplies
Inventory Were Not Timely Investigated and Resolved
Food Services 29
School Board Oversight 29
Other Financial Controls
* Finding 16 – MCPS Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Certain 31
Employee and Retiree Healthcare Claims Paid by Its Plan
Administrators
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 33
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Montgomery County Public Schools (MCPS)
ranks first in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2014 enrollment was 151,295 students. MCPS has
202 schools, consisting of 133 elementary, 38 middle, 25 high schools, 5
special schools, and 1 career and technology center.
According to MCPS’ audited financial statements, operating and capital
expenditures totaled $2.7 billion in fiscal year 2014. The largest expenditure
category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for 76
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2014. According to MSDE
records, during the 2013-2014 school year, MCPS had 20,882 full-time
equivalent positions, which consisted of 14,151 instructional and 6,731 non-
instructional employees.
Oversight
MCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected
members and one student member with partial voting rights. Montgomery
County government provides over 60 percent of MCPS’ funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with MCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Montgomery County government exercises authority over MCPS,
primarily through review and approval of MCPS’ annual operating and capital
budgets.
External and Internal Audits
MCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what
is referred to as a Single Audit of MCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement and Single
Audit reports for fiscal years 2013 and 2014, and examined the related work
7

--- Page 10 ---
papers for the fiscal year 2014 audits, which were the latest work papers
available when we commenced our fieldwork.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited MCPS’ financial statements and the risks and
scope of our audit in certain areas, we relied on the results of the
independent audits to reduce the scope of our audit work related to revenues,
accounts receivable, and federal grant activity. In addition, we relied on the
results of the work performed by the MCPS internal auditors related to school
activity funds.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives, our
audit included a review to determine the status of 17 of the 23 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated January 15, 2009. We
determined that MCPS satisfactorily addressed 11 of these findings. The
remaining 6 findings are repeated in this report, and appear as 8 findings.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
MCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Montgomery County,
the State, and the federal government. According to the MCPS audited
financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled $2.7 billion during
fiscal year 2014. In addition to these revenue sources, schools also collect
funds for various purposes, such as for student activities, clubs, and school
publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these student
activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and are reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. Although this revenue is raised
through student-related activities, MCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard
these funds. For fiscal year 2014, school activity fund collections totaled $34
million and the June 30, 2014 balance was $16 million.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the MCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the
results of the firm’s audit for certain revenues and accounts receivable (for
example, amounts due from other governments). The auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies regarding material revenue types or accounts receivable, the
majority of which related to electronic fund transfers from other government
entities and food service cash receipts.
Student Activity Funds Were Subject to Internal Auditor Review
MCPS' Internal Audit Unit reviews the student activity funds at each of the
schools on a recurring basis. This review consisted of evaluating and testing
internal controls over cash receipts and disbursements. The results of the
internal auditor’s review were provided to the school’s principal and other
MCPS administrative personnel including the respective associate
superintendent. Our review of the internal auditor’s work papers disclosed
the reviews were conducted in accordance with Board policies and the MCPS
Financial Manual. The Manual establishes standard procedures and
designates persons responsible for the handling of student activity funds for
each school. Furthermore, the internal auditor’s reports we reviewed did not
identify any significant improprieties or prevalent control weaknesses.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
Checks received at certain locations were not recorded nor restrictively
endorsed immediately upon receipt, and accountability over the transfer of
collections to the Controller’s Office for deposit was not established.
Analysis
Proper controls over collections initially received at various locations other
than the Controller’s office were not established. For example, checks
received at four departments were not recorded or restrictively endorsed until
the receipts arrived at the Controller's Office for posting to financial records
and deposit processing. MCPS had not required certain departments that
received checks to immediately record and restrictively endorse the checks to
establish initial accountability. Furthermore, the collections received at these
departments were handled by multiple employees before being forwarded to
the Controller's Office. Additionally, the Controller's Office did not provide
departments with any acknowledgement that their receipts had been
transferred to and accepted by the Controller’s Office for deposit.
As a result, cash receipts could be misappropriated without detection.
According to MCPS records, cash receipts totaled approximately $41 million
during fiscal year 2014. According to MCPS records, one of the four
aforementioned departments transferred collections totaling $290,000 to the
Controller’s Office during fiscal year 2014. MCPS did not maintain records to
indicate how much was collected by the remaining three departments.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MCPS
a. ensure that all collections are immediately recorded and restrictively
endorsed upon receipt by the department receiving the payment (repeat),
and
b. ensure that an independent employee performs a documented verification
that all collections recorded by the departments were subsequently
transferred to and accepted by the Controller’s Office for deposit (repeat).
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
MCPS had not sufficiently pursued collection of delinquent accounts
receivable and non-cash credits could be processed without independent
approval and adequate supporting documentation.
Analysis
MCPS did not adequately pursue collection of certain accounts receivable
(such as for nonresident tuition, facility rentals, and employee health
insurance premiums) and controls were not adequate over non-cash credits
processed by the central accounting office.
 MCPS’ debt collection procedures were not comprehensive because they
did not specify the intervals for sending late payment notices, the
conditions for deeming an account to be delinquent, and the processes for
forwarding the accounts to its collection agency and writing off
uncollectible accounts. As of July 16, 2015, outstanding accounts
receivable (from both governmental and non-governmental agencies)
totaled $45 million, including $3.5 million that was over 360 days past
due according to MCPS records.
Our test of nine outstanding accounts (applicable to non-governmental
entities) totaling $456,560 that were over 360 days past due disclosed
that MCPS had not sent any dunning notices or forwarded the unpaid
balances to its collection agency for five accounts totaling $135,187.
Dunning notices are necessary in an attempt to collect outstanding
amounts before referral to its collection agency, which charges a fee.
A similar comment was included in our preceding audit report. After the
prior audit, MCPS adopted accounts receivable regulations to address
certain debt collection issues, such as the necessity of sending late
notices and referral to a collection agency, but did not address other
aspects of an effective debt collection process.
 Three employees had the ability to process non-cash credits without
independent approval. These credits reduced accounts receivable
balances in the automated financial system without any funds being
collected. Although MCPS had established a manual review process for
non-cash credits to be approved by a supervisor, this review was based on
documentation submitted to the supervisor by these employees rather
than a system output report of all such credits processed. As a result,
improper non-cash credits could be processed in the system without
detection.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 During fiscal year 2015, non-cash credits totaled approximately $365,000
according to MCPS records. Our test of 10 non-cash credits during this
period totaling $46,683 disclosed that MCPS could not provide supporting
documentation (such as departmental requests or other correspondence)
for 5 credits totaling $22,037. As a result, we could not determine
whether these credits were proper. We were advised by an MCPS
management employee that these 5 credits were recorded to write off
uncollectible accounts, but documentation that MCPS had properly made
this determination was not provided.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that MCPS
a. develop comprehensive debt collection policies and procedures that
address progressive collections steps to be performed to pursue
outstanding accounts, including establishing predetermined intervals for
sending late payment notices and for referring delinquent accounts to a
collection agency (repeat);
b. ensure independent supervisory personnel use a system output report to
review non-cash credit adjustments and that these reviews be
documented; and
c. enhance its non-cash credit policy by including who can initiate a non-cash
credit and what documentation is to be retained to support that the non-
cash credit was justified and properly made.
Federal Funds
Background
MCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2014 expenditures of federal
award funds totaled $103.3 million.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to the work performed by the independent certified public accounting
firm that conducted the Single Audit of the MCPS federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results.
Besides expressing an opinion on MCPS compliance with the terms of several
grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure's impact on compliance and audited the required Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant-
12

--- Page 15 ---
related expenditures) for fiscal year 2014. The related report stated that
MCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements applicable to
its major federal programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance
with major federal programs, the auditor did not identify any material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
MCPS has a comprehensive procurement policy and related procedures. The
policy sets bidding requirements for goods, request for proposal requirements
for services, and specifies when Board approval is required. MCPS uses a
combination of manual and automated processes to process requisitions,
purchase orders, invoices, and payments to vendors. According to MCPS
records, total expenditures for goods and services, excluding payroll and
benefit costs, were approximately $465 million during fiscal year 2014.
MCPS also has a comprehensive credit card purchasing program and, during
fiscal year 2014, MCPS employees used credit cards to make purchases
totaling $7.3 million. Monthly invoices for credit card purchases were paid
directly by the school system. According to MCPS records, as of June 2014,
1,202 employees have been issued credit cards to facilitate purchasing.
Finding 3
A number of employees had procurement and disbursement system
capabilities assigned which allowed them to perform incompatible functions.
Analysis
MCPS did not establish adequate internal controls over its automated
financial management system to mitigate the risk of improper purchases and
payments for goods and services. Our review of system access related to
procurement and disbursement processing disclosed that 41 employees had
been assigned system capabilities that allowed them to perform incompatible
critical functions without independent review.
Specifically, 20 employees could initiate or modify, as well as approve
purchase orders, 13 employees could initiate and approve invoice payments,
and 8 employees were assigned these capabilities for both purchases and
disbursements. In addition, 17 of the 28 employees who were assigned
incompatible purchasing capabilities could also mark the items in the system
as having been received (a required condition prior to payment). Further, 9 of
13

--- Page 16 ---
the employees could process disbursements and also add or update vendors
and addresses, including one employee who also had access to the check
printing room to retrieve related checks from the printer.
Finally, MCPS did not have a process in place to generate output reports of
critical transactions to permit an independent review and approval of
transactions processed by employees with incompatible functions. As a
result, improper or erroneous transactions could be processed without
detection, although the results of our testing did not disclose any indications
of such transactions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MCPS
a. strengthen its controls over the automated financial management system
by segregating employee duties and restricting system capabilities so that
incompatible critical procurement and disbursement processes cannot be
performed by one employee acting alone; and
b. if there are instances where system capabilities cannot be adequately
restricted, develop a process to identify and report on critical transactions
processed by the aforementioned employees, for subsequent independent
review.
Finding 4
MCPS awarded a $900,000 contract without using a competitive
procurement process or justifying that decision, and for five other contracts
tested, MCPS did not assess the benefits of intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements as required by State Law.
Analysis
Our test of contracts with 12 vendors for goods and services with payments
totaling approximately $61 million in fiscal year 2014 disclosed the following
procurement issues for contracts with 6 vendors totaling approximately $33.3
million:
 MCPS awarded a three-year $900,000 contract with payments totaling
$300,000 in fiscal year 2014 to survey employees without using a
competitive procurement process or preparing a sole-source justification
even though this service (conducting surveys) is available from multiple
firms. The documentation presented to the Board for the approval of this
contract was ambiguous. Specifically, the documentation indicated this
vendor was selected through a competitive procurement process, but also
included a schedule indicating bidding was not applicable for this contract
14

--- Page 17 ---
without providing any justification. We were advised by a MCPS
management employee that this vendor was selected based on instruction
from an executive management official without any competition.
MCPS’ policy, approved by the Board, established a Procurement Manual,
which required that competition for procurements be sought to the
maximum extent feasible. The Manual also requires that purchases made
by sole source be accompanied with a sole source justification form.
 For five contracts (including computer equipment and fuel) that were
based on intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA),
with payments totaling $33.0 million in fiscal year 2014, MCPS did not
prepare a written determination of the benefits of using an ICPA, as
required by State law. This law, which specifically states it is applicable to
local education agencies, allows the use of ICPAs only after the using
entity has determined that the use of such arrangements will provide cost
benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or further other policy goals.
We were advised by a MCPS management employee that MCPS had not
prepared such written determinations for any of its ICPAs in our audit
period.1
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MCPS
a. procure vendors through a competitive procurement process unless there
is a documented justification to use the sole-source procurement method
as required by MCPS policies, and
b. comply with State law and ensure that a written determination
substantiating its use of an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement is prepared.
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement as a
contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a manner consistent with
the purposes set forth in Section 11-201 of the Article, that is available for use by the
governmental entity entering the contract and at least one additional governmental entity,
and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can result from
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Finding 5
MCPS’ monitoring of certain contracts did not ensure that the best value was
obtained or that payments did not exceed the contract amounts.
Our test of the contracts with 12 vendors disclosed there was a lack of
sufficient contract monitoring for contracts with 4 vendors with payments
totaling $21.1 million in fiscal year 2014. Specifically, MCPS did not ensure
payment arrangements provided for services to be obtained at the best value
and that payments did not exceed the approved contract amount.
 MCPS had not determined the most cost-effective payment arrangement
for certain legal services with payments totaling $226,000 in fiscal year
2014. MCPS’ contract with a legal firm to represent it at hearings
involving special needs students and other services included two
permissible payment scenarios: one was an all-inclusive per diem billing
rate (referred to as a daily hearing rate) and the other a per employee
hourly time charge for legal and paralegal services, plus expenses. The
invoices submitted by the firm to MCPS frequently only included a daily
hearing rate ($6,300 per day), and MCPS was unaware of the number of
hours provided for each case. This precluded MCPS from evaluating
whether the daily hearing rate payment arrangement provided for related
services to be obtained at the best value.
According to MCPS management, the daily hearing rate included the law
firm's time to prepare for hearings and represented a better value than if
the vendor had billed for all hours and expenses incurred on the cases.
However, because the firm's invoices did not specify the hours expended
per case, MCPS had no way of determining if the $6,300 daily rate was a
better value than hourly charges for all services rendered, which according
to the contract ranged from $185 and $245 per hour for lawyer’s services
plus additional hourly costs for paralegal and associated administrative
expenses.
 Payments for three contracts (including dairy products and computer
equipment) were not adequately monitored. As a result, during fiscal year
2014, MCPS paid the vendors approximately $1.3 million more than the
contract amounts approved by the Board. For example, MCPS paid one
vendor approximately $1 million more than the $10,376,130 contract
amount for computer hardware and services for fiscal year 2014 without
seeking or obtaining Board approval.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MCPS
a. evaluate vendor payment arrangements to ensure services are obtained
at the best value;
b. monitor contract costs to ensure total payments do not exceed the
contract values, and seek Board approval to modify the contract when
costs are expected to exceed the agreement amounts; and
c. seek retroactive Board approval for the aforementioned contracts.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll costs represent the largest single cost component in the MCPS budget.
According to MCPS records for fiscal year 2014, salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $2.2 billion. According to Maryland State Department of
Education reports, during the 2013 – 2014 school year, MCPS had 20,882
full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 14,151 instructional and
6,731 non-instructional positions.
MCPS uses an automated integrated human resources and payroll system to
maintain human resources information, record employee time, and track
leave usage. Manual time records, including leave taken, are entered onto
the system every two weeks by MCPS payroll clerks. Leave accumulation is
automatically calculated by the system, which is also used to process and
record all payroll transactions. Payroll checks and direct deposit advices are
produced using a separate automated system.
Finding 6
Independent reviews did not provide sufficient assurance that certain critical
personnel transactions, such as changes to employee information and salary,
were proper.
Analysis
Independent reviews of certain personnel changes processed did not provide
sufficient assurance that all personnel changes, such as changes to salaries
and employee information, were authorized and supported. An MCPS
management employee’s quarterly review of a system output report of
processed personnel changes, did not include a review to determine the
propriety of those changes. Rather, the review’s purpose was to ensure that
changes were only made by designated employees. As a result, improper or
17

--- Page 20 ---
erroneous changes in the system could be processed without detection,
although the results of our testing did not disclose any indications of such
changes. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that MCPS verify, at least on a test basis, the propriety of
personnel changes recorded in the automated system (repeat).
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to the MCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2014, the
undepreciated value of its capital equipment (including furniture and fixtures)
was $165 million. Equipment items with a cost of $5,000 or more are
capitalized and depreciated for financial statement reporting purposes.
MCPS uses a centralized fixed asset inventory system to track capital and
sensitive equipment, including furniture, computers, audio and video items,
and various other items, and conducts periodic physical inventories. Sensitive
equipment is defined as non-capital equipment with a unit cost between $500
and $5,000 and a useful life greater than one year, which is transportable,
easily concealable, or prone to theft. Certain individuals were responsible for
the equipment at each location (that is, each school or administrative office).
Controls Over Equipment Inventories Were Established
MCPS has implemented procedures and controls to provide accountability
over equipment inventories. MCPS has developed written policies and
procedures that establish guidance and define responsibilities to facilitate
effective controls over equipment inventories. These policies and procedures
include requirements for periodic physical inventories, recordation of
equipment, and disposition of equipment items. Our review of the procedures
and controls and tests of the equipment records did not disclose any
reportable conditions.
Information Technology
Background
The MCPS Office of the Chief Technology Officer maintains and administers
the MCPS’ computer network, computer operations, and certain information
system applications. MCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet
18

--- Page 21 ---
connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the
computer resources located at the MCPS data center. The MCPS network
included two redundant core network firewalls to protect the MCPS network.
MCPS also operates several significant administrative and academic-related
applications including the finance application and the student information
application. The finance application includes modules for budgeting,
accounts payable, fixed assets, and purchasing.
Finding 7
The MCPS core network firewalls were not configured to properly secure the
MCPS network, allowing overly broad network level access with insufficient
security event logging and monitoring.
Analysis
The MCPS core network firewalls were not configured to properly secure the
MCPS network.
 The firewall rules on the two core firewalls allowed overly broad network
level access from all locations (including the Internet) to all devices on the
MCPS network, thereby placing these network devices at risk. Also, over
200 additional firewall rules allowed certain source locations access to
any destination on the MCPS network.
 Security event logging and monitoring of core firewall events was not
sufficient. For example, the two core firewalls were not configured to send
automatic email alerts to administrators concerning high severity firewall
operational events and we were advised that regular reviews of the
firewalls’ logs were not performed.
 Administrative connections to these two core firewalls were not restricted
to originate from only authorized source addresses. In addition, an
insecure connection protocol, which transmitted information including
logon credentials in clear text, was enabled on these firewalls for
administration purposes.
Best practice guidance from the State of Maryland Information Security Policy
states that agencies should configure security settings of information
technology products to the most restrictive mode consistent with operational
requirements.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that MCPS
a. configure its firewalls to achieve a “least privilege” security strategy giving
individuals and devices only the access needed to perform necessary
tasks;
b. configure its core firewalls to send email alerts to responsible
administrators regarding critical firewall security events;
c. regularly review its core firewalls’ logs and investigate unusual or
suspicious items, with such reviews and investigations being documented
and retained for future reference; and
d. restrict administrative access to the core firewalls to only authorized
source addresses and only use secure protocols for administrative
connections to these firewalls.
Finding 8
The MCPS network was not sufficiently secured to assist in the
detection/prevention of potential network security breaches and attacks, and
restrict access to critical servers.
Analysis
The MCPS network was not sufficiently secured.
 The MCPS network was not subject to Intrusion Detection Prevention
System (IDPS) coverage. Specifically, we determined that MCPS had not
implemented either network or host based IDPS coverage for its network
devices. A properly configured IDPS can aid significantly in the
detection/prevention of and response to potential network security
breaches and attacks. Best practices identified in the State of Maryland
Information Security Policy require that networks be protected against
malicious code and attacks by implementing protections including the use
of IDPS to monitor system events, detect attacks, and identify
unauthorized use of information systems and/or confidential information.
 Thirty critical non-public servers were improperly placed in a network
segment that contained publicly accessible servers. In addition, 13
servers hosting email that should not be publicly accessible were publicly
accessible, thereby unnecessarily exposing these servers to additional
risk.
 Traffic from 86 third-party business partners (such as contractors that
remotely support certain systems and applications) to the MCPS network
20

--- Page 23 ---
via a virtual private network connection was not adequately restricted. We
noted that these third parties, via this connection, had network level
access to the entire MCPS network. Best practices, as prescribed by the
aforementioned Information Security Policy, state that information
systems shall be configured to monitor and control communications at the
external boundaries of the information systems.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that MCPS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS coverage should be best applied to its network
and implement this coverage,
b. relocate the aforementioned non-public servers to the internal network
and eliminate public access to the email servers, and
c. restrict network level access for each third-party business partner to only
those devices that the business partner needs to access.
Finding 9
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware, as
administrative access was not properly restricted and systems were running
outdated or unsupported system software.
Analysis
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
 Five of nine workstations tested were improperly configured with users
having administrator rights. Administrator rights are the highest
permission level that can be granted to users and it allows users to install
software and change configuration settings. As a result, if these
workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run with
administrator rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk of
compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only
user rights. In addition, because of the administrator rights assigned,
users on these five workstations had the ability to disable the malware
protection software on their workstations.
 All 12 computers tested (including 3 servers) were running outdated
operating system software and the 9 workstations tested had not been
updated with the latest releases for software products that are known to
have significant security-related vulnerabilities, even though the software
vendors frequently provide software patches to address these
vulnerabilities. When we conducted our test, the 12 computers’ operating
21

--- Page 24 ---
systems had not been updated for periods ranging from 10 months to over
3 years. Also, our test of 9 workstations for vendor patches related to
three software products, disclosed that all of these devices were running
older versions of these software products that had not been updated for
periods ranging from 10 months to over 4 years. In this regard, MCPS did
not have a regularly scheduled, automated update process to ensure
computers were protected against known threats on an ongoing basis. A
similar condition related to system software not being kept updated was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Although MCPS used an enterprise wide management tool to administer
the anti-malware software on its workstations and servers, at the time of
our audit test, this tool had not been supported by the vendor for over
three years. Because of this condition, the installed management tool
could not connect to and manage over 13,000 of its workstations.
Therefore, MCPS lacked assurance that these 13,000 workstations had a
fully operational and up-to-date anti-malware software installed.
Best practices as prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Security
Policy state that agencies, at a minimum, must “protect against malicious
code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by implementing (anti-virus, anti-
malware) solutions that, to the extent possible, include a capability for
automatic updates.”
Recommendation 9
We recommend that MCPS
a. ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to network
administrators and other users requiring such rights;
b. promptly install all critical security-related software updates (including
those for operating systems) on workstations and servers (repeat); and
c. ensure that the management tool used to administer the anti-malware
software on its workstations and servers is being supported by the vendor,
and use this tool to regularly confirm that all workstations and servers are
configured with anti-malware software that is operating properly and up-to-
date.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 10
Network, application, and database account and password controls were not
sufficient to properly protect critical resources, as they did not meet minimum
thresholds in accordance with recognized best practices.
Analysis
Network, application, and database account and password controls were not
sufficient to properly protect critical resources. The account and password
controls over network authentication and the student information and
financial management system applications and databases did not meet
certain minimum thresholds, as identified in best practices prescribed by the
State of Maryland Information Security Policy. For example, network
authentication password controls were deficient with respect to password
length, complexity, maximum age, and history. A similar condition related to
network authentication and application password controls was commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that MCPS establish appropriate network, application, and
database account and password controls (repeat).
Finding 11
Controls over the critical student information and financial management
system databases were not sufficient as security activity was not logged, and
various software in use was no longer supported by the respective developers.
Analysis
Controls over the critical student information and financial management
system databases were not sufficient.
 Both databases were not configured to log any database security activity
including privileged operations.
 The student information system database software and the operating
system software on the server hosting this database were susceptible to
known vulnerabilities because both the database and operating system
software versions used were no longer supported by the respective
developers. For example, the installed version of the student information
system database software had not been supported by its developer since
January 2012. We identified 12 vulnerabilities that existed on the
installed version of this database software that were addressed in later
versions of this software.
23

--- Page 26 ---
A similar condition related to insufficient logging and review of system
security-related activity was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Best practices as prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Security
Policy require that information systems generate audit records for all security-
relevant events, including all security and system administrator accesses and
that system hardening procedures shall be created and maintained to ensure
up-to-date security best practices are deployed at all levels of IT systems
(operating systems, applications, databases, and network devices).
Recommendation 11
We recommend that MCPS
a. set the student information and the financial management system
databases to log all critical security related events, regularly review these
logs, document these reviews and retain this documentation for future
reference (repeat); and
b. ensure that all production database and operating system software is
supported by the respective developers.
Finding 12
MCPS did not have a complete information technology Disaster Recovery Plan
for recovering computer operations.
Analysis
MCPS did not have a complete information technology Disaster Recovery Plan
(DRP) for recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for
example, a fire or flood). The State of Maryland Information Technology (IT)
Disaster Recovery Guidelines provide best practices on the minimum required
elements needed for a DRP. MCPS’ DRP did not address several of these
minimum requirements. For example, the DRP did not contain complete
listings of software components, technical considerations for restoring
network connectivity, or critical vendor contact information. In addition,
documentation did not exist to evidence that the DRP had been tested since
May 2011. Without a complete and tested DRP, a disaster could cause
significant delays (for an undetermined period) in restoring information
systems operations beyond the expected delays that would exist in a planned
recovery scenario.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 12
We recommend that MCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive disaster DRP that is in
accordance with the aforementioned IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines; and
b. periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the
documentation for future reference.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
MCPS maintains 202 schools and a number of other facilities (such as
administrative and support offices) with a staff of approximately 1,370
custodial and 360 maintenance personnel. According to the Capital
Improvement Plan (CIP) prepared in fiscal year 2015, planned construction,
major renovations, and systemic improvements to MCPS facilities over fiscal
years 2015 through 2020 are estimated to cost $1.7 billion.
MCPS Contracts and Expenditures for Capital Projects Were Proper
Our review of five construction-related procurements totaling $277.6 million
disclosed that MCPS had used appropriate processes to procure all five
contracts, including obtaining Board approval. In addition, our test of invoices
totaling $16.0 million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were
properly reviewed and approved and the amounts invoiced were in
accordance with the related contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
MCPS has developed a comprehensive energy management program and has
established goals, strategies, and processes to minimize energy costs. For
example, MCPS utilizes an energy management system to monitor energy
usage and can remotely control heating, air conditioning, and other
environmental factors from the central office location. In addition, MCPS has
installed certain higher efficiency replacement equipment (such as heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning) at a number of schools and has obtained
available energy rebates.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 13
Maintenance supervisors did not ensure work orders were completed timely
and that the completion of work was properly recorded in the automated
system.
Analysis
Maintenance supervisors did not ensure that maintenance work orders were
completed timely and recorded as complete in the automated system.
Consequently, the system was not accurately maintained which precluded
effective overall monitoring of the progress of assigned tasks. According to a
system report as of June 17, 2015, there were 12,725 open work orders,
including 4,073 work orders that remained open from 0.5 to 8.5 years. MCPS
prioritizes the work orders in its system. Of the older 4,073 work orders, 15
were identified as “Emergency” (requiring a same day response), 90 were
“Urgent” (a 2 day response), 3965 were “Routine” (a 15 day response), and 3
were listed as “None” priority.
Our review of the detailed maintenance records in the system for 10 of these
open work orders (2 were “Emergency” and 8 were “Routine”) disclosed that
9 of the work orders were closed in the system after we brought this matter to
MCPS' attention in July 2015. We were advised by a maintenance
management employee that the work for these 9 work orders had been
completed previously, but supervisors had not addressed these items during
their monthly review of the status of open work orders. The remaining work
order had been open for 7 months and had still not been completed as of our
review.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that MCPS ensure maintenance supervisors periodically
perform effective reviews of system reports to ensure open work orders are
completed timely and recorded as complete in the system.
Transportation Services
Background
MCPS has approximately 98,000 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported using 1,120 school
system-owned buses. According to the audited financial statements, fiscal
year 2014 transportation costs totaled $101 million. Of the 19 million
reported route miles for the 2013-2014 school year, 47 percent represented
miles traveled to transport disabled students.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 14
MCPS did not use formal targets for revising bus routes or fully use its
automated routing software to improve route efficiency. We found 300 routes
with ridership significantly below bus ridership goals.
Analysis
MCPS did not use formal targets and goals to guide the decisions made
during the process of reviewing and revising bus routes nor did it fully use its
automated bus routing software to promote efficiency. Specifically, MCPS had
developed bus ridership goals, but had not developed comprehensive policies
that defined the relevant factors for MCPS to consider when determining the
most appropriate bus routes, such as number of potential or expected rides
and student ride times. Rather, MCPS used existing bus routes and made
manual modifications to accommodate students’ school assignment, based
on the experience and knowledge of its transportation staff, without
periodically reviewing all routes for efficiency on a system-wide basis.
The lack of system-wide route analysis could affect route efficiency. For
example, our review of all 1,900 regular MCPS bus routes using fiscal year
2015 bus manifests (documents that record student ridership) disclosed that
approximately 300 routes were below 50 percent of MCPS’ bus capacity.2
Fully using routing software capabilities is a recognized best practice that can
reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes, help ensure that routes
utilize existing bus capacity, and minimize the number of buses needed to
transport students. The MCPS transportation staff’s use of routing software
was limited to displaying current bus routes as an aid to manually developing
new routes and changing existing routes. A similar condition was noted in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that MCPS
a. develop formal and comprehensive policies and procedures for its bus
routes that include guidance regarding bus ridership goals and any other
factors in order to assist in developing bus routes (repeat); and
b. use automated routing software to help ensure the efficient utilization of
buses (repeat).
2 MCPS’ formal school bus capacity was 57 students for transit style buses and from 36 to
48 students for conventional buses, which agreed to manufacturer specifications. The
capacity for special education buses varied based on the riders’ needs.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Finding 15
Bus maintenance work order records frequently did not reflect the current
status of assigned maintenance work, and discrepancies in the maintenance
parts and supplies inventory were not timely investigated and resolved.
Analysis
Bus maintenance work order records were not accurate. Also, sufficient
controls and accountability had not been established over the bus
maintenance parts and supplies inventory.
The automated bus maintenance system was not always updated upon
completion of maintenance work orders for bus repairs. According to a
system report of open work orders for bus repairs as of March 4, 2015, there
were 933 open work orders, including 303 work orders that remained in the
open status from at least 1 month to 2 years. However, our review of the
detailed maintenance records in the system for 10 of these work orders
disclosed that all 10 buses had been repaired and were back in service. As a
result, MCPS work order reports in the system were not accurate and could
not be used to reliably track the status of bus maintenance work.
Discrepancies identified during annual physical inventories were not properly
investigated and resolved. As of April 2015, MCPS’ bus maintenance parts
and supplies inventory consisted of approximately 25,000 different items
costing $1.7 million. Specifically, physical inventories of bus maintenance
parts and supplies from April 2014 and April 2015 collectively identified
shortages totaling $92,000 and overages totaling $49,500. Our review of 6
shortages (3 shortages from each physical inventory) of bus parts and
supplies from these inventories totaling $14,000 (such as for transmission
fluid and brake parts) disclosed that the cause of the discrepancies was not
investigated and resolved as of June 2015.
Inventory items were not properly safeguarded as mechanics working the
overnight shift had unrestricted access to the inventory items. Although these
mechanics were expected to document any items withdrawn from inventory to
perform maintenance work, there was no independent verification to ensure
that all items withdrawn were appropriate based on the completed work
orders and subsequently recorded in the automated system. As a result,
inventory items could be misappropriated without immediate detection.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that MCPS
a. update maintenance records in the automated system to record the
completion of work orders,
28

--- Page 31 ---
b. timely investigate and determine the cause of discrepancies identified
during annual physical inventories and take appropriate corrective action,
and
c. ensure an independent employee verifies that inventory items withdrawn
by overnight mechanics were appropriate and recorded in the automated
system.
Food Services
Background
MCPS has one central location that prepares all meals for its 202 schools. In
fiscal year 2014, MCPS had 583 food service employees (comprised of 570
cafeteria positions and 13 administrative positions). According to the fiscal
year 2014 audited financial statements, food service expenditures ($52.9
million) exceeded food service revenues ($52.6 million) by $326,679. While
for some recent years, MCPS operations resulted in deficits, these deficits
were not persistent and were offset by surpluses in other years. MCPS’ fiscal
year 2014 cost per meal was the second highest among the five largest
Maryland public school systems, which was primarily due to MCPS’ higher
employee salary and benefit costs.
Cash Handling Procedures for Cafeteria Sales Were Established
MCPS has implemented procedures and controls designed to ensure that
cafeteria receipts were properly accounted for, processed, and deposited.
MCPS has developed a Cash Handling Policies and Procedures Manual to
establish a uniform policy for the handling of all cafeteria sales. The Manual
outlines responsibilities including, collection, reporting, and deposit practices.
Periodically, staff from the Division of Food and Nutrition Services conducts
unannounced audits to test for compliance by cafeteria staff with the
procedures.
School Board Oversight
Background
MCPS’ Board of Education consists of seven elected members and one
student member with partial voting rights. In its oversight responsibilities, the
Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent
audits of the MCPS financial statements and federal programs. The Board
has established special committees to study and report on various matters,
including an active, standing fiscal management/audit committee consisting
of three Board members. Also, MCPS has an Internal Audit Unit that reports
29

--- Page 32 ---
organizationally to the Superintendent but reports audit results and submits
its annual audit plan to the Board. Effective July 2016, MCPS’ Internal Audit
Unit will report organizationally to the Board.
MCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law,
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure, and was
approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of this policy are
applicable to Board members as well as all MCPS employees. MCPS
established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members who are appointed by
the Board of Education. The Panel acts as an advisory body to the Board,
interprets the ethics code, and provides advisory opinions. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendents, and
a number of other administrators (such as school principals and department
heads) by April 30th of each year. Our test of the records for employees
required to submit financial disclosure forms for calendar year 2014,
disclosed that forms were submitted as required.
MCPS Has an Operational Fraud Hotline
In 2010, MCPS implemented a confidential fraud hotline to enable employees
to confidentially report operational concerns and suspected fraud, waste, and
mismanagement. The hotline is maintained by an independent third party
that notifies the MCPS Internal Audit Unit of the allegations. The Internal Audit
Unit reviews the allegations and identifies the appropriate means for
investigation.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
MCPS participates in a cooperative purchasing agreement with other regional
agencies to obtain employee and retiree health insurance. MCPS’ healthcare
expenditures, including claims expense, insurance premiums, and plan
administrative fees, totaled approximately $369 million during fiscal year
2014.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Finding 16
MCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain employee and retiree healthcare
claims paid by its plan administrators.
Analysis
MCPS did not verify the propriety of claims and benefits paid by program
administrators. Rather, MCPS relied on the plan administrators’ claims
adjudication process to control healthcare costs. However, the adjudication
process only reviews eligibility and pricing for claims submitted and does not
ensure the services were actually provided. According to the audited financial
statements, health care claims payments totaled $295 million during fiscal
year 2014. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
An MCPS management employee advised us that a contractor was hired to
audit pharmaceutical claims in 2008. Since this audit did not identify any
financial recoveries, MCPS determined it was not cost beneficial to hire a
contractor to audit health insurance claims. Pharmaceutical claims account
for only a portion of the total health insurance claims. For example, according
to MCPS records, pharmaceutical claims accounted for 29 percent of total
claim payments during fiscal year 2014. The State Office of Personnel
Services and Benefits, which administers self-insured health plans for State
employees, contracts for comprehensive reviews of claims paid by plan
administrators. According to the Office, improper payments from these
reviews have consistently exceeded the cost of the reviews.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that MCPS enhance its procedures to verify healthcare costs
by ensuring the propriety of paid claims (repeat).
31

--- Page 34 ---
32

--- Page 35 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Montgomery County
Public Schools (MCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the MCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the MCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of MCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on MCPS dated January 15, 2009, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the MCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by MCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at MCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
33

--- Page 36 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).3
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of MCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2013 through December 31,
2014. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits MCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data — including financial and operational —
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from MCPS’ automated finance management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure, inventory, and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
MCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to MCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from November 2014 to July 2015. The MCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
3 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
34

--- Page 37 ---
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
35

--- Page 39 ---
Montgomery County Public Schools Response to
Office of Legislative Audits Draft Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Finding 1
Checks received at certain locations were not recorded nor restrictively endorsed immediately upon
receipt, and accountability over the transfer of collections to the Controller’s Office for deposit was
not established.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Ensure that all collections are immediately recorded and restrictively endorsed upon receipt
by the department receiving the payment (repeat), and
b. Ensure that an independent employee performs a documented verification that all recorded
collections were subsequently transferred to and accepted by the Controller’s Office
for deposit (repeat).
Response
Montgomery County Public Schools (MCPS) agrees with this finding. In light of this finding,
MCPS will review with all departments their procedures and processes to improve compliance.
MCPS notes that it has already established procedures that require departments to immediately
endorse and deposit receipts as well as monitor deposits recorded in our financial system.
None of the many audits of MCPS by federal, state, and county agencies, including this audit, have
identified misappropriation of cash receipts. Cash receipts by MCPS are a very small component
of the MCPS budget, averaging $4,636 per month during the current fiscal year.
In addition, MCPS departments have been provided with stamps to restrictively endorse checks
upon receipt and Division of Controller (DOC) staff will remind offices of this requirement.
Instructions on the deposit slip reinforce the requirement. Additionally, efforts will continue
to move payments from cash and check to online payments to reduce the handling of cash receipts
and risk of loss.
MCPS utilizes a remote check deposit scanner in the DOC, which provides additional security,
eliminating the need to transport checks to the bank. Where cost effective, MCPS will explore
additional remote check deposit scanners.
Receipts are recorded in the Financial Management System (FMS) and departments can verify
independently that their receipts have been recorded. MCPS will reinforce the requirement
to departments that an independent employee verify that recorded collections are deposited.
1

--- Page 40 ---
Finding 2
MCPS had not sufficiently pursued collection of delinquent accounts receivable, and non-cash
credits could be processed without independent approval and adequate supporting documentation.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Develop comprehensive debt collection policies and procedures that address progressive
collections steps to be performed to pursue outstanding accounts, including establishing
predetermined intervals for sending late payment notices and for referring delinquent
accounts to a collection agency (repeat);
b. Ensure independent supervisory personnel use a system output report to review non-cash
credit adjustments and that these reviews be documented (repeat); and
c. Enhance its non-cash credit policy by including who can initiate a non-cash credit and what
documentation is to be retained to support that the non-cash credit was justified
and properly made.
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. After the prior OLA audit, MCPS strengthened controls, and we
will continue to work to improve processes in the account receivable and collection activity.
MCPS does require that all receivables are created either as a result of an interface (e.g., retiree
benefit billings) or an authorization from the originating office or department (e.g., overused leave
after termination). Credits and adjustments require authorization from the originating office
or department.
As part of our process improvements, the assistant controller will sample and review non-cash
credit adjustments using system reports to ensure that adjustments have been properly authorized
and documented. The monthly closing procedures will be updated to include the review of system
output reports by the assistant controller and account receivable supervisor.
In addition, MCPS will review collection activity including adjustment limits and authority,
determination of predetermined intervals for late payment notices and delinquent account
collection referrals, and establish timelines that can be met by existing staff resources.
MCPS also will enhance its non-cash credit policy by including who can initiate a non-cash credit
and define documentation requirements.
Finding 3
A number of employees had procurement and disbursement system capabilities assigned which
allowed them to perform incompatible functions.
2

--- Page 41 ---
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Strengthen its controls over the automated FMS by segregating employee duties and
restricting system capabilities so that incompatible critical procurement and disbursement
processes cannot be performed by one employee acting alone; and
b. If there are instances where system capabilities cannot be adequately restricted, develop
a process to identify and report on critical transactions processed by the aforementioned
employees for subsequent independent review.
Response
MCPS does not agree with this finding. MCPS has instituted additional controls to offset potential
improper or erroneous transactions. Procurement Unit staff cannot create and commit a requisition
without account owner approval. This prevents unauthorized transactions. Procurement staff
are required to obtain account owner approval for price changes and to attach appropriate
authorizing documentation.
MCPS agrees that an individual should not have access both to check printing and checks
and the ability to authorize payments and will reassign duties to provide this separation.
Auditor’s Comment:
During the audit, we provided MCPS management with the list of 20 employees who could
initiate or modify, as well as approve purchase orders without account owner approval of a
requisition. We also provided MCPS management with documentation of a demonstration,
which confirmed that a procurement user was capable of processing a purchase order on
its financial system without a requisition and without notification to the account owner.
Finding 4
MCPS awarded a $900,000 contract without using a competitive procurement process or justifying
that decision, and for five other contracts tested, MCPS did not assess the benefits
of intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements as required by State Law.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Procure vendors through a competitive procurement process unless there is a documented
justification to use the sole-source procurement method as required by MCPS policies; and
b. Comply with State law and ensure that a written determination substantiating its use
of an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement is prepared.
Response
While MCPS does not agree with this finding and believes its procurement processes are consistent
with state law, it will review the recommendations regarding general procurement practices
and will consider ways the current processes and activities could be improved. With respect
3

--- Page 42 ---
to intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements, MCPS notes, based on advice from
its general counsel, that, in general, as the Office of Legislative Audits acknowledges, county
boards of education are not units of state government for purposes of the State Finance
and Procurement Article and, thus, are not subject to the state’s general procurement
laws for the purchase of goods and services that apply to state agencies. The Maryland Court
of Appeals adopted this holding in Chesapeake Charter, Inc. v. Anne Arundel County Board of
Education, 358 Md. 129 (2000), and reaffirmed it in Beck Industries v. Worcester County Board
of Education, 419 Md. 194 (2011), and again in Building Materials Corp. of America v. Board of
Education of Baltimore County, 428 Md. 572 (2012). Notably, in Building Materials Corp.,
the Court of Appeals upheld a county board of education’s right to purchase roofing services
for school buildings through a group purchasing consortium. The Court of Appeals focused
its analysis on Section 5-112(a)(3) of the Education Article, which permits “a county board’s
participation in contracts for goods or commodities that are awarded by other public agencies
or by intergovernmental purchasing organizations if the lead agency for the contract follows public
bidding procedures.”
Through Montgomery County Board of Education Policy DJA, MCPS Procurement Practices
and Bid Awards, compliance with the due diligence requirement of Section 5-112 is the
responsibility of the procurement staff of MCPS. Staff takes steps to ensure that the lead agency
follows public bidding procedures prior to “bridging” a contract awarded by another public
agency or participating in a cooperative purchasing agreement. In addition, staff otherwise ensure
compliance with the procedures set forth in the MCPS Procurement Manual and MCPS Regulation
DJA-RA, Procurement of Equipment, Supplies, and Services.
In our view, when read in conjunction with Section 5-112 of the Education Article,
Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article does not impose additional
requirements beyond those MCPS staff already follow. In Building Materials Corp., the Court of
Appeals noted that the General Assembly enacted legislation in 2009 that extends Section 13-110
of the State Finance and Procurement Law to encourage and authorize participation by county
boards of education in cooperative purchasing agreements. Id. at 584 n.13 and 588 n.21.
But the Court of Appeals’ primary focus was assuring compliance with Section 5-112 of the
Education Article, which expressly permits such procurements.
In any event, the due diligence that MCPS staff apply to meet the standard set forth
in Section 5-112 of the Education Article, as well as the procedures set forth in the MCPS
Procurement Manual, fully satisfy the requirement in Section 13-110(e) of the State Finance and
Procurement Article—to the extent that it is applicable at all—that a local entity must demonstrate
that participating in an existing contract by another government agency will:
(1) provide a cost savings in purchase price or administrative burden; or
(2) further other policy goals including operational and energy-efficiency goals related
to the purchase, operation, or maintenance of the supply or service.
The MCPS Procurement Manual, expressly incorporates such policy goals into the objectives it
sets forth for its procurement procedures. These objectives are well-aligned with Section 13-110(e)
of the State Finance and Procurement Article, to the extent it is applicable. For the foregoing
4

--- Page 43 ---
reasons, it is my view that MCPS’ practice of “bridging” contracts of other government agencies
and participation in cooperative purchasing agreements complies with applicable state law.
With respect to the finding regarding sole-sourcing, MCPS agrees that prudent due diligence
is critical to the responsibility to spend taxpayer funds wisely and has implemented procurement
practices to ensure high-quality goods and services purchased in a timely manner at a reasonable
cost. The OLA auditors claim that documentation presented to the Board of Education for the two
contracts identified by the auditors as, “lacked critical details about the procurement process
and contract terms.” Yet, as shared with members of the Board, the contract for Employment
Engagement Consulting was a unique service contract to assess school and staff climate
and engagement. The organization, Gallup, has a national reputation and unique product for work
of this nature. Members of the Board of Education were presented the contract for approval
as an action item and provided the opportunity to question the specifics of the contract.
MCPS does agree that there was a misstatement in the Board memorandum stating that there
was a competitive process.
Auditor’s Comment:
The audit finding does not question the legality of MCPS’ use of Intergovernmental
Cooperative Purchasing Agreements (ICPA); rather, the finding cites the necessity of
complying with Section 13-110(e) of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. MCPS’ response appears to question the applicability of the
law even though OLA obtained advice from the Office of the Attorney General confirming
that MCPS is subject to those requirements when using an ICPA. Although MCPS indicates
that its staff perform certain due diligence procedures for ICPA’s it used, we were advised
during the audit by MCPS that there was no documentation to support that MCPS had
determined for any ICPA’s used during the audit period that the use of such arrangements
would provide a cost savings in purchase price or administrative burden; or further other
policy goals, as required by law. Further, MCPS’ Procurement Manual does not contain
requirements pertaining to the aforementioned section of law.
Finding 5
MCPS’ monitoring of certain contracts did not ensure that the best value was obtained or that
payments did not exceed the contract amounts.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS
a. Evaluate vendor payment arrangements to ensure services are obtained at the best value;
b. Monitor contract costs to ensure total payments do not exceed the contract values and seek
Board approval to modify the contract when costs are expected to exceed the agreement
amounts; and
c. Seek retroactive Board approval for the aforementioned contracts.
5

--- Page 44 ---
Response
MCPS does not agree with this finding, but agrees to review the recommendations regarding
general procurement and monitoring practices and will consider ways the current processes
and activities could be improved.
MCPS notes, however, that, as previously explained in greater detail to the Office of Legislative
Audits, MCPS program and procurement staff currently conduct detailed reviews of all contracts
and present summary recommendations to the Board. For special education legal services,
monthly billing records are carefully reviewed by the MCPS Office of the General Counsel
and program staff in our Office of Special Education and Student Services. Additionally, monthly
expenditures, including legal, are reported to the Board. With one of those vendors
who has consistently provided high-quality legal services to the Board over many decades,
MCPS has negotiated a flat fee based on the number of days of hearings before an administrative
law judge required for a due process complaint. That flat fee encompasses not just the time required
for participating in the hearing for that day, but also all of the lengthy preparation and filings
leading up to and following the hearing, including compliance with the requirements of special
education law, legal research, reviewing educational records and other documents, preparing
the required disclosure documents, preparing and filing of motions and responsive letters
to counsel for the opposing party, reviewing and responding to discovery requests, scheduling
conferences, preparing for and participating in any settlement discussions or resolution sessions,
meeting with witnesses, and preparing for hearings including meeting with witnesses and other
MCPS staff. Such flat fees are utilized by other entities as a means to control costs, and MCPS
has found that it receives good value at a rate that is comparable, if not better, than it would receive
if this vendor were to charge hourly rates, based on staff’s first-hand knowledge of the matters
and the firm’s work, as well as the extensive amount of time that the firm expends on the district’s
behalf. Based on ongoing staff review, it is MCPS’s judgment that the flat rate provides good
value for the firm’s high-quality legal services and strong record of success in special education
matters.
Auditor’s Comment:
MCPS disagrees with the finding and claimed that it receives good value using the all-
inclusive per diem billing rate, and that the cost is comparable, if not better, than the cost
from the same vendor under the hourly rate structure. As commented upon in the finding,
MCPS had not obtained appropriate documentation necessary to support that assertion.
Finding 6
Independent reviews did not provide sufficient assurance that certain critical personnel
transactions, such as changes to employee information and salary, were proper.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS verify, at least on a test basis, the propriety of personnel changes
recorded in the automated system (repeat).
6

--- Page 45 ---
Response
MCPS does not agree with this finding. In the 2009 report, when this finding was identified,
MCPS implemented a mitigating control to address the limitations of the human resources system.
Each quarter, the chief financial officer reviews the types of transactions by user for all employees
who can modify employee information and confirms that only those employees who have
a specific responsibility have entered that type of transaction. For example, only members
of the salary and administration team enter salary changes. Therefore, any improper transaction
would be detected.
MCPS does segregate the ability to add new employees from the ability to change employee
salaries and benefits. New employees must be added through the online applicant tracking system
and then authorized as hired by the Office of Human Resources and Development (OHRD).
Changes to employee hours also are initiated by OHRD. The Employee and Retiree Service Center
updates employee information such as salaries and benefits. One person cannot perform both
functions without detection.
This recommendation suggests a level of double review that would be costly and inefficient, given
other controls in place. Salaries and wage expenditures are monitored by account managers
and unusual or unexpected changes would be detected through the financial monitoring processes
in place. In addition, every employee whose record is changed receive a Personnel Action Notice
(PAN) so the employee is notified of a change to his/her records.
Auditor’s Comment:
MCPS indicated that it believes the quarterly review of personnel transactions is sufficient.
When this issue was discussed with MCPS, we advised that this review would not detect
improper transactions by certain employees responsible for updating salaries and benefits.
In addition, the processes described by MCPS to compensate for this control weakness
would not, in our opinion, provide sufficient assurance of detecting improper personnel
transactions.
Finding 7
The MCPS core network firewalls were not configured to properly secure the MCPS network,
allowing overly broad network level access with insufficient security event logging
and monitoring.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Configures its firewalls to achieve a “least privilege” security statement giving individuals
and devices only the access needed to perform necessary tasks;
b. Configure its core firewalls to send e-mail alerts to responsible administrators regarding
critical firewall security events;
c. Regularly review its core firewalls’ logs and investigate unusual or suspicious items, with
such reviews and investigations being documented and retained for future reference; and
7

--- Page 46 ---
d. Restrict administrative access to the core firewalls to only authorized source addresses
and only use secure protocols for administrative connections to these firewalls.
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. Firewall rules have been updated and optimized to include only
current configurations to ensure devices and users are only reaching the needed devices(s)
or subnet(s).
Extended access-list object groups have been created in lieu of the previous “any any” method
of allowing access to large numbers of devices and/or clients. Firewall logs are now collected,
sorted, and organized by a new Log Event Manager (LEM) product with alerting and e-mail
capabilities. These logs are monitored on a daily and sometimes hourly basis.
Reviews/investigations of these logs are saved to the LEM. The LEM reports are the subject of
meetings with stakeholders to review any necessary changes. Administrative access
to the firewall is only allowed using Secure Shell (SSH) sessions; this access is restricted to three
network engineers.
Finding 8
The MCPS network was not sufficiently secured to assist in the detection/prevention of potential
network security breaches and attacks and restrict access to critical servers.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks and identify
how IDPS coverage should be best applied to its network and implement this coverage;
b. Relocate the aforementioned non-public servers to the internal network and eliminate
public access to the e-mail servers; and
c. Restrict network level access for each third-party business partner to only those devices
that the business partner needs to access.
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. MCPS is actively engaged in a project to upgrade the web filter
(SWG) as well as add intrusion detection/prevention (IDPS) and advanced malware protection.
Pilot testing is currently underway with a full deployment scheduled for late June 2016.
Full functionality is expected by the end of June 2016. The additional time was necessary
to consider the proper selection of an appropriate vendor for all of these technologies and a realistic
time frame to install them responsibly. We worked with partners and industry experts to identify
the proper technologies which are now being tested for implementation. As reported previously
in 2015, the 30 servers in question are all on the internal network only. The servers on the private
DMZ network do not have a public IP assigned to them and are not accessible externally. Similarly,
the servers within the public IP Address ranges are configured on MCPS’ internal server network
and are not a part of the DMZ network or available remotely.
8

--- Page 47 ---
Public access to all of the mailbox servers was immediately addressed at the time of the initial
recommendation in 2015 by blocking port 25, on the firewall, from outside access to these servers.
To control the level of access for all nonemployees, the final phase of an identity management
software product was deployed in September 2015 to properly assign and restrict nonemployee
access to only those devices to which they require access. The access is defined by a form
submitted to us from the nonemployee’s sponsor (an MCPS supervisor or executive staff member).
Finding 9
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware, as administrative access
was not properly restricted and systems were running outdated or unsupported system software.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Ensure that administrator rights on workstations are restricted to network administrators
and other users requiring such rights;
b. Promptly install all critical security-related software updates (including those for operating
systems) on workstations and servers (repeat); and
c. Ensure that the management tool used to administer the anti-malware software
on its workstations and servers is being supported by the vendor and use this tool
to regularly confirm that all workstations and servers are configured with anti-malware
software that is operating properly and up-to-date.
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. Since the recommendation was initially made in 2015, MCPS staff
has modified our process to ensure that the default permissions for all users does not include
administrator rights. To address those with the elevated rights, we have begun to review access
requirements on an office-by-office basis and are planning to remove elevated rights that are
deemed unnecessary. We are using our change-management process to roll out critical updates
as appropriate. The process informs all necessary stakeholders of the update and allows them
to weigh in with any relevant questions or concerns to ensure the change does not impact
operations. New servers were purchased to upgrade the anti-malware management servers we are
currently using. This will allow us to upgrade to the newest version of the server-side software. The
new servers and upgraded software are currently being tested and are scheduled to be deployed
at the end of June 2016. Additionally, once the new servers are operational, the client anti-malware
software also will be upgraded to match that of the new server-side software. That also will take
place between the months of June and August 2016.
Finding 10
Network, application, and database account and password controls were not sufficient to properly
protect critical resources, as they did not meet minimum thresholds in accordance with recognized
best practices.
9

--- Page 48 ---
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS establish appropriate network, application, and database account
and password controls (repeat).
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. Since the recommendation was initially made in 2015, MCPS staff
has set FMS and student system password logins to the same password policies as set in the MCPS
user account login policy. Additionally, for our database software, we set password restrictions in
accordance with best recognized practices.
Finding 11
Controls over the critical student information and financial management system databases were
not sufficient as security activity was not logged, and various software in use was no longer
supported by the respective developers.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Set the student information and the FMS databases to log all critical security related events,
regularly review these logs, document these reviews, and retain this documentation
for future reference (repeat); and
b. Ensure that all production database and operating system software is supported by the
respective developers.
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. Since the recommendation was initially made in 2015, we enabled
the database logging parameters for both student and FMS applications. MCPS
has created an upgraded database that is being tested for those critical systems that are not yet on
the latest version of the database software. While testing is currently taking place, the plan will
be to migrate to the latest versions of the database software with the launch of new applications
for those who are accessing the legacy databases. The new databases were created using parameters
determined by the requirements of the pending upgraded applications.
Finding 12
MCPS did not have a complete information technology Disaster Recovery Plan for recovering
computer operations.
10

--- Page 49 ---
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Develop and implement a comprehensive disaster DRP that is in accordance with
the aforementioned IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines; and
b. Periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the documentation for future
reference.
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. While the disaster recovery plan we have in place is still designed
to help in the event of an unexpected emergency, we are actively in the process of updating
the disaster recovery plan. Meetings with necessary stakeholders are underway, as well as a visit
to our off-site recovery facility. MCPS conducted its annual disaster recovery test on June 3–4,
2015, for specific systems and functions. The plan is in revision and in preparation for the annual
test in the fourth quarter for 2017.
Finding 13
Maintenance supervisors did not ensure work orders were completed timely and that the
completion of the work was properly recorded in the automated system.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS ensure maintenance supervisors periodically perform effective reviews
of system reports to ensure open work orders are completed timely and recorded as complete
in the system.
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. In September 2015, the MCPS Division of Maintenance
implemented a new report and procedure related to outstanding work review. Each week, shop
supervisors receive an automated report via e-mail from the division’s computerized work order
management system. Supervisors then review the report and update the work order status
and comments as needed. In addition, for any outstanding work requests greater than 180 days old
(which may legitimately exist due to logistical or funding constraints), the supervisors will
implement a plan to address the request, update the status remarks field, and notify the requestor
as necessary regarding the delay.
Finding 14
MCPS did not use formal targets for revising bus routes or fully use its automated routing software
to improve route efficiency. We found 300 routes with ridership significantly below bus ridership
goals.
11

--- Page 50 ---
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Develop formal and comprehensive policies and procedures for its bus routes that include
guidance regarding bus ridership goals and any other factors in order to assist in developing
bus routes (repeat); and
b. Use automated routing software to help ensure the efficient utilization of buses (repeat).
Response
MCPS does not agree with this finding. MapNet, the current routing software used by the
Department of Transportation (DOT), as well as all other computer assisted routing packages,
has limitations that prevent its use for automated routing. As an example, the computer does
not have the capacity to know about safety issues regarding stop locations. MCPS will continue
to review software available in the marketplace and seek to identify improvements in future
replacement systems.
When automated routing is attempted, currently systems must “overbook” buses to ensure that
ridership is near bus capacity as the computer does not know which students will ride and which
students will have alternate transportation. Even at schools for which every student is eligible
for bus transportation, many students are transported by parents and/or ride with friends or drive
themselves in the case of high school students. DOT has found that the use of historical ridership
data is a more accurate predictor of future ridership from each neighborhood, and, therefore,
we use that method to maximize ridership per bus rather than a general prediction of overbooking.
Periodically, DOT allows the computer to create automated routes and compares those routes
to existing routes to determine if any proposed changes by the computer would be viable.
The four-tiered bell time system, which results in each bus serving multiple schools, creates time
limitations on individual route segments. While serving multiple schools creates tremendous
efficiencies in bus usage, the time limitations result in low ridership on some segments,
particularly in more rural areas where it takes so long to collect students from stops with few
or only one student.
Auditor’s Comment:
MCPS’ practice of primarily relying on historical ridership to design bus routes does not
assure cost effectiveness as MCPS operates hundreds of buses on a daily basis at less
than half of the ridership capacity. OLA has noted several local school systems that have
used routing software to aid in maximizing bus ridership and other systems have
acknowledged its usefulness and plan to more effectively use routing software.
Finding 15
Bus maintenance work orders frequently did not reflect the current status of assigned maintenance
work, and discrepancies in the maintenance parts and supplies inventory were not timely
investigated and resolved.
12

--- Page 51 ---
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS:
a. Update maintenance records in the automated system to record the completion of work
orders;
b. Timely investigate and determine the cause of discrepancies identified during annual
physical inventories and take appropriate corrective action; and
c. Ensure an independent employee verifies that inventory items withdrawn by overnight
mechanics were appropriate and recorded in the automated system.
Response
MCPS agrees with this finding. To ensure compliance is met regarding the proper use of FASTER,
fleet maintenance automated record keeping software, shop staff will be required to log on and off
each work order in accordance with the time spent repairing the vehicle. An “Active Work Orders
by Shop” report will be run biweekly to determine if work orders are remaining open beyond
the suggested two-week period. The report will be reviewed by the shop supervisor to determine
what action can be taken to close any unclosed work orders in a timely manner.
Furthermore, the lack of control of bus maintenance parts inventory during the first shift will
be addressed by ensuring a work order is presented to the parts department staff prior to issuing
the part. Once the parts staff have the work order, they will retrieve the required part and charge
it to FASTER before releasing the part to the mechanic. To further control inventory shortages
on the first shift, only parts personnel are authorized to charge parts to work orders. As a final step,
we will explore having the auto parts supervisor run an audit report once a month to determine
inventory variances. Once a discrepancy is noted, the auto parts supervisor will investigate
and resolve any discrepancy with satellite parts staff.
To control bus maintenance parts inventory on the second and third shifts, we will explore having
the shift supervisor be responsible for issuing and charging parts to each work order in FASTER,
thus ensuring proper authorized access. Following this plan will take the shift supervisor away
from shift leadership to work on vehicles himself to perform parts clerk duties that may not make
strategic sense. Staffing second and third shifts with parts staff is cost prohibitive and would cost
far more than the cost of the inventory discrepancy problem it would potentially solve.
Finding 16
MCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain employee and retiree healthcare claims paid by its
plan administrators.
Recommendation
We recommend that MCPS enhance its procedures to verify healthcare costs by ensuring
the propriety of paid claims (repeat).
13

--- Page 52 ---
Response
MCPS does not agree with the finding. MCPS completed an independent pharmaceutical claim
audit in 2008 upon the recommendation of the auditors at the cost of $60,000. No recoverable
claim payments were found from that audit. MCPS will continue to discuss and consider best
practices for claims audits and other cost savings with our benefits consultant.
Auditor’s Comment:
Due to the significant expense represented by employee and retiree health care at the
local school systems, a health care claims audit or review is a reasonable approach for
detecting health care billing errors or fraud and ensuring plan administrators only issued
claims payments for allowable benefits for eligible participants. OLA also reiterates that
the named State agency has stated that the recoveries of improper payments found have
exceeded the costs of the reviews. Finally, the results of MCPS’ 2008 pharmaceutical
claim audit may not be indicative of current circumstances or the results of an audit of the
larger portion of its health care costs.
14

--- Page 53 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Abdullah I. Adam, CFE
Senior Auditor
Christopher D. Jackson, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Jessica A. Foux, CPA, CFE
Joshua A. Naylor
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors