Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2007
Date: 11/12/2008
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ecc9d72404c150b7a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:05:47.036001
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
November 12, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Mr. Kevin M. O’Keefe, Chairman
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Mr. Karl S. Aro, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. We are
herein summarizing the results of such audits.
Our review disclosed that all opinions expressed by the colleges’ independent
auditors stated that the applicable financial statements were fairly presented in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. Additionally, none of the colleges had a deficit net assets balance as of
June 30, 2007. However, there were two colleges for which the applicable
auditors reported a total of five material weaknesses in internal control for fiscal
year 2007. In these instances, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the colleges’
responses to the material weaknesses noted, and concluded that appropriate
follow-up actions had been taken.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the MHEC for review and comment.
Since there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not
necessary.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information and Purpose of Review
According to the State’s records, State aid totaling approximately $206 million for
the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16
community colleges. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and
student enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and
various other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College)
is a budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation.
Baltimore City Community College is not subject to the Education Article,
Section 16-315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual
financial audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits. We issue separate reports on the College, which contain information
regarding the results of these audits.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to adopt
guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on the colleges. The
guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors to express
opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial statements as
well as to the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating the State aid to
the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue management letters
containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of internal controls.
While not required, many of the auditors issue management letters that contain
non-material weaknesses.
We reviewed the audit reports of the State’s community colleges for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2007 to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit net asset balances, or
uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the results of that
review.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
Fourteen of the 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2007 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that 14 of the 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The Prince George’s
Community College audit report was submitted 21 days after the required filing
date, and no extension was granted.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions; however, four reports were
not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2007 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors.
However, 3 of the 15 community college audit reports reviewed for fiscal year
2007 did not express opinions on all opinion units included in the colleges’ basic
financial statements as required by generally accepted auditing standards.
Specifically, the independent auditor’s reports for the College of Southern
Maryland, Montgomery College, and Prince George’s Community College did
not express separate opinions on the colleges’ business-type activities and
discretely presented component units (for example, college foundations).
In addition, we noted that one community college’s audit report (Community
College of Baltimore County) was not appropriately modified to properly reflect
that the opinions were based, in part, on the report of another auditor. In this
regard, the audit report’s introductory paragraph stated that the community
college’s discretely presented component unit had been audited by other auditors
and that the independent auditor’s opinions as related to the discretely presented
component unit was based solely on the report of other auditors. However,
related modifications were not made to the scope or opinion paragraphs of the
Independent Auditors’ Report.
MHEC advised us that it would notify the community colleges of these
deficiencies and ensure that the deficiencies are corrected in future audits.
4

--- Page 7 ---
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Financial Statements
None of the community colleges had a deficit net assets balance as of June 30,
2007.
There were no deficit net assets balances reported for any of the 15 colleges as of
June 30, 2007. A deficit net assets balance would indicate that the college had
more liabilities than assets and could indicate a potential financial problem.
The financial statements for one community college disclosed
uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits.
The financial statements of Frederick Community College disclosed
uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. Specifically, these financial statements
disclosed that cash deposits totaling $788,567 exceeded collateralization and
insurance at June 30, 2007, therefore subjecting these deposits to custodial credit
risk.
Article 95, Section 22 of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires that deposits
with financial institutions by local government units (including community
colleges) be fully collateralized. Full collateralization is necessary to minimize
the risk of loss of a deposit in the event of the default of a financial institution.
Management Letters
Management letters for fiscal year 2007 included a total of 18
recommendations for improvement, including a total of five
recommendations considered to be material weaknesses in two colleges’
systems of internal control.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. Our
5

--- Page 8 ---
review disclosed that 8 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations, while the remaining 7 community colleges received a total of
18 recommendations, 5 of which were considered material weaknesses in the
colleges’ systems of internal control. The material weaknesses were found to
exist at Garrett College and Prince George’s Community College and all were
related to the colleges’ federal student financial aid programs. One of these
material weaknesses was also cited as a material weakness during fiscal year
2006. This one material weakness (found at Garrett College) related to student
loan proceeds from lenders not being reconciled to the College’s records in order
to verify that proper loan disbursements were made to student accounts.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
material weaknesses and determined that appropriate follow-up action had been
taken.
MHEC did not formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
13 non-material recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s guidelines,
comments and suggestions related to non-material weaknesses are not required.
When auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up actions
are subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2007
recommendations by fiscal area. Two of the 18 recommendations (one material
and one non-material) were repeated from the preceding year.
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Financial aid 11
Accounting and financial reporting 5
Other (for example, accounts receivable) 2
Total 18
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Garman, CPA
Assistant Director
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor
A’knea K. Smith
Staff Auditor