Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Medical Care Programs Administration - Follow-up Review
Date: 07/13/2007
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ecc9d72404c150b8a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:06:47.870687
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Medical Care Programs Administration
Follow-up Review
July 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
July 13, 2007
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Nathaniel J. McFadden, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA), as
of February 1, 2007, to address the findings in our July 28, 2006 audit report. In
that report, we concluded that MCPA’s fiscal accountability and compliance
rating was unsatisfactory.
We performed certain procedures to evaluate the corrective actions taken by
MCPA. Specifically, we selected 10 of the 20 findings from our audit report and
reviewed MCPA’s progress. Our review disclosed that MCPA had made some
progress in resolving the audit findings reviewed:
Number of
Implementation Status
Findings
Corrected 1
Substantial Progress 4
In Progress 2
Minimal Progress 3
No Progress 0
Status Not Determined (item not selected for review) 10
MCPA had initiated corrective action on all 10 findings reviewed; and had
established a corrective action plan, which included timelines and processes to
monitor the implementation of the plan, for all 20 findings from our audit report.
Nevertheless, most of the recommendations were still in progress of being
implemented as they relate to complex issues that require extensive time and
effort to resolve. If MCPA continues on this course for all findings and, if other
areas do not deteriorate, our next audit should result in an improved accountability
and compliance rating.

--- Page 4 ---
The current status of each of the 10 findings we reviewed is identified in Exhibit
1. In addition, Exhibit 1 includes MCPA’s self-assessment of the implementation
status for all 20 report findings. Exhibit 2 describes, in greater detail, the current
status for the 5 findings we determined that MCPA had not corrected or
substantially addressed. The Department’s response to our review results is
included as an appendix to this report.
We will review the status of all of the audit findings during our next audit of
MCPA. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by MCPA
during this review.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1: Current Status
of Findings in July 28, 2006 Audit Report
Current Status Current Status as
Based on Determined by
Prior Finding Auditor’s Review MCPA as of
as of January 2007
February 2007
Provider Reimbursements
1. MCPA overrode or bypassed certain automated system
Minimal Progress Minimal Progress
edits for claims totaling approximately $1.5 billion.
2. Payments were made for untimely claims in violation of
Substantial Progress Corrected
State regulations.
3. MCPA processed $8.1 million in claims to providers whose
N/A Substantial Progress
eligibility had expired.
4. Controls over the processing of provider changes in the
Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II)
Corrected Corrected
were not adequate.
5. Assurance was lacking that payments totaling $43 million
Minimal Progress In Progress
for emergency procedures for aliens were legitimate.
Medical Assistance Recipient Eligibility
6. Payments totaling $32.2 million were made on behalf of
Substantial Progress Minimal Progress
recipients with invalid or missing social security numbers.
7. MCPA did not effectively monitor the Medicaid eligibility
Substantial Progress Substantial Progress
determination process.
Maryland Pharmacy Programs
8. Prior to January 2006, a policy concerning the payment for
erectile dysfunction drugs was not established (Policy N/A Corrected
Issue).
9. The vendor responsible for processing pharmacy claims did
N/A Corrected
not provide required audit reports timely.
10. MCPA’s pharmacy audit procedures were inadequate. Substantial Progress Corrected
HealthChoice
11. MCPA did not adequately verify individual encounter data
N/A Minimal Progress
submitted by the Managed Care Organizations.
Page 1 of 2
N/A – not applicable since implementation status was not reviewed
Shaded findings are more fully described in Exhibit 2.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1: Current Status
of Findings in July 28, 2006 Audit Report
Current Status
Current Status as
Based on
Determined by
Prior Finding Auditor’s Review
MCPA as of
as of
January 2007
February 2007
Recovery Procedures
12. MCPA did not initiate appropriate actions when hospitals
In Progress Corrected
denied access to claims records for audit.
13. MCPA did not adequately monitor the vendor contracted to
N/A In Progress
conduct hospital bill audits.
14. Accounts receivable records related to recoveries were
N/A Minimal Progress
inadequate.
Contract Monitoring of Cost Settlements
15. MCPA did not adequately monitor the vendor performing
cost settlements and authorized $230,000 in payments that
N/A In Progress
exceeded the contract amount.
Information Systems Security and Control
16. MCPA did not adequately restrict access to critical claims
Minimal Progress Substantial Progress
processing menu functions.
17. MCPA did not have a current, comprehensive, and
In Progress Substantial Progress
documented disaster recovery plan.
Electronic Data Interchange Translator Processing System
(EDITPS)
18. Controls over EDITPS user authentication, data
N/A Corrected
transmission, and monitoring were inadequate.
19. Controls over user accounts and monitoring of the EDITPS
N/A Corrected
web server’s host operating system were inadequate.
20. The server hosting the EDITPS web server was not backed N/A Corrected
up for disaster recovery purposes.
Page 2 of 2
N/A – not applicable since implementation status was not reviewed
Shaded findings are more fully described in Exhibit 2.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 2
Current Status of Findings for
Which Corrective Action Was Deemed to be
“In Progress” or “Minimal Progress”
Provider Reimbursements
Prior Finding 1
MCPA processed claims totaling approximately $1.5 billion by overriding or
bypassing certain automated system edits that were designed to identify
improper claims. The vast majority of these claims were paid without
manual reviews of the claims being performed.
Prior Report Recommendation
1. We recommended that MCPA process all claims through the standard system
edits, unless approval to automatically override the edits is obtained from the
federal granting agency.
2. In addition, we recommended that claims that are suspended and later paid by
manual overrides be subject to sufficient review in accordance with MCPA
policy.
3. We also recommended that MCPA adequately review previously paid claims
that were processed by (automatically) overriding or bypassing system edits to
ensure the claims were proper, that this review be performed by an individual
independent of the claims processing and system overriding process, and that
this review be documented and retained for future reference.
4. Finally, we recommended that MCPA review the questionable payments
identified and ensure recovery of any improper payments.
Current Status – Minimal Progress
1. MPCA has continued to automatically override certain edits to process claims.
Specifically, according to MCPA records, during the period from August 2006
through January 2007, MCPA processed fee-for-services claims totaling
approximately $600 million by automatically overriding certain edits that were
designed to detect errors. MCPA believes that its payment of many of these
claims was proper because several of the related edits were unique to the State
of Florida’s Medicaid System (from where Maryland purchased its present
system) or were federally-approved changes to the Maryland Medicaid
5

--- Page 8 ---
Program. Thus, MCPA believes these edits were not applicable and needed to
be overridden; however, a full evaluation of these system edits has not been
completed.
2. Although, in accordance with its policy, MCPA has performed supervisory
reviews of claims that were suspended and later paid by manual overrides,
certain claims were not included in the reviews. For example, $920,000 in
claims processed by the Department’s Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA) for the period from August 2006 through January
2007, were suspended and later paid by manual overrides without supervisory
reviews by either DDA or MCPA staff. MCPA believes that these claims and
related supervisory reviews are DDA’s responsibility.
3. Because of ongoing communications on this issue between OLA and MCPA,
MCPA has postponed conducting a comprehensive review of the propriety of
previously paid claims that were processed by automatically overriding or
bypassing system edits. Although previously paid claims have not yet been
reviewed, MCPA has instituted a process to test certain current claims prior to
payment. We were advised that, as of March 2007, MCPA tested
approximately 1.5 percent of $746,000 in current Mental Hygiene
Administration (MHA) claims that were processed by bypassing system edits
during fiscal year 2007. We were advised that this testing did not disclose any
errors and, in accordance with MCPA policy, all of the claims were processed
in order to obtain federal reimbursement. (We were advised that if MCPA
detects one error during this testing, the entire batch is rejected and returned to
MHA). Because of MCPA’s testing process, MHA is not required to review
any claims for propriety prior to submitting them to MCPA.
4. MCPA has completed its review of the approximate $1 million in potential
duplicate MHA charges that were identified in our audit report and agreed that
these claims appear to be duplicates. The results of the MCPA review were
forwarded to MHA in February 2007. As of April 2007, recovery of the vast
majority of these duplicate payments had not been initiated.
Due to the complexity of the MCPA claims processing system, as well as the
significance of claims processed for which system edits are overridden and
bypassed, OLA plans to conduct a separate performance audit of MCPA’s claims
and edit processes. This audit will include a determination of the MCPA’s
assertion that the various edit overrides are appropriate. This performance audit is
anticipated to begin in the second half of the 2007 calendar year.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Prior Finding 5
MCPA lacked assurance that $43 million in claims paid for emergency
procedures for aliens in fiscal year 2005 were legitimate.
Prior Recommendation 5
1. We again recommended that formal criteria be established by MCPA to define
emergency procedures and diagnoses that will be paid.
2. We also recommended that MCPA retain all medical documentation that is
the basis for MCPA’s approval of all emergency procedure requests for aliens.
3. In addition, we again recommended that MCPA compare claims paid to
authorized emergency procedures, on a test basis, for propriety.
4. Finally, we again recommended that MCPA verify, in the future, that all
emergency expenditures are properly reported to the Federal Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).
Current Status – Minimal Progress
1. In December 2006, MCPA submitted proposed changes to State regulations to
better define emergency procedures. As of April 2007, these proposed
changes have been submitted to the appropriate legislative committee and
MCPA is awaiting a final decision.
2. MCPA stated that, in lieu of retaining all medical documentation, it would
modify the approval letter to indicate the emergency condition that was
authorized for payment and that this letter would be signed by a medical
professional indicating approval of the payment for the specified condition.
We determined that MCPA has made this modification to the approval letters,
has obtained signatures of medical professionals, and has retained the signed
letters.
3. MCPA has not compared claims paid to authorized emergency procedures,
but is in the process of determining the procedures and sampling techniques
needed to perform these reviews. According to MCPA records of claims paid
during the period beginning August 1, 2006 and ending January 31, 2007,
MCPA paid claims totaling approximately $67,000 for routine prenatal or
post-partum care charges that were specifically excluded as emergency
procedures, according to MCPA’s definition in its Medicaid Manual. Also,
we questioned the appropriateness of another $342,000 in claims paid during
the same period, based on the types of services provided (nursing home care,
observation, clinic visits).
7

--- Page 10 ---
4. Although MCPA is currently testing a system program change to properly
capture and record these claims payments, the improper amounts of
emergency expenditures have continued to be reported to CMS. We noted
that the quarterly reports submitted to CMS reflected only $182,661 for the
period July 1, 2006 through December 31, 2006; however, according to
MCPA records of paid claims for the period beginning August 1, 2006 and
ending January 31, 2007, the actual emergency expenditures averaged
approximately $6 million a month.
Recovery Procedures
Prior Finding 12
MCPA did not initiate appropriate actions when numerous hospitals denied
MCPA’s contractor access to claims records to conduct audits to identify
overpayments resulting from third party recoveries.
Prior Report Recommendation
We recommended that MCPA instruct the hospitals to allow MCPA’s contractor
access to the claim records, in accordance with MCPA’s standard provider
agreement. If access is not granted, we recommended that MCPA immediately
initiate appropriate actions (such as withholding payments for Medicaid services
provided or initiating legal action).
Current Status – In Progress
MCPA sent letters to providers during August 2006 advising them to allow
MCPA’s contractor access to the claim records. MCPA further informed the
providers that disciplinary action would be initiated should a provider prevent
MCPA’s contractors from completing the required audits.
Based on our inquiries, we were advised by MCPA’s contractor that, as of March
28, 2007, all providers have allowed them access to claims records except for one
hospital. The contractor also advised us that its efforts during the period from
September 2006 through March 2007 to obtain access from this one hospital were
unsuccessful. Until our inquiry, MCPA was not aware that this hospital continued
to deny access; therefore, appropriate actions were not initiated timely to obtain
access.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Prior Finding 16
MCPA did not adequately restrict access to critical claims processing menu
functions.
Prior Report Recommendation
We recommended that MCPA limit access to its critical claims processing menu
functions to only those current employees whose job responsibilities require such
access, and that userids be deleted immediately upon employee termination. We
also recommended that each system user be assigned a unique userid. In addition,
we recommended that MCPA periodically review critical MMIS II screen
accesses granted to employees to ensure that access granted is appropriate.
Current Status – Minimal Progress
Our review of system access to critical claims processing menu functions as of
February 27, 2007, disclosed that, although MCPA did instruct the security
officers to periodically review critical MMIS II screen accesses, these reviews
were not independent because these officers also granted the access. Although
our limited review of system access did not find instances of system users sharing
userids (that is, unique userids were assigned), we did note other current
exception conditions similar to those described in our prior report. Specifically,
we noted the following conditions:
• One individual who had terminated employment with MCPA, effective
June 30, 2006, still had an active userid as of February 27, 2007 which
allowed the ability to add and change claims data.
• Five users had unnecessary or improper access to critical MMIS II menu
functions even though their job duties did not require such access. Three
of these five users were noted as having similar access in our audit report.
• MCPA could not identify the employees assigned to two MMIS II userids.
These userids have the ability to update recipient eligibility information.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Prior Finding 17
MCPA did not have a current, comprehensive, and documented disaster
recovery plan.
Prior Report Recommendation
We again recommended that MCPA comply with DBM’s Information
Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines and develop a current,
comprehensive, and documented disaster recovery plan.
Current Status – In Progress
MCPA IT processing is conducted at two sites: the Comptroller of the Treasury’s
Annapolis Data Center (ADC) and DHMH’s O’Conor Building in Baltimore.
Although MCPA has developed a current, comprehensive, and documented
disaster recovery plan for its ADC-based processing functions, disaster recovery
plans for IT processing activities at the O’Conor Building do not address certain
required components of a disaster recovery plan. The most significant component
not addressed is the use of an alternate site in the event of a major disaster at this
facility, which could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of time)
in restoring all MCPA computer operations.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene – Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA), as
of February 1, 2007, to address selected findings in our July 28, 2006 audit report.
In that report, we concluded that MCPA’s fiscal accountability and compliance
rating was unsatisfactory.
The purpose of our review was to determine the current status of MCPA’s
corrective actions to address certain of our audit findings. This review was
conducted based on our long-standing practice of performing a follow-up review
whenever an agency receives an unsatisfactory rating in our fiscal compliance
audit report. The rating system was established, in accordance with State
Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, for the
purpose of determining an overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability
and compliance with State laws and regulations.
Our review consisted of obtaining a January 2007 status report from MCPA
(describing the level of implementation of each prior audit report
recommendation), performing tests and analyses of selected information, and
holding discussions with MCPA personnel as we deemed necessary to determine
the status of MCPA’s corrective actions to address selected findings from our July
28, 2006 audit report. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Had we
conducted an audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. Our review was conducted primarily during February through April
2007.
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s response, on behalf of MCPA,
to our follow-up review is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in
the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its
response.
11

--- Page 16 ---
Provider Reimbursements
Prior Finding 1
MCPA processed claims totaling approximately $1.5 billion by overriding or
bypassing certain automated system edits that were designed to identify improper
claims. The vast majority of these claims were paid without manual reviews of the
claims being performed.
MCPA Response
1. As stated by the auditors, MCPA continues to believe the claims processed by
overriding certain edits are proper. At the Joint Audit Committee meeting, Senator
Hogan inquired as to what percent of the 1.5 B of overridden claims had been
determined to be invalid. OLA stated their review did not provide that
determination. It was decided by OLA that before MCPA or their office proceeded
forward with a time consuming claims review process, that the Program should
perform an edit analysis to determine exactly what edits had been bypassed and the
reasons for the overrides. From this analysis, the Program determined that
approximately 50 percent of the 1.5 B cited in the report, was determined to have
applied to the Florida State System (from whom we purchased the system), and did
not apply to the Maryland Medicaid Program. In addition, after the Audit committee
hearing, the Program also explained to OLA the reasons for the bypasses that were
required to our own Maryland Medicaid system that resulted from changes in the
laws, etc., since the original installation of these edits. The reason this item has been
rated as minimal progress is because the recommendation of the auditors has been put
on hold until later this fall to allow the auditors the time to perform a more in-depth
review of the edits. The auditors did not want the Program to waste manpower
performing this review until they had a better understanding of the significance of
each bypassed edit.1
2. MCPA has implemented the auditor’s previous recommendations and is performing
supervisory reviews of MCPA forced claims. As a result of the OLA follow up
review, OLA has disclosed a “new” issue with DDA forced claims that had not been
addressed in the original report. Since DDA keys the claims and the review decisions
are made by DDA supervision, MCPA feels this issue should be addressed with
DDA since MCPA has no control over these decisions. MCPA, however, has
presented this issue to DDA and has been advised in May 2007 by DDA that an
independent person reviews and approves forced claims “before” they are keyed into
Auditor’s Comments:
1The Office of Legislative Audits will be conducting a performance audit of MCPA’s payment processes,
including the edit functions. Regardless, MCPA is responsible for determining the appropriateness of
bypassing edits and maintaining sufficient documentation to support its determinations.

--- Page 17 ---
the system. DDA has indicated the reviews are documented and retained. DDA feels
that a “post” supervisory review is therefore not necessary.
3. MCPA has postponed the review of previously paid claims that were processed by
automatically overriding or bypassing system edits as requested by OLA.2 OLA has
advised MCPA that a “performance audit” regarding system edits will be scheduled
in the fall of 2007. In regards to the processing of future “special” MHA forced
claims, MCPA will require that the letter from MHA requesting the removal of
system edits include a statement certifying that a review was performed by MHA
prior to the requested submission. It will be to MHA’s advantage to perform this pre-
testing because if MCPA detects one error during its testing, the entire batch gets
rejected and returned to MHA.
4. MCPA has completed its review of the approximately $1 million in duplicate MHA
charges and agrees the claims appear to be duplicates. MCPA met with MHA staff
on June 4, 2007 to discuss the duplicate payments issue and has agreed to identify
those Invoice Control Numbers (ICN’s) that are believed to be duplicates for MHA.
This information will then be forwarded to MHA for their review. The documentation
should be sent to MHA by July 20, 2007. Once MHA has reviewed the
documentation and is in agreement, MHA will proceed with forwarding a void file to
remove the duplicate transactions from the MMIS History file. The recovery of
duplicate payments is the responsibility of MHA since MHA made the initial
payment.
Auditor’s Comments:
2 See auditor’s comments on previous page.

--- Page 18 ---
Prior Finding 5
MCPA lacked assurance that $43 million in claims paid for emergency procedures
for aliens in fiscal year 2005 were legitimate.
MCPA Response
1. As stated by the auditors, MCPA submitted proposed regulation changes to AELR
and is awaiting a decision.
2. MCPA as stated by the auditors, has also modified the emergency approval letter,
obtained signatures of medical professionals and retained the signed letters.
MCPA will continue to utilize this process in lieu of retaining medical
documentation.
3. MCPA is in the process of developing procedures and sampling techniques to
compare claims paid to authorized emergency procedures.
4. MCPA has completed development and testing system changes that will edit
emergency related services claims and deny payment based on authorized
eligibility dates. Additional modifications were required to allow specific ICD-9
codes to pay for certain emergency services. Claims edits are scheduled to go
into production on August 1, 2007. As a result, it is anticipated the change in
undocumented alien expenditures will be reflected on the CMS 64 during the 2nd
quarter of FY 08.

--- Page 19 ---
Recovery Procedures
Prior Finding 12
MCPA did not initiate appropriate actions when numerous hospitals denied
MCPA’s contractor access to claims records to conduct audits to identify
overpayments resulting from third party recoveries.
MCPA Response
As requested by the auditors, MCPA sent out letters to all hospitals advising them that
they would be subject to disciplinary action if they denied our audit contractors access
to claim records. Unfortunately, MCPA’s audit contractor failed to inform the Program
of a scheduling issue with one provider. Once brought to the Program’s attention,
MCPA advised the hospital by phone and letter (faxed and mailed) that refusal to allow
audit access would result in the suspension of Medical Assistance payments, effective
May 15, 2007, and until such time as their cooperation in the audit process was
confirmed. The hospital advised MCPA that the lack of response was an oversight
traceable to a single individual and that there was no intent to avoid scheduling an audit.
On May 15, 2007, the hospital contacted MCPA to advise that full cooperation had
been extended to the MCPA contractor and that an audit has been initiated. The hospital
repeated assurances that there would be no re-occurrence of the access issue. The audit
was successfully completed.
In an effort to avoid any future issues with the contractor’s access to hospital claims
records, OOEP is requiring the contractor to submit monthly reports addressing any audit
access.

--- Page 20 ---
Information Systems Security and Control
Prior Finding 16
MCPA did not adequately restrict access to critical claims processing menu
functions.
MCPA Response
The Director of Systems and Operations will appoint someone independent of the
processes to review and document the access of Security Monitor’s and DHMH Security
Officers. In addition, MCPA will create a new report by August 1, 2007 that will identify
anyone who has update capabilities to MMIS. The report will be distributed to Security
Monitors and MCPA Directors. The Security Monitors will review the access of all
employees assigned to them and document their findings.
Furthermore, MCPA will obtain from the Office of Personnel a copy of the DHMH
Separation report bi-weekly. An independent employee within Systems & Operations
will review the separation report and verify that the appropriate action has been or is
taken for the individuals identified on the report.
MCPA has deleted or terminated the user ids identified in the audit report.

--- Page 21 ---
Prior Finding 17
MCPA did not have a current, comprehensive, and documented disaster recovery
plan.
MCPA Response
MCPA has developed a comprehensive Information Technology Disaster Recovery Plan.
The plan accounts for interrupted services at the Annapolis Data Center, which is where
the MMIS application is housed. The OLA has recommended that MCPA address an
alternative site in the event a disaster occurs at 201 W. Preston Street. Although MCPA
acknowledges the need to have an alternative site, MCPA cannot designate an alternative
site without the approval of the overall site IT manager. MCPA staff met with
DHMH/IRMA staff June 22, 2007 to discuss alternative locations. The two locations
proposed have their own drawbacks and are not within the recommended miles of the
primary site. DHMH is working with the State of Maryland’s CIO to determine a feasible
site for our State agency. MCPA is unable to establish a projected completion date due to
the involvement of the State of Maryland’s CIO.

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Laura R. Morgan, CPA
Audit Manager
A. Jerome Sokol, CPA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Senior Auditor
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Ronnette L. Bailey
Laura J. Hilbert, CFE
Staff Auditors