Title: Department of Human Resources - Child Support Enforcement Administration Follow-up - Response to the April 2012 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 11/09/2012
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b3d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:02:34.589041
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to November 9, 2012 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Findings in OLA’s September 1, 2011 Audit Report on the
1
Department of Human Resources – Child Support Enforcement Administration
as of September 1, 2012
Status Based on Status Indicated by
Prior Finding
OLA Review CSEA
Enforcement Procedures
1. CSEA did not utilize wage withholding orders to the
Completed Completed
fullest extent possible.
2. CSEA did not effectively use occupational license
suspensions as an enforcement tool for delinquent In Progress In Progress
noncustodial parents.
3. The seizure of bank account funds was not effectively
Completed Completed
used as a collection tool.
4. CSEA did not have procedures to ensure that two
large local child support offices investigated and
resolved inaccurate noncustodial parent social
Completed Completed
security numbers recorded in the Child Support
Enforcement System (CSES).
5. CSEA did not adequately review and process driver’s
license suspension referrals rejected by the Motor In Progress In Progress
Vehicle Administration.
6. CSEA had not established procedures to intercept
payments from the Comptroller of Maryland to State
Completed Completed
vendors who were child support obligors, as allowed
by State law.
Local Office Monitoring
7. CSEA did not take sufficient actions to ensure that the
contractor hired to provide child support functions in
Minimal Progress In Progress
Baltimore City complied with certain contract
requirements.
8. CSEA did not ensure that a local child support office
performed sufficient and timely reviews of delinquent In Progress Completed
accounts.
9. Sufficient procedures were not established to identify
In Progress Completed
payments made to deceased custodial parents.
Page 1 of 2
Shaded findings are more fully described in Exhibit 2.
1 OLA’s assessment was based on CSEA’s status report which described the actions taken to address the prior audit findings as of September 1,
2012. The CSEA status report did not clearly state if the finding was deemed “Completed” or “In Progress.” To enable a comparative
assessment, OLA determined these status categories, with CSEA concurrence, based on comments CSEA provided on the September 1, 2012
status report and on additional comments CSEA provided on two previous quarterly status reports submitted to OLA.

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to November 9, 2012 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Findings in OLA’s September 1, 2011 Audit Report on the
Department of Human Resources – Child Support Enforcement Administration
as of September 1, 2012
Status Based on Status Indicated by
Prior Finding
OLA Review CSEA
Contracts
10. CSEA did not adequately verify billings for
In Progress Completed
services provided by local government agencies.
System Access
11. CSEA did not establish adequate controls in CSES to
prevent or detect unauthorized changes to critical data
Completed Completed
such as addresses and the amounts disbursed to
custodial parents.
Page 2 of 2
Shaded findings are more fully described in Exhibit 2.
2

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 2 to November 9, 2012 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Current Status of Findings for Which Corrective Action Was
Deemed to be in Progress or as Minimal Progress
Prior Finding 2
CSEA did not effectively use occupational license suspensions as an
enforcement tool for delinquent noncustodial parents.
Prior Report Recommendation
We recommend that CSEA work with State licensing authorities to
effectively use occupational license suspensions as an enforcement tool, as
authorized by State law (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that CSEA
a. obtain complete licensing data from state licensing authorities;
b. establish a process to prioritize the matches to help ensure the most
effective use of this collection tool (for example, by targeting licensees
who have a higher likelihood of being excluded from other enforcement
efforts);
c. conduct matches of licensee data with delinquent child support obligors,
using appropriate matching parameters; and
d. document the match process, and ensure proper follow-up of the match
results with the licensing authorities, including the aforementioned
individuals cited in this finding.
Current Status: In Progress
CSEA has implemented an electronic data exchange with 7 of 15 licensing
authorities identified in the prior audit report, and has been performing monthly
matches using the licensee data and notifying these authorities of all of their
licensees who have met certain criteria for the referrals. CSEA has been
documenting the match results and is developing an automated follow-up process
to determine the status of those cases with the licensing authorities.
We were advised that CSEA had memoranda of understanding (MOUs) with two
other licensing authorities to begin the data exchange in the near future. Of the
remaining six licensing authorities, CSEA is working with five of the licensing
authorities to implement procedures for performing matches in the future. CSEA
is no longer considering the remaining licensing authority for an electronic data
exchange because it does not issue state professional licenses to individuals.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Prior Finding 5
CSEA did not adequately review and process driver’s license suspension
referrals rejected by the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA).
Prior Report Recommendation
We recommend that CSEA perform timely follow-up on all cases rejected by
the MVA due to system edits, review possible matches identified, and report
corrected information to the MVA (repeat).
Current Status: In Progress
Timely follow-up on cases rejected by MVA is not being performed because
CSEA is not providing the local child support offices with MVA’s report of
rejected cases in a timely manner. During the prior audit, we commented that for
18 of 20 rejected referrals tested, the referrals were not reviewed, processed, and
resubmitted. Although the records we currently reviewed indicated that the local
offices now performed timely follow-up on rejected referrals after they were
received from CSEA, CSEA’s delay in forwarding the MVA rejected case reports
to the local offices contributed to some information being at least two months old
when it was reviewed by the local offices. Specifically, CSEA did not provide the
rejected referral data received from MVA for the fourth quarter of calendar year
2011 and the first quarter of calendar year 2012 to the local jurisdictions until two
months after they were received from MVA.
Prior Finding 7
CSEA did not take sufficient actions to ensure that the contractor hired to
provide child support functions in Baltimore City complied with certain
contract requirements.
Prior Report Recommendation
We recommend that CSEA
a. determine the reasons for the contractor’s noncompliance with contract
performance requirements and take appropriate actions, including
requiring the preparation of a systemic corrective action plan (repeat);
and
b. ensure that cases that were deemed non-compliant are corrected timely.
Current Status: Minimal Progress
CSEA did not determine the reasons for the contractor's non-compliance with
contract requirements nor has CSEA or the contractor developed a systemic
corrective action plan to bring the contractor into compliance. CSEA reviews of
contractor compliance with child support enforcement procedures continue to
4

--- Page 7 ---
indicate a significant number of cases involving non-compliance issues. For
example, of the more than 1,100 Baltimore City child support cases reviewed by
CSEA during the period from October 1, 2011 through March 31, 2012 at least 63
percent of the cases were deemed non-compliant and required corrective action.
We also found that CSEA did not ensure that non-compliant cases were corrected
in a timely manner. For example, although CSEA is monitoring the contractor’s
actions, as of September 2012, 70 of 702 non-compliant cases identified from the
quarter ending December 31, 2011 remain uncorrected. We did note that CSEA
withheld one monthly payment in April 2012 because the contractor failed to
timely complete case corrections for the third quarter of calendar year 2011;
however, the percentage of cases deemed non-compliant and requiring action for
the subsequent quarters was still high and the cases were not being corrected
timely by the contractor. No other contractor payments have been withheld.
Prior Finding 8
CSEA did not ensure that a local child support office performed sufficient
and timely reviews of delinquent accounts.
Prior Report Recommendation
We recommend that CSEA ensure that local offices perform sufficient and
timely follow-up with delinquent obligors. Specifically, we recommend that
CSEA ensure that
a. caseworkers review cases identified on the delinquency report on a
monthly basis in accordance with its policy (repeat) and perform a
documented follow-up within 30 days, and
b. supervisors review five percent of each caseworker’s total cases from the
delinquency reports in a timely manner.
Current Status: In Progress
CSEA implemented a process to generally review 20 cases from the delinquency
report on a monthly basis for each jurisdiction to ensure caseworkers are
reviewing cases and performing a documented follow-up within 30 days as
recommended. However, CSEA did not establish a process to ensure that the
supervisors at the local jurisdictions are reviewing five percent of their
caseworkers' cases from the delinquency reports as required. Consequently,
CSEA was uncertain as to whether the reviews were being performed.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Prior Finding 9
Sufficient procedures were not established to identify payments made to
deceased custodial parents.
Prior Report Recommendation
We recommend that CSEA
a. periodically (for example, quarterly) match its records of payees to the
federal Social Security Administration’s (SSA) death records based on
identical social security numbers and dates of birth, investigate the match
results, and cease payments as appropriate;
b. investigate the aforementioned match results indicating payments made
to custodial parents after the dates of death; and
c. confer with the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to determine what
action should be taken against individuals who cashed State-issued child
support checks that were payable to deceased individuals.
Current Status: In Progress
CSEA has been performing monthly matches of its records and SSA death records
to identify payments made to deceased custodial parents and investigating the
match results. Also, on a quarterly basis, CSEA’s Quality Assurance Unit
performs reviews of the death matches to monitor adherence to CSEA’s
procedures. However, CSEA had not investigated all of the 362 individuals
identified with payments 30 or more days after the payees’ dates of death that
OLA identified in the prior report finding. Furthermore, five of the eight cases
specifically highlighted in our prior audit report were being investigated, but still
have not been resolved. Finally, CSEA had not conferred with the OAG for cases
of individuals cashing State-issued support checks payable to deceased
individuals.
Prior Finding 10
CSEA did not adequately verify billings for services provided by local
government agencies.
Prior Report Recommendation
We recommend that CSEA
a. verify that the rates charged on invoices are consistent with related
contracts and pursue any overpayments; and
b. obtain and review documentation supporting invoices, at least on a test
basis.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Current Status: In Progress
Although our review disclosed that CSEA is obtaining and reviewing
documentation (such as, time records) supporting invoices, CSEA’s contract
monitors still did not always verify that the rates charged by the local government
agencies were consistent with the contractually agreed-upon rates. Specifically,
our review of eight invoices totaling approximately $3 million related to four
local government agency agreements disclosed that CSEA did not verify rates
charged for six invoices totaling approximately $2.6 million. For example, for
one invoice totaling approximately $973,200, the rates charged for 24 of the 51
salaries tested were not in accordance with the contract. Consequently, there
continues to be a lack of assurance regarding the propriety of such billings.
7