Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2013
Date: 10/02/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150b0c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:12:10.462996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Purpose of Review and Background Information
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013. We
reviewed these audit reports to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted
net assets, or uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the
results of that review.
According to the State's records, State aid totaling approximately $272 million
was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16 community colleges for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2013. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and student
enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and various
other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College) is a
budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation. Baltimore
City Community College is not subject to the Education Article, Section 16-
315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual financial
statement audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits for which separate audit reports are issued.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires MHEC to adopt guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on
the colleges. The guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors
to express opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial
statements as well as of the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating
the State aid to the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue
management letters containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of
internal controls. While not required, many of the auditors issue management
letters that contain additional recommendations that were not considered material
weaknesses.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
All 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2013 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2013.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions; however, two reports were
not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2013 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
However, 2 of the 15 community colleges’ audit reports reviewed for fiscal year
2013 were not presented in accordance with certain generally accepted auditing
standards. Specifically, Carroll and Prince George’s Community Colleges’ audit
reports did not describe the degree of responsibility taken for required
supplementary and other supplementary information that accompanied these
Colleges’ basic financial statements. In this regard, the independent auditors’
reports did not describe the degree of responsibility taken regarding Carroll
Community College’s “Schedule of Funding Progress for Other Postemployment
Benefits” and Prince George’s Community College’s “Schedule of Expenditures
of Federal Awards and Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal
Awards.” MHEC advised us that it would notify these Colleges of the
deficiencies and ensure that the deficiencies are corrected in future audits.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Statements
Two community colleges’ financial statements disclosed deficit balances in
the unrestricted portion of their net position at June 30, 2013.
Our review disclosed two colleges with deficit balances in the unrestricted
component of their net position as of June 30, 2013. Specifically, Anne Arundel
and Carroll Community Colleges had unrestricted net position deficits of
$13,858,704 and $8,289,706, respectively. Furthermore, this situation was also
noted in the financial statements for Anne Arundel and Carroll Community
Colleges’ for each fiscal year since 2011 and 2009, respectively. For these two
colleges, the unrestricted net position deficits increased during fiscal year 2013.
An unrestricted net position deficit balance represents the costs of current or past
services that will need to be financed in future periods and could indicate a
potential financial problem.
We did not perform a detailed analysis to determine the cause of these deficits;
nevertheless, the Colleges’ financial statements and accompanying notes
contained certain pertinent information relative to the deficits. Specifically, both
Colleges’ financial statements disclosed that the decreases in net position
experienced during fiscal year 2013 were due, in part, to increases in the other
post employment benefit liabilities which increased by $4.6 million (to $26.4
million) for Anne Arundel Community College and $2.0 million (to $12.7
million) for Carroll Community College.
Generally accepted accounting principles specify that liabilities for post
employment benefits (such as healthcare benefits), which are deferred until
retirement or another future event, be recognized in the years in which the
employee provides services rather than during the postemployment period when
payments are made.
The financial statements of one community college disclosed bank deposits
that were not fully collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by State
law.
The financial statements of Wor-Wic Community College disclosed that bank
deposits were not fully collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by State
law. Specifically, these financial statements disclosed that cash deposits totaling
$554,048 were secured by collateral which was not one of the types authorized by
State laws.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The Local Government Article, Section 17-101 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that deposits with financial institutions by local government
units (including community colleges) be fully collateralized. In addition, this
Section of the law requires that collateral be of the types specified in the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 6-202 of the Code. Full
collateralization is necessary to minimize the risk of loss of a deposit in the event
of the default of a financial institution.
Two community colleges’ financial statements did not meet certain
requirements of generally accepted accounting principles.
Our review disclosed two colleges’ did not meet certain requirements of generally
accepted accounting principles. Specifically, the Hagerstown Community
College “Statement of Net Position” did not display the assets, deferred outflow
of resources, liabilities, and deferred inflow of resources for fiscal years 2013 and
2012 in accordance with the provisions established by the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board’s (GASB) Statement No. 65 entitled Items
Previously Reported as Assets and Liabilities. Specifically, we noted the
statement presented a "Deferred Inflow of Resources – Deferred student tuition
revenue" totaling $4,571,255 and $4,925,786 for fiscal years 2013 and 2012,
respectively. However, this unearned revenue does not meet the definition of a
deferred inflow of resources. Section 1600 of the Codification of Governmental
Accounting and Financial Reporting Standards published by the GASB states that
material revenues received prior to normal time of receipt should be recorded as
liabilities.
The Prince George’s Community College financial statements were not presented
in accordance with the requirements as established by GASB Statement No. 63
entitled Financial Reporting of Deferred Outflows of Resources, Deferred Inflows
of Resources, and Net Position. Specifically, the basic financial statements
(business-type financial statements and fiduciary fund financial statements) did
not use the terminology established by GASB Statement No. 63 and codified
primarily in Section 2200 of the Codification of Governmental Accounting and
Financial Reporting Standards published by the GASB. For example, the
Statement of Net Position was entitled "Statement of Net Assets."
MHEC advised us that it would notify the Colleges of the deficiencies and ensure
the deficiencies are corrected in future audits.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Management Letters
Management letters for fiscal year 2013 included a total of 13
recommendations for improvement, including 3 recommendations
considered to be material weaknesses related to one college’s compliance
with requirements.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013. Our
review disclosed that 7 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations; the remaining 8 community colleges received a total of 13
recommendations, 3 of which were considered material weaknesses related to
student financial aid compliance requirements. The material weaknesses were
found at Prince George’s Community College and resulted in a qualified opinion
on the student financial aid cluster in the College’s Independent Auditors’ Report
on Compliance With Requirements That Could Have a Direct and Material Effect
on Each Major Program and on Internal Control Over Compliance in
accordance With OMB Circular A-133.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the College’s response to the
material weaknesses and determined that appropriate corrective actions were
indicated.
MHEC did not formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
10 other recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s guidelines,
comments and suggestions related to these deficiencies are not required. When
auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up actions are
subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2013
recommendations by fiscal area. Five of the 13 recommendations were repeated
from the preceding year.
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Financial aid 10
Accounting and financial reporting 1
Student enrollment and residency 1
Grants and contracts 1
Total 13
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor