Title: Prince George's County Public Schools
Date: 02/19/2014
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d37cc9d72404c150a2a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:46:24.982776
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Prince George’s County Public Schools
February 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 9
Oversight and Governance Change 9
Statistical Overview 9
External and Internal Audits 10
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 11
Revenue and Billing Cycle
* Finding 1 –Segregation of Duties Over the Enrollment, Collection, and 12
Deposit Functions in the Before and After Care Program Were
Inadequate
Federal Funds 13
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 2 – PGCPS Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Certain Disbursements 14
* Finding 3 – PGCPS Did Not Maintain Required Documentation 15
Justifying the Use of Sole Source Procurements
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 4 – Internal Controls Over Payroll and Personnel Transactions 16
Were Not Adequate in the Central Office and at Various Departments
* Finding 5 – PGCPS Did Not Implement Adequate Processes to Prevent 17
or Timely Detect Overpayments to Employees
Finding 6 – PGCPS Did Not Have a Policy to Support the Method 18
Used to Calculate Leave Payouts Upon Employee Separation
Finding 7 – PGCPS Paid for the Use of Donated Sick Leave Totaling 19
$2.4 Million in Excess of Contributions to the Sick Leave Banks
* Finding 8 – Internal Controls and Record Keeping for Certain 19
Transportation Department Employees Were Not Adequate
Inventory Control and Accountability
* Finding 9 – PGCPS Equipment Inventory Records Were Not 21
Comprehensive or Complete
* Finding 10 – Physical Inventories of Equipment Were Not Conducted 23
Regularly and Policies Were Not Established for Performing
Inventories
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
* Finding 11 – PGCPS Did Not Ensure that Employee Access to 24
Its Automated Financial System was Appropriate
Finding 12 – Inadequate Controls Over Databases Resulted in 26
Security Vulnerabilities
* Finding 13 – PGCPS Did Not Have a Disaster Recovery Plan 27
* Finding 14 – The PGCPS Network Was Not Properly Secured 27
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 15 – PGCPS Did Not Adequately Document Preventive 29
Maintenance Work Performed
Finding 16 – Energy Performance Contracts Lacked Necessary 30
Specificity to Ensure Timely Completion and Realization of
Expected Savings
Finding 17 – PGCPS Did Not Always Obtain Adequate Assurance 31
that Payments Were For Proper Amounts or For Services Provided
in Accordance With the Approved Energy Performance Contract
Finding 18 – PGCPS Paid Higher Prices For Certain Projects Than 32
Specified in the Energy Performance Contracts
Transportation Services
* Finding 19 – PGCPS Did Not Implement Certain Practices to Promote 33
More Efficient Use of Its Bus Fleet
Finding 20 – PGCPS Did Not Adequately Control Access to the 35
Automated Fuel Dispensing System
Food Service Operations 35
School Board Oversight
Finding 21 – PGCPS Has Not Determined if Various Cost Saving 39
Measures Have Had the Expected Results
Other Financial Controls
Finding 22 – PGCPS Did Not Implement Risk Management Strategies 40
to Identify, Monitor, Mitigate, or Prevent Risk Factors
Finding 23 – PGCPS Did Not Take Sufficient Actions to Control Health 41
Care Costs
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 43
Agency Response Appendix A
Auditor’s Comments on Agency Response Appendix B
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Prince George’s County Public Schools
(PGCPS)
February 2014
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
PGCPS ranks 2nd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems
in Maryland. In fiscal year 2012, PGCPS had a total full-time regular and
special education pupil population of 123,833 at its 197 schools. PGCPS’
operating and capital expenditures totaled $1.8 billion during that year.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of PGCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated January 10, 2006. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for PGCPS to improve internal controls, to adopt more cost-
effective processes, and to enhance policy direction.
PGCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability in Certain
Financial Areas
Although proper internal controls had been established in certain financial
areas, such as for food service contracts and cash receipts at the central
office, PGCPS needs to improve internal controls and accountability in certain
other financial areas. For example, PGCPS had not implemented adequate
controls over its human resources and payroll. PGCPS could not substantiate
that reports of human resource and payroll changes processed were routinely
generated from the system, and that all such transactions were reviewed by
supervisors. Our review disclosed that PGCPS made a number of
overpayments to employees. We also found that over 300 supervisors had
the ability to enter and approve timecard changes in the automated system.
PGCPS did not implement controls to ensure that Transportation Department
payroll, including overtime, was accurate. The Department did not use a
standardized process (such as time clocks) to record time worked by drivers
and attendants. Our tests identified a lack of support for certain actual hours
worked, including overtime hours. For fiscal year 2012, transportation payroll
totaled $87.5 million including $6.4 million in overtime.
PGCPS had not implemented procedures and controls over cash receipts
related to the Before and After School Care Program (these receipts totaled
$7.5 million in fiscal year 2012). At each of the 57 sites where PGCPS
operated this Program, Program coordinators had complete control over the
receipts and related records as they enrolled students, collected and
deposited tuition payments, and maintained all of the related records.
5

--- Page 8 ---
PGCPS had not implemented an adequate process to ensure that employee
access to its automated systems (which includes purchasing, accounts
payable, payroll and personnel among other functionality) was proper. For
example, PGCPS did not establish standard user profiles to ensure that
assigned system capabilities were appropriate based on an employee’s
position or job duties. In addition, PGCPS could not generate security reports
that readily identified users with critical system capabilities. We also noted
that proper security controls were not implemented for its student
management and financial databases, and intrusion detection and prevention
tools were not used on its network.
PGCPS Should Implement Certain Steps to Improve Cost Effectiveness
PGCPS needs to take steps to enhance bus transportation efficiency. We
found that PGCPS did not use its automated routing software to promote
efficiency in the use of its bus fleet. Further, the accuracy of the data
contained in the automated system appeared to be questionable. For
example, the system showed that 388 regular bus routes had a travel time of
zero minutes and that 22 bus routes were assigned 100 or more students
exceeding the bus manufacturer’s capacity (manufacturer capacity is
generally 64 students). Consequently, current bus utilization could not be
readily assessed. A December 2011 transportation task force report
indicated that the average utilization of PGCPS buses during the 2010 – 2011
school year was only 48 percent of capacity.
PGCPS was unable to provide key documentation related to energy
performance contracts awarded to two vendors. These contracts are
designed to improve energy efficiency and lower costs to PGCPS which are
used to pay back funds borrowed to pay for the contracts. Project completion
schedules were not available and PGCPS could not provide documentation to
show how cost savings would be calculated. The contracts provided for
vendor guaranteed savings of $184.4 million. In addition, although PGCPS
employed a third-party contract monitor to oversee these contracts, we found
two instances totaling $6.5 million where PGCPS paid a contractor even when
the monitor did not approve the related invoice. PGCPS did not document its
rationale for paying these invoices. Finally, we found instances where the
contractors improperly increased the invoiced amounts for certain project
components between various phases of the contracts. Contract documents
specifically prohibit such increases unless PGCPS requested additional
services and approved the increases.
PGCPS Needs to Establish or Modify Certain Policies and Ensure Compliance
with Existing Policies
PGCPS frequently did not comply with its existing policy that requires approval
of requests to procure certain services without competitive procurement. Our
6

--- Page 9 ---
test of six such contracts totaling $1 million found no documentation that the
requesting department submitted a request to use sole source procurement
or that such a request was approved as required.
PGCPS did not have a policy to address its methodology for calculating leave
payouts to employees. Our recalculations of leave payments to employees
using the payroll system daily pay rates found that the actual payments made
by PGCPS always exceeded our calculations. We were not provided with
documentation to indicate that the method PGCPS used had been approved
by the Board or the Superintendent.
PGCPS’ Property Control Manual did not specify the frequency of physical
inventories of equipment, which was valued at $171 million as of June 2012.
PGCPS had not conducted a complete physical inventory of 198 of its 212
locations since 2007.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Background Information
Oversight and Governance Change
Until June 1, 2013, Prince George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) was
governed by a local school board consisting of nine elected members (four
elected on a county-wide basis and five elected from the different school
board districts) and a non-voting student member. The Board selected the
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) who is responsible for the overall administration
of PGCPS.
Effective June 1, 2013, Chapter 147, Laws of Maryland, 2013, modified the
governance structure of the Board and the methodology for appointing the
CEO. The law increased the number of Board members from 10 to 14
(including 1 student member) and provided that 3 of the 4 additional
members shall be appointed by the Prince George’s County Executive. The
remaining new member is appointed by the Prince George’s County Council.
The law also states that the County Executive shall appoint the chair and vice
chair of the Board. The law further states that the PGCPS CEO is selected by
the County Executive and must receive the approval of the State
Superintendent of Schools before appointment by the Board. The current CEO
was appointed effective August 1, 2013.
The State and the Prince George’s County government provide the vast
majority of PGCPS funding. In addition, the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE) exercises considerable oversight through the establishment
and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with PGCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Prince George’s County government also exercises authority over
PGCPS through review and approval of PGCPS’ annual operating and capital
budgets.
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the MSDE, PGCPS ranks
2nd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
From fiscal year 2001 to 2012, the total full-time regular and special
education pupil population has decreased 7.4 percent from 133,723 to
123,833 pupils. For the 2012 – 2013 school year, PGCPS had 197 schools
and other educational facilities, not including 7 public charter schools.
According to PGCPS’ audited financial statements and required supplementary
information, expenditures totaled $1.8 billion in fiscal year 2012. The largest
expenditure category is salaries and wages, including benefits, which
9

--- Page 12 ---
accounted for 77 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2012.
According to MSDE records, during fiscal year 2012, PGCPS had 15,961 full-
time equivalent positions which consisted of 9,756 instructional and 6,205
non-instructional employees.
External and Internal Audits
Annually, PGCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently
audit its fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor
conducts what is referred to as a Single Audit of PGCPS federal grant
programs (as required by federal regulations). The resulting financial
statement and Single Audit reports for the 2012 fiscal year were issued
October 1 and December 7, 2012, respectively.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited PGCPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we relied
on the results of the independent audits to reduce the scope of our audit work
related to revenues, accounts receivable, and federal grant activity. In
addition, we relied on the results on the work performed by the PGCPS
internal auditors to reduce the scope of our work related to school activity
funds.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 41 of the 66 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated January 10, 2006 (the 66
findings resulted in 24 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed
up on these 41 findings based on our current assessment of significance and
risk relative to the audit objectives. We determined that PGCPS satisfactorily
addressed 25 of these findings. The remaining 16 findings are repeated as
12 findings in this report.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Prince George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) revenues consist primarily of
funds received from Prince George’s County, the State, and the federal
government. According to the PGCPS audited financial statements, revenues
from all sources totaled $1.9 billion during fiscal year 2012. In addition,
PGCPS maintains school activity funds that are collected to operate various
student activities, clubs, and school publications. Each school maintains
detail records which separately account for the activity of each group or club.
Each school also maintains its own separate bank account. For fiscal year
2012, school activity fund collections totaled $15 million and disbursements
totaled $14.6 million. The collective June 30, 2012 activity fund balance
based on the audited financial statements totaled $11 million.
External and Internal Audits Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding
Revenue Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the PGCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the
results of that audit for certain revenues and accounts receivable (for
example, amounts due from other governments). The auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses regarding significant
revenue types or accounts receivable. Such testing included the most
significant revenue types–the majority of which related to electronic fund
transfers from other government entities.
The PGCPS internal auditor conducts audits of school activity funds.1 The
internal auditor’s review and testing of the school activity funds at PGCPS
schools identified some control weaknesses at certain schools that were
addressed by school management. The internal auditor’s reports we reviewed
disclosed that internal control weaknesses identified were not prevalent. The
internal auditor audits all schools’ activity funds on a rotating basis and
reports its findings to the school principals, central administrative staff, and
the Board.
1 The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that school activity funds are used only for intended
purposes by those to whom the assets belong. Receipts for the school activity funds are not included
in the $1.9 billion revenue total because the Board cannot use these assets to finance its operations.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Revenues Tested Were Properly Processed and Deposited
Our test of revenues collected and deposited by the Central Treasurer’s Office
disclosed that the receipts tested were properly deposited and recorded.
Specifically, our test of 20 receipts processed by the Central Treasurer’s Office
(totaling $4.8 million) disclosed that receipts tested were deposited in a
timely manner and accurately recorded in PGCPS’ accounting records. In
addition, we determined that supervisory personnel verified that all amounts
received were deposited as documented by supervisory sign-off of the
validated deposit slip.
Finding 1
Segregation of duties over the enrollment, collection, and deposit functions in
the Before and After School Care Program were inadequate.
Analysis
Although PGCPS had implemented certain procedures and controls over cash
receipts, controls over the Before and After School Care Program were not
adequate to ensure all collections were deposited. Specifically, program
coordinators had complete control over the cash receipts process since they
enrolled individual students, collected and deposited related tuition
payments, maintained all related student records, and reported deposit
summaries to the central program office.
PGCPS operates a Before and After School Care Program at 57 sites.
Participating families pay the tuition (using money orders, certified checks, or
on-line payment). Separately, tuition subsidies from the local Department of
Social Services are paid on behalf of eligible students to each site’s program
coordinator. Each location maintains a bank account and processes all
program revenue. All Program records were maintained manually. Program
coordinators forward certain documentation, including weekly reports of
enrollment, validated deposit slips, and bank reconciliations to a central office
that provides program oversight. We were advised that the central office
performed periodic site visits to review documentation maintained by the
program, such as enrollment and deposit documents, although due to staffing
cut-backs the visits were no longer performed regularly.
Although supervisory personnel at the central office reviewed validated
deposit slips and the bank reconciliations, these processes did not ensure
that all collections for program services were received and deposited due to
the lack of segregation of duties within the Program. According to PGCPS
records, program revenue for fiscal year 2012 totaled $7.5 million. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PGCPS ensure a proper segregation of duties is
established over the enrollment, collection, and deposit functions of the
Before and After School Care Program (repeat). For example, PGCPS should
establish centralized enrollment and independently reconcile program
revenue to enrollment records on a periodic basis.
Federal Funds
Background
PGCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of Federal
Awards, fiscal year 2012 expenditures of federal award funds totaled $140
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Regarding Federal Grant Management
Due to the work performed by the independent certified public accounting
firm that conducted the Single Audit of the PGCPS federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor’s work and results
to reduce our audit scope and detailed audit work for federal funds.
Medicaid Funds Were Received for Eligible Services
PGCPS has established procedures to identify students eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and to recover the related funds. For example, at the
beginning of the year, and on a quarterly basis, PGCPS electronically matches
Medicaid Assistance records to all enrolled students. In addition, PGCPS
ensures that services provided are billed and recoveries subsequently
received on a monthly basis. According to the fiscal year 2012 audited
financial statements, reimbursement for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled
$4 million.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements, non-payroll disbursements
totaled $412 million during fiscal year 2012. PGCPS has a comprehensive
procurement policy and related procedures. For example, the policy sets
bidding requirements for contracts for purchases of goods, services, and
instructional supplies. PGCPS uses an automated system to process
requisitions, purchase orders, invoices, and payments to vendors. Under
13

--- Page 16 ---
PGCPS procurement procedures, requisitions are prepared by departments
and are subject to on-line supervisory approval within the requesting
departments. Purchase orders, contracts, solicitations, and bids are generally
handled by the central purchasing department. The ordering department is to
document the receipt of goods and services by signing a copy of the related
purchase order and entering receiving report information into the automated
system. After the finance office’s accounts payable unit matches invoices to
information on the automated system, vendor payments are processed.
Finding 2
PGCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain disbursements.
Analysis
PGCPS did not adequately ensure the propriety of certain disbursements. For
example, we found the following conditions:
 PGCPS did not adequately monitor utility usage, such as electricity and
water. Although a PGCPS employee monthly selects 10 utility invoices for
review to determine the existence of any unusual charges, we were
advised that the review does not include any comparison of month-to-
month or year-to-year usage nor does it include a determination that the
billed meter readings were reasonable. Ten invoices represents one
percent of all utility invoices received on a monthly basis. Furthermore,
PGCPS did not utilize available automated technology to monitor energy
usage. Consequently, there is no system in place to summarize utility
usage information in order to monitor usage and make effective decisions
for enhancing efficient resource utilization. Certain State agencies and
other public schools systems in Maryland have implemented automated
technology to monitor utility usage and assess the reasonableness of
billings. We were advised that a utility bill pay system that would provide
this function is included in the energy performance contracts currently
underway within the system. According to PGCPS records, it spent $33.5
million on utilities during fiscal year 2012.
 PGCPS did not ensure that amounts billed were accurate or appropriate.
Our test of 14 disbursements for transportation maintenance totaling $6
million paid to five vendors disclosed that for 10 invoices, PGCPS could
not support the amounts billed. Specifically, for these 10 invoices totaling
$813,000, PGCPS could not provide contract documentation that
supported the invoice pricing.
 Similarly, PGCPS did not ensure amounts billed agreed to approved
contract rates for wireless phone services. Additionally, PGCPS lacked
independent approval for payment of the wireless service invoices and for
14

--- Page 17 ---
the issuance of wireless phones. PGCPS has approximately 1,600 active
wireless phones.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that PGCPS
a. ensure the accuracy and propriety of all amounts invoiced including
verification to supporting documentation (repeat), and
b. segregate duties to ensure independent approval exists for the issuance
of wireless phones and the payment of the related invoices.
Finding 3
PGCPS did not maintain required documentation justifying the use of sole
source procurements totaling $1 million.
Analysis
PGCPS did not document, as required, the rationale for the use of sole source
procurements for any of the six consulting contracts selected for testing
totaling $1 million. Without this documentation, there is no assurance that
the services procured were the best value available to the system, or that they
could not be competitively bid.
According to PGCPS procurement procedures, certain specialized services
(including consulting) do not have to be competitively procured, but may be
procured as a sole source. However, these procedures require that for sole
source procurements, the department requesting the service complete a bid
exemption letter that lists all potential advantages of not soliciting bids for the
contract. This letter is required to be submitted to the Director of Purchasing
for approval prior to the procurement. A bid exemption letter was not on file
for any of the contracts tested nor was there any written documentation
explaining the reasons for selecting the contracted vendor.
According to PGCPS records, the value of contracts not bid during fiscal year
2011 and 2012 totaled approximately $22 million. The lack of competitive
procurements without adequate justification was commented on in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that PGCPS maintain adequate documentation supporting
sole source procurements, including the Director of Purchasing’s approval of
all bid exemption letters prior to the related procurement, as required
(repeat).
15

--- Page 18 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll represents the largest single cost component in the PGCPS budget.
According to the audited financial statements and PGCPS records, fiscal year
2012 salary, wage, and benefits costs totaled $1.4 billion. According to
MSDE reports, as of October 2012, PGCPS had 15,931 full-time equivalent
positions, including 6,046 non-instructional positions. PGCPS uses an
automated system to maintain human resources information, process payroll,
and track employee leave balances. PGCPS has a centralized human
resource office that processes personnel transactions (such as adding new
employees and processing salary information). Payroll processing is also
handled on a centralized basis. Individual departments and schools are
responsible for processing automated timesheets and leave data for
employees.
Finding 4
Internal controls over payroll and personnel transactions were not adequate
in both the central office and at the various departments.
Analysis
Critical human resources and payroll transactions were not subject to a
documented independent supervisory review. For example, we noted the
following conditions:
 Required supervisory approvals over changes recorded in the automated
human resources system, including personnel information, salary
adjustments, and special payouts were not documented. We were
advised that supervisory personnel reviewed all changes to the automated
human resources and payroll system by comparing the changes to the
initiating documents. However, this review was not documented and
PGCPS could not provide us with evidence that a report of changes
processed was generated from the system on a routine basis to identify all
transactions needing supervisory review. Similar conditions were included
in our preceding audit report.
 Our test of 20 payouts for employee separation totaling $777,433 made
in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 disclosed that in 19 of the 20 tested items,
there was no documentation of independent supervisory review and
approval for the transactions. For two of the test items, PGCPS overpaid
the employees $25,111 as a result of duplicate payments. As of
September 2012, PGCPS had recovered $7,100 out of $9,553 related to
one of the duplicate payments, but was not aware of the other duplicate
payment of $15,558 which we brought to their attention.
16

--- Page 19 ---
 PGCPS did not limit certain supervisors’ user capabilities on the
automated system in the individual departments. We found that 303
supervisors responsible for approving timecards and any changes also had
the ability to enter timecard information. As a result, these employees had
incompatible duties. We also found that supervisors often were
responsible for approving a large number of employee timecards within
the system each pay period. For example, 13 supervisors were individually
responsible for approving between 200 and 300 timecards each pay
period and 27 supervisors were individually responsible for approving
between 100 and 200 timecards each pay period. We questioned several
supervisors and they advised that they did not take any action to
determine if the information recorded on the timecard was accurate prior
to approval.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that PGCPS
a. perform and document evidence of supervisory reviews of critical human
resources and payroll transactions and ensure they are supported by
appropriate documentation (repeat);
b. recover the identified duplicate payments;
c. separate the functions of recording and approving timecards within the
automated system; and
d. review current supervisory responsibilities for approving timecards and, to
the extent practical, reduce the number of timecards these individuals are
responsible for approving.
Finding 5
PGCPS did not implement adequate processes to prevent or timely detect
overpayments to employees.
Analysis
A lack of adequate manual and automated processes at PGCPS contributed to
overpayments to employees. We identified a number of missing processes for
identifying and reporting events and conditions that could cause
overpayments. Specifically, our testing and review of accounts receivable
records and an internal audit report disclosed that overpayments were made
under an assortment of circumstances such as paying contract employees for
days not worked, improperly calculating leave payouts to terminated
employees, not timely or accurately recording employee separation dates,
making payments to employees on unpaid leave, and processing duplicate
payments. For example, our review of 11 overpayments identified by PGCPS
totaling $210,000 disclosed that 6 of these overpayments totaling $95,000
were due to the failure to timely notify the Payroll Department of employee
17

--- Page 20 ---
separations. A similar condition was commented on in our preceding audit
report regarding a lack of processes to prevent employee overpayments.
As of October 2012, outstanding overpayments to employees totaled $1
million according to PGCPS records, including $780,000 submitted to an
outside collection agency for recovery. In addition, PGCPS approved write-offs
of $1.4 million in uncollectible accounts (those accounts with balances
exceeding three years old) during fiscal years 2008 to 2012.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that PGCPS develop appropriate processes to prevent
overpayments (repeat).
Finding 6
PGCPS did not have a policy to support the method used to calculate leave
payouts upon employee separation.
Analysis
PGCPS did not have a Board approved policy supporting the basis for
calculating leave payouts. Specifically, the automated system calculates an
employee’s daily pay rate based on 261 days per year for a 12 month work
calendar, but the manual leave calculations supporting the leave payouts
were based on 244 days per year (the 261 days less 17 holidays).
Consequently, the manual calculations used a higher daily pay rate than that
recorded in the automated system, resulting in higher payments made to
employees receiving such payouts. Our test of 10 employee payouts totaling
$596,000 made during fiscal years 2010 and 2011, disclosed the 10
employees received an additional $39,000 payout when compared to the
payout calculated on the automated system’s daily pay rate. According to
PGCPS records, fiscal year 2011 payouts totaled $5 million.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that PGCPS establish a formal Board approved policy
specifying the appropriate daily pay rate basis for calculating leave payouts.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 7
PGCPS paid for sick leave usage totaling $2.4 million in excess of donations
to the sick leave banks.
Analysis
PGCPS does not have a policy for reviewing and granting union employees’
sick leave bank requests. Sick leave banks are established for employees to
voluntarily donate sick leave for other employees who have exhausted their
leave. Furthermore, PGCPS did not review total sick leave bank balances to
determine the availability of sick leave hours prior to approving and
processing the sick leave grants. As a result, PGCPS paid for sick leave usage
in excess of donations.
Our review of the five union sick leave banks’ records disclosed that one sick
leave bank had granted to employees 27,922 hours in excess of the total
hours donated by employees as of the end of fiscal year 2011 as well as the
carryover of donated hours available at the beginning the fiscal year. This
represented an unearned benefit provided to PGCPS union employees valued
at approximately $2.4 million. (Fiscal year 2011 was the last completed year
for which records were available at the time of our field work).
Sick leave banks are authorized under PGCPS contracts with the five unions
representing PGCPS employees, and the donation process is governed by
each union agreement. The above situation occurred because although the
union agreements grant PGCPS the authority to disagree with an approved
grant after providing a full explanation, PGCPS management stated that it
does not deny union approved grants.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that PGCPS establish a policy over sick leave bank grants
regarding the permissibility for granting requests in excess of the available
balance.
Finding 8
Internal controls and record keeping related to certain Transportation
Department employees were not adequate to ensure the propriety of salary
payments.
Analysis
Internal controls and record keeping related to Transportation Department
bus drivers and bus attendants were not adequate. Bus drivers and bus
attendants are paid based on predetermined route hours as calculated by the
19

--- Page 22 ---
automated routing system, with manual adjustments for other non-routine
duties (such as bus inspections), leave taken, and overtime worked.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 PGCPS did not have a standardized process (for example, time clocks) to
determine actual time worked by drivers and attendants. Instead,
supervisors stationed at the various bus lots were responsible for
maintaining documentation to track leave, substitute assignments, and
other duties impacting time, which they recorded on payroll registers that
were posted to the transportation timekeeping system for eventual
interface to the automated payroll system. However, the documentation
maintained by the supervisors was informal, inconsistent, or incomplete,
such as handwritten notes recorded in spiral notebooks or on daily route
schedules. In some instances, when we attempted to test time reported,
documentation was missing. For example, our test of overtime payments
made to 10 employees totaling $21,895 during fiscal year 2011 disclosed
that 238 of the tested 647.5 overtime hours were not adequately
supported or approved. For 3 employees with 203.75 hours of overtime,
PGCPS could not provide us with any documentation to support the hours
worked. Also, for 6 of the remaining 7 employees, documentation
provided did not support all of the overtime hours worked. PGCPS
procedures require that approval for paid overtime be obtained in advance
from appropriate supervisory personnel.
 Managers responsible for approving time in the transportation
timekeeping system for drivers and attendants did not sight
documentation of hours worked, even on a test basis.
 Changes to routes increasing hours worked for bus drivers were not
independently verified. Drivers complete and sign a route manifest to
document any additional time due to modifications to permanent route
assignments (the union agreement forbids reductions in route times
established at the beginning of each school year), which is ultimately used
to support changes to the automated payroll system. Although PGCPS
management stated that an independent employee rides on the bus to
verify the modification, this process was not documented. As a result,
changes to routes and ultimately to hours charged by the driver, may be
improper or inaccurate. According to PGCPS records, changes to routes
during fiscal year 2012 resulted in a total increase of 130,682 paid hours.
Using the starting salary of $16.68 for drivers, we estimated that these
modifications increased employee payroll by at least $2.2 million.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Similar conditions regarding the payroll documentation were commented
upon in our preceding audit report. The Transportation Department employs
1,428 personnel, which includes 1,285 drivers. Payroll expenditures in fiscal
year 2012 totaled $87.5 million. In addition, overtime expenditures for PGCPS
totaled approximately $11 million in fiscal year 2011 (a $2.6 million increase
over the total overtime charged in fiscal year 2010). Of that amount,
approximately 58 percent or $6.4 million was paid to Transportation
Department employees.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that PGCPS ensure
a. that a standard time reporting process for transportation employees (such
as timesheets or time clock) is implemented and that related documents
are retained (repeat), and all overtime is properly supported and approved
in accordance with PGCPS procedures;
b. that supervisors approving payroll records, review the source
documentation, at least on a test basis; and
c. that an employee independent of the driver verifies the propriety and
accuracy of all changes to permanent route assignments and documents
the verification procedures performed.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to PGCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $171 million as of June 30, 2012.
PGCPS uses automated records maintained in the accounting office to track
equipment items with a cost of $500 or more (items valued at $5,000 or
more are capitalized for financial statement purposes). In addition, the
Information Technology Department (ITD) maintains separate inventory
records for computers and related peripheral items.
Finding 9
PGCPS equipment inventory records were not comprehensive or complete and
items were not physically marked as being property of the System.
Analysis
Our review disclosed a lack of compliance with established equipment record
keeping policies. For example, we noted the following conditions:
 Our test of 14 purchases (including capital and non-capital items) totaling
$422,000 made in fiscal year 2012 disclosed that 6 items (including
printers, freezers, and audio visual equipment) totaling $217,000 had not
21

--- Page 24 ---
been posted to the detail equipment records as of October 2012. These
items were purchased between July 2011 and June 2012. The PGCPS
Property Control Manual (PCM) states that all items valued at $500 or
more will be recorded on a computerized system maintained by the Fixed
Assets Department to support the value, for self-insurance and budget
request purposes, establish control, and for reporting to State and federal
agencies. The PGCPS Property Audit Office advised us that schools were
frequently not following established PCM requirements for completing new
property forms.
 Detail records for non-capital equipment (that is, equipment valued
between $500 and $5,000) frequently did not include all required
information. For example, a detail report of inventory provided to us
included 47,958 items (out of a total of 104,586 items) that had a
purchase price of zero or $1. In addition, the records did not include the
serial number for 4,849 items. The PGCPS PCM requires that the
inventory records include description, serial number, model, manufacturer,
and unit price.
 PGCPS does not always affix inventory tags or otherwise mark equipment
as its property. However, starting in fiscal year 2011, ITD affixed bar
codes that include unique identification numbers and identify computers
and related peripherals as the property of PGCPS. In addition, we found
that the PGCPS PCM already requires that special tags be displayed on
certain grant funded equipment.
Similar conditions were commented on in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that PGCPS
a. ensure that detailed equipment records are maintained for all appropriate
assets (repeat);
b. ensure that detail records include all applicable information, including cost
and serial numbers or other specific identifying information (repeat); and
c. amend the Property Control Manual to require tagging of all equipment for
identification purposes.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 10
Physical inventories of equipment were not conducted regularly and policies
had not established a process for performing physical inventories.
Analysis
PGCPS did not conduct periodic physical inventories of its equipment.
Furthermore, the PCM did not specify certain critical requirements for
performing physical inventories such as the frequency, items to be
inventoried, designating responsibility for conducting the inventories, and
reconciling the results to the detail inventory records.
Our review disclosed that only the PGCPS Property Audit Office (a unit of the
PGCPS Internal Audit Department) had conducted some physical inventories,
which included reconciling results to the related detail records, and submitting
an annual summary of these inventory results to the Board. In its reports to
the Board for fiscal years 2011 and 2010, the Department commented that
its property audits (which were for only a small portion of the 212 inventory
locations) resulted in identifying missing items with a value of $750,000 and
$980,000, respectively. Items not located included computers, printers, and
mechanical equipment.
The Property Audit Office’s records, which we verified, indicated that many
locations had not been audited in several years (see Table 1 below).
Table 1
Physical Inventories Completed by Property Audit Office
Number of Locations Inventoried
Fiscal Year of by Equipment Type
Most Recent Musical
Physical Inventory Complete Computers Only Instruments
Only
2012 None 33 None
2011 None 41 None
2010 2 51 None
2009 5 30 None
2008 3 24 46
2007 4 10 None
Prior to 2007 5 4 13
None 193 19 153
Total Locations 212 212 212
Source: Property Audit Office, as of June 6, 2012
Note: “Locations” reflects the number of schools and administrative buildings as
determined by the Property Audit Office.
A similar condition was commented on in our preceding audit report.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Recommendation 10
We recommend that PGCPS
a. amend the PCM to specify the frequency for conducting physical
inventories (for example every three years), designate inventorying
responsibilities and require documented reconciliations of the inventory
counts to the detailed equipment records (repeat); and
b. ensure that all locations are inventoried on a regular basis (repeat).
Information Technology
Background
PGCPS’ Information Technology Department (ITD) maintains and administers
the computer network, computer operations, and information systems
applications. PGCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the computer
resources located at PGCPS’ two data centers. These data centers host
numerous devices including firewalls and computer servers to support PGCPS’
information system applications. The ITD supports PGCPS’ critical
applications including its student management system and its Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) application which includes financial, human
resources, and payroll modules.
Finding 11
PGCPS did not ensure that employee access to its automated financial system
was appropriate.
Analysis
PGCPS did not have a procedure to ensure that employee access to ERP
applications and functions were appropriate based on the employee's job
duties. Specifically, we found the following conditions:
 PGCPS did not require standardized user access profiles; rather, each
user’s access capabilities for various system functions could be unique as
they are assigned based on their responsibilities and job duties.
Consequently, this increases the likelihood that employees are assigned
incompatible or inappropriate functions. Furthermore, PGCPS advised us
that system security reports were not readily available to assess the
appropriateness of user access. PGCPS also advised us that they could
provide us with detailed access capabilities by user; however, we
determined that this was not a practical way to determine propriety of
system access due to the length of the related documentation. For
example, one user profile was 141 pages long and there were 19,168
user names as of March 2012.
24

--- Page 27 ---
 Although, we were advised that PGCPS supervisory staff are required to
periodically confirm the propriety of employee access capabilities based
on current job duties, PGCPS system administrators advised us that
supervisors often did not respond to periodic ITD reports requesting such
confirmations. A similar condition was commented on in our preceding
audit report.
 Our testing of certain critical access capabilities (such as purchasing)
assigned to 46 individuals, disclosed that 38 of these employees had
been assigned capabilities that resulted in an inadequate separation of
duties. For example, 20 employees could record requisitions, purchase
orders, and the related receiving information in the system without any
independent review. We also found that several senior staff had system
programming capabilities in addition to almost complete operational
access (that is, PGCPS assigned certain information technology staff both
programming and operations capabilities that provided essentially total
access to the system).
 Approval paths have been established in the automated system to route
requisitions to individuals with a sufficient approval authority as defined
by Board policy. While this process provides some control over the
procurement process, we found that two PGCPS Purchasing Department
employees could modify approval paths and that these changes were
not subject to independent review by supervisory personnel.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that PGCPS ensure appropriate internal controls exist for
granting and periodically reviewing assigned access capabilities on the
automated financial system. Specifically, we recommend that PGCPS
a. develop security reports that readily identify employee access information
for critical responsibilities and functions within the automated system,
b. implement standardized user profiles,
c. periodically ensure that employee access capabilities are appropriate and
warranted based on the employee’s current job duties (repeat),
d. ensure that staff who are assigned programming capabilities do not also
have capabilities that would allow them to perform system operational
functions, and
e. limit modification capabilities to independent supervisory personnel and
ensure any changes are reviewed for propriety.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 12
Inadequate controls over the student management system and ERP
databases resulted in security vulnerabilities.
Analysis
Security controls over the student management system and ERP databases
were not adequate. As a result, security violations that could adversely affect
the integrity of the databases could go undetected. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 Both aforementioned databases were not configured to log direct changes
to critical data and security tables or to log the use of critical database
privileges although the capability to perform such logging existed within
the software for each database. In addition, there was no documentation
to support any reviews performed of database logs that were generated.
Best practices identified in the State of Maryland Department of
Information Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy state that
information systems must generate audit records for all security-relevant
events and procedures must be developed to routinely review audit
records for indications of unusual activities or suspected violations.
 At the time of our review, the student management system database was
running a database version that had not been supported by the vendor for
eight months. As a result, the database had not been updated for any
vulnerability that may have occurred. Best practices identified in the
University System of Maryland’s Guidelines in Response to the State IT
Security Policy, state that “all devices must have updates and patches
installed on a timely basis to correct significant security flaws.”
 An insecure service was enabled on the student management system
database that could allow users to run commands as a privileged user.
This service was intended only to accept requests from the database
server but local users on the server hosting this database could execute
commands using this service without authentication.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that PGCPS
a. log direct changes to critical tables and the use of critical database
privileges for the student management system and ERP databases,
b. document reviews of database logs and retain the documentation for
verification purposes,
c. ensure that databases are fully supported by the database vendors and
patched on a current basis, and
26

--- Page 29 ---
d. disable the insecure service on the student management system
database.
Finding 13
PGCPS did not have an Information Technology Disaster Recovery Plan.
Analysis
The PGCPS did not have an Information Technology Disaster Recovery Plan for
recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for example, a fire or
flood). Without a complete disaster recovery plan, a disaster could cause
significant delays, for an undetermined period of time, in restoring operations
above and beyond the expected delays that would exist in a planned recovery
scenario. Specifically, the following critical elements of a recovery plan should
be addressed according to the best practices outlined in the State of
Maryland Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines:
 Concept of operations
 Notification and activation procedures
 Recovery strategies (including use of alternate sites)
 Reconstitution procedures
 Periodic testing of the disaster recovery plan
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that PGCPS develop and implement a comprehensive
information systems disaster recovery plan (repeat).
Finding 14
The PGCPS network was not properly secured.
Analysis
The PGCPS network was not properly secured. For example, we noted the
following conditions:
 PGCPS did not use intrusion detection and prevention (IDP) coverage on its
network. Accordingly, PGCPS had no IDP protection relative to un-trusted
connections (for example the Internet). Best practices noted in the DoIT
Information Security Policy states that “intrusion detection/prevention tools
and techniques must be employed to monitor system events, detect
attacks and identify unauthorized use of information systems and/or
confidential information.”
27

--- Page 30 ---
 Thirty-two publicly accessible servers were located on the internal network
rather than in a separate network zone to minimize security risks. The
placement of these servers, which could potentially be compromised,
exposed the internal network to additional risk. The National Institute of
Standards and Technology Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy
recommends placing publicly accessible servers in a separate network
zone to protect those servers as well as an entity’s internal network.
 Connections from PGCPS student computer labs were not properly
restricted from accessing critical PGCPS internal network resources. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report. Best
practices, as per the DoIT Information Security Policy, prescribe that
entities networks “must ensure that only authorized individuals have
access to confidential information and that such access is strictly
controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of ‘least possible
privilege’ and ‘need to know.”
Recommendation 14
We recommend that PGCPS adequately secure its network from potential
attack. Specifically, we recommend that PGCPS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks, identify how IDP coverage should be best applied to its network, and
implement IPD coverage for all critical portions of its network as
appropriate;
b. place publicly accessible servers in a separate protected network zone to
minimize security risk; and
c. implement controls to limit network level student access to only
authorized local school and headquarters network resources (repeat).
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
PGCPS maintains 197 schools not including other facilities (such as
administration and support offices) with a staff of 1,540 custodial and 298
maintenance personnel. According to the approved fiscal year 2012 Capital
Improvement Plan, the estimated cost of new construction, facility
replacement, major renovations, and systemic improvement projects over the
next six years totaled $781 million. In its Comprehensive Maintenance Plan
that was prepared in October 2011, PGCPS estimated that the cost of
deferred maintenance projects was $2.5 billion.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 15
PGCPS did not adequately document preventive maintenance work
performed.
Analysis
Although PGCPS has developed a comprehensive maintenance plan that
included preventive maintenance and task schedules, and required that
inspections and preventive maintenance work be completed at certain
intervals and documented on logs contained in the plan, PGCPS did not
always have this documentation on file to substantiate that maintenance was
performed. PGCPS has various maintenance logs applicable to each facility
that include a number of specific tasks to be completed as scheduled (daily,
weekly, or monthly). For example, the boiler maintenance log includes nine
unique tasks (such as checking the water level and safety valve). Our test of
five schools for documentation of January 2013 maintenance and inspections
disclosed that logs were not always retained. Specifically, one school
provided five of the required nine maintenance logs and the remaining four
schools could not provide us with any logs for that month. Without sufficient
documentation and review by supervisory personnel, PGCPS lacks assurance
that all preventive maintenance is performed.
PGCPS has acknowledged the challenges in completing preventive
maintenance, noting that many such tasks would require shutting down the
related systems (which cannot be done while students are in the building) or
otherwise disrupt the school day. Although PGCPS has identified the need for
an additional shift to perform after-hour’s tasks and new automated software
for work order processing, it had not implemented these plans as of August
2013.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that PGCPS complete and document all preventive
maintenance performed in compliance with the requirements of the
comprehensive maintenance plan.
Energy Performance Contracts – Background
PGCPS originally procured the services of two Energy Service Companies
(ESCOs) in fiscal year 2006 to implement energy conservation measures
under the Maryland Department of General Services (DGS) statewide contract
for energy performance contracting. PGCPS implemented the energy
performance contracts in four phases from 2006 to 2010. The Board
approved each phase of the contracts, including the total cost for each phase.
Project costs totaling approximately $105 million were financed through third
29

--- Page 32 ---
parties beginning in fiscal year 2008, over periods ranging from 13 to 15
years. (The total cost of the project was not readily available.) The projects’
energy conservation measures included physical plant improvements,
installation of energy efficient devices (lighting for example) and new heating
and cooling equipment at certain schools, as well as a system to monitor and
measure the project benefits as a result of such improvements. While all
related improvements have not been completed as of June 2012, the
financing procured to fund these projects is currently being repaid. Debt
service payments through fiscal year 2012 totaled $25 million.
PGCPS contracted with a third-party monitor in August 2006 to monitor the
progress of construction, the installation of energy conservation measures,
and the accuracy of progress billings submitted by the two ESCOs. The
monitor is responsible for reviewing invoices submitted by the ESCO and
certifying completeness and accuracy. Based on PGCPS payment records, the
monitor has been paid $3.7 million between fiscal year 2007 and 2012.
Energy performance contracts allow agencies to pay for the cost of installing
energy savings equipment with the savings realized from that equipment. In
order to minimize the risk that these installations will not result in real
savings, ESCOs generally guarantee that a certain level of savings will be
achieved every year during a pre-determined payback period (generally the
same number of years the agency repays the related financing or 15 years). If
the guaranteed savings are not achieved, the vendor is responsible for the
difference. However, this guarantee is not effective until construction is
finalized because the estimated savings will be calculated based on all
equipment being online and working effectively.
Finding 16
ESCO contracts lacked necessary specificity to ensure timely project
completion and realization of expected savings.
Analysis
PGCPS lacked contract documentation to facilitate monitoring and ensure
timely project completion. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 PGCPS could not monitor or enforce timely completion of energy projects
since the two ESCO contracts did not include schedules of project
completion or any related penalty provisions. In addition, upon our inquiry,
PGCPS could not provide any other documentation that showed when
individual components of the projects would be completed, as well as an
overall project completion date. As of the end of fiscal year 2012, the
construction related to these projects which began in fiscal year 2006 was
30

--- Page 33 ---
not completed. PGCPS advised that it anticipated completion of all related
projects by the end of calendar year 2013.
 Based on the proposals submitted by the ESCOs, guaranteed savings over
the 15 year savings period were to total $184.8 million. Annual savings
are to be measured based on future energy usage as compared to a base
year; however, contract documents did not establish how the annual
savings would be calculated, nor specify the base year. Given the length
of time the project has been in process (over six years) and that savings do
not accrue until construction is completed, the determination of the base
year is critical to determining overall savings. The original DGS statewide
contract required each project to achieve a minimum 20 percent reduction
from the base year in annual energy usage and a maximum payback
period of 15 years.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that PGCPS develop an approach to ensure that projects are
completed on time and determine that guaranteed saving are achieved.
Finding 17
PGCPS did not always obtain adequate assurance that payments were for
proper amounts or for services that had been provided in accordance with the
approved contract.
Analysis
PGCPS paid for services without sufficient evidence that they were received.
Our test of four fiscal year 2011 invoices totaling $9.7 million, disclosed that
two invoices for $6.5 million were paid to the ESCOs (one to each ESCO), even
though the PGCPS third-party contract monitor did not approve them for
payment. Specifically, for one invoice totaling $3.2 million the third-party
monitor could not determine whether all services included on the invoice were
provided in accordance with the contract. As a result, the monitor provided no
opinion regarding completion to PGCPS; nevertheless, PGCPS paid the invoice
without further investigation. In addition, the other ESCO requested a pre-
payment of $3.3 million for the delivery of equipment and construction
supplies to school locations before the commencement of construction on the
final phase of the project. However, the third-party monitor did not agree with
the justification for this pre-payment provided by the vendor. Furthermore,
there was no evidence that PGCPS independently confirmed that the related
equipment and construction supplies had been received.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Recommendation 17
We recommend that PGCPS ensure that
a. all goods and services invoiced by the ESCOs are provided prior to
payment of the related invoices and that the prices charged by the ESCOs
are in accordance with the related contract; and
b. comply with the recommendations and reviews of the third-party monitor,
or document why the recommendations were not accepted.
Finding 18
PGCPS paid the ESCOs higher prices for certain projects than specified in the
contracts, without a formal contract modification or Board approval.
Analysis
The ESCOs increased the price of certain projects contained in the original
proposals. The original proposals contained all of the potential projects to be
performed by the ESCOs. Furthermore, due to the related costs, PGCPS
financed the contracts over four phases covering several fiscal years. We
found instances in which prices fluctuated over the different phases of the
contract while the scope of work did not change. Specifically, our review of
individual energy savings projects implemented at three schools, with original
proposed costs of $3.3 million, disclosed increases in pricing for certain
projects totaling $230,000 when compared to the pricing for these projects
included in the original proposal. PGCPS paid these higher costs even though
these changes in price were not explained by the ESCOs as required by the
contract and were not presented to the PGCPS Board for approval. Further,
for these cases the third-party monitor was not included by PGCPS in the
review process, which included these increased costs. The extent to which
such price increases occurred on other projects could not be readily
determined.
The Maryland DGS ESCO Request for Proposals (incorporated by reference
into the PGCPS contracts) specifically states that costs shall not be modified
unless PGCPS requested additional services which were approved by PGCPS.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that PGCPS thoroughly investigate any increases in costs for
energy conservation measures and take action to recover any payments for
unjustified increases or seek retroactive Board approval for cost increases
that are adequately explained.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Transportation Services
Background
PGCPS has approximately 81,000 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on 1,146 school
system-owned buses. According to PGCPS records, fiscal year 2011
transportation costs totaled $96 million. Of the 19.9 million reported route
miles for the 2010 – 2011 school year, 40 percent represented miles
traveled to transport disabled students.
A December 2011 report by a transportation task force (which included
representatives from PGCPS and a number of other local and State agencies)
included numerous recommendations for improving PGCPS transportation
services such as staggering bell times, combining elementary and middle
school students on the same bus and reducing the number of stops. Many of
the findings and recommendations repeated similar findings and
recommendations found in a 1998 transportation study. Based on the 2011
report, PGCPS implemented several changes to the routing policies. For
example, PGCPS implemented a staggered bell time schedule for schools and
combined students going to more than one school on a single bus. According
to the PGCPS automated routing system, these changes resulted in 462 fewer
(from 5,632 to 5,170) bus routes for the 2012-2013 school year as
compared to the previous year.
Finding 19
PGCPS did not implement certain practices to promote more efficient use of
its bus fleet.
Analysis
PGCPS did not implement certain practices that may allow it to more
efficiently use its bus fleet. Specifically, we found the following conditions:
 PGCPS transportation staff advised us that routing is primarily done
manually. Although PGCPS has owned an automated routing system since
2001, this system is used as a mapping tool and is not used to calculate
alternative routes, route consolidations, or stop consolidations that may
reduce costs. Consequently, routes may be inefficiently designed and
result in significantly underutilized capacity on individual buses, and
operating more buses than necessary to fulfill PGCPS’ transportation
needs.
 PGCPS could not use the automated routing system to assess route
efficiency because the system data were unreliable. For example, our
33

--- Page 36 ---
analysis of the routing system data for regular bus routes for the 2012 –
2013 school year disclosed 388 bus routes had a listed travel time of zero
and 1,157 had a route time between 1 and 10 minutes. The system also
showed 22 bus routes with 100 or more students assigned to the
individual routes (the largest bus in the PGCPS fleet had a listed capacity
of 64 students).
When prepared, PGCPS used driver manifests of actual ridership on the
day prepared as well as actual drive time. However, these manifests were
not compared to expected utilization to determine routing efficiency and
help transportation staff make decisions for route modifications.
Furthermore, as of October 31, 2012, drivers had not completed a
manifest for the 2012 – 2013 school year. Typically, these manifests are
completed by the end of September. As a result, PGCPS management
could determine the level of bus utilization based on actual ridership for
that school year. According to the December 2011 task force report,
PGCPS bus utilization operated at an average of only 48 percent of
capacity for the 2010 – 2011 school year.
 PGCPS did not document processes used to manually plan, review, and
revise bus routes to ensure that such processes include all appropriate
factors. Current documented procedures did not instruct routers on how
to plan, review, and revise bus routes and provided only a general
guideline for routing. PGCPS had not established documented policies for
related areas such as bus loads and maximum student ride times. A
similar condition was commented on in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 19
We recommend that PGCPS take steps to use buses more efficiently.
Specifically, we recommend that PGCPS
a. utilize an automated routing system to assist in developing efficient bus
routes on a system-wide basis;
b. take appropriate steps to ensure the accuracy of routing system data;
c. obtain manifests for all bus runs and periodically review bus ridership data
and established routes to ensure capacity goals are met to the extent
practical; and
d. develop detailed policies and procedures to provide guidance for
determining and revising bus routes, including goals for bus utilization,
capacity, and ride times (repeat).
34

--- Page 37 ---
Finding 20
PGCPS did not adequately control access to the automated fuel dispensing
system.
Analysis
PGCPS had not fully implemented available controls in the automated fuel
dispensing system, used for both gas and diesel. As a result, PGCPS did not
adequately control access to fuel. Specifically, PGCPS does not require
employees to sign a user agreement to clearly establish the employees’
responsibilities for using the system. In addition, PGCPS has no established
process to timely deactivate user access to the fuel system when warranted.
As a result, terminated employees may continue to maintain access after
leaving PGCPS or transferring to another job assignment that did not require
access. Finally, PGCPS did not review user access on a periodic basis to
determine if continued access was warranted. According to system records,
there were 72 employees with assigned access who had not used the access
since it was assigned to them.
According to PGCPS records, 527 employees (primarily Maintenance and
Transportation Department staff who refuel buses) are currently assigned
access to the automated fuel system. Fuel purchases in fiscal year 2012
totaled approximately $10.2 million.
Recommendation 20
We recommend that PGCPS ensure access to the automated fuel dispensing
system is adequately controlled. Specifically we recommend that PGCPS
a. develop a standard user agreement, which is signed by employees
authorized to use the system, delineating employee responsibilities and
inappropriate use;
b. deactivate user access immediately upon employee termination or
position transfer; and
c. review user access on a periodic basis and remove access from
employees who do not need the access.
Food Service Operations
Background
PGCPS has a cooking cafeteria at most of its schools. Food and related
supplies are received and stored in each school. In fiscal year 2012, PGCPS
had 932 cafeteria positions (consisting of 907 food service positions and 25
administrative positions). According to the audited financial statements, food
service operations revenues exceeded expenditures by $352,000 for fiscal
35

--- Page 38 ---
year 2012, and deficiencies were resolved by a transfer of $20.2 million from
general operating funds to the food service fund (the food service fund
experienced operating losses totaling $45.2 million for the period from fiscal
year 2007 to 2011).
PGCPS Utilized Certain Best Practices to Monitor and Track the Results of
Food Service Operations
PGCPS utilized certain best practices to monitor and track the results of food
service operations. The implementation of these procedures (described
below) has dramatically reduced overall operating deficits for the food
services program over the last two fiscal years (see table 2 below).
Table 2
Revenues, Expenditures, and General Fund Transfers
For the Food Services Fund
Fiscal Years 2007 to 2012
Excess (Deficiency) of
Fiscal Year Revenues Expenditures Revenues Over
Expenditures
2007 $ 49,978,890 $ 57,452,822 $ (7,473,932)
2008 53,195,447 64,020,409 (10,824,962)
2009 55,048,063 70,796,632 (15,748,569)
2010 56,782,576 66,914,231 (10,131,655)
2011 61,742,531 62,719,516 (976,985)
2012 63,363,743 63,011,793 351,950
Source: Audited Financial Statements
Specifically, PGCPS compiles a monthly profit and loss statement by cafeteria
site to track detailed revenue and expenditure transactions. This function
allows PGCPS’ food services management to compare schools and make
comparisons from month to month. If costs are determined to be high for a
specific school as a result of this analysis, management will communicate with
school personnel to identify the causes for any deviations and to establish a
strategy for correcting it. PGCPS management attributed the decrease in
operating losses to this increased accountability at the school level. In
addition, PGCPS required all cafeteria managers to participate in training
focused on improving labor and food costs (for example, inventory
management). PGCPS also worked with food vendors to create online ordering
forms that are limited to items included in the approved contracts. This
prevents managers from inadvertently ordering items which are not
36

--- Page 39 ---
covered by approved price lists. Finally, PGCPS has requested vendors to
notify the central Food Service office of large or unusual food orders. Our test
of food service procurements and disbursements disclosed that PGCPS
properly procured the contracts tested and that related expenditures were
properly supported and in accordance with contract prices.
PGCPS Has an Appropriate Process in Place to Maximize Participation of All
Eligible Students in the National School Meals Program
PGCPS ensures that all eligible students are enrolled in the federal National
School Meals Program through their qualification process. They have
established procedures to automatically qualify certain households based on
their qualification for supplemental assistance. Additionally, the schools send
free and reduced meal applications home with all students on the first day of
school. The application is also available online throughout the school year.
Furthermore, PGCPS has identified and addressed measures to follow up with
students who are eligible but not participating in the program. For fiscal year
2011, 86 percent of students eligible to receive free lunches and 75 percent
of students eligible to receive reduced price lunches actually participated in
the program.
PGCPS Had Implemented Appropriate Procedures and Controls Over Cafeteria
Related Cash Receipts
PGCPS had implemented procedures and controls designed to ensure that
cafeteria receipts were properly accounted for, processed, and deposited.
Specifically, the central food services office verifies on a daily basis, that
amounts collected according to the automated cash register system used at
each school agrees to the validated deposit slips received from the bank. Our
testing disclosed that the central office was properly performing this
reconciliation, and as a result, ensured that funds collected by the school
cafeterias were properly deposited.
School Board Oversight
Background
Until June 1, 2013, PGCPS’ Board of Education was composed of members
elected from nine school board districts and a non-voting student
representative. Effective June 1, 2013, Chapter 147 Laws of Maryland 2013
modified the governance structure of the Board. The number of Board
members increased to 14 (including a student member) and provided that 3
of the 4 additional members would be appointed by the Prince George’s
County Executive and the remaining member be appointed by the Prince
George’s County Council. In its oversight responsibilities, the Board
37

--- Page 40 ---
contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent audits of
the PGCPS financial statements and federal programs.
PGCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure.
Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all PGCPS
employees. PGCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members
who are not subject to the authority of the Board of Education to interpret
ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent,
Associate Superintendents, and a number of other administrators (such as
Division Directors) by April 30st of each year. Our test of 20 judgmentally
selected employees disclosed that the required financial disclosure forms had
been submitted for the most current year.
PGCPS Has an Active Internal Audit Function and an Operational Fraud Hotline
The Board has implemented several methods to help deter and detect fraud
and misuse of PGCPS assets. PGCPS employs an Internal Audit Department
(IAD) consisting of a Director and 12 audit staff to conduct independent
reviews of school activity funds at all of the schools, as well as audits of
operational functions of the school system, such as transportation and food-
related services. The IAD periodically reports the results of its audits to the
audit committee of the Board. According to the IAD’s fiscal year 2011 Annual
Report, the Department conducted 143 financial operational/fraud audits for
the fiscal year (including student activity fund and property audits).
In 2005, PGCPS implemented a confidential fraud hotline to enable
employees and others to confidentially report operational concerns and
suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement. The IAD is responsible for
investigating the allegations and documents their efforts, results, and any
follow-up actions taken. According to the aforementioned fiscal year 2011
Annual Report, the hotline received 248 calls during the fiscal year. The IAD
investigated and resolved 53 cases. The remaining cases were either still
open, referred to another department, or deemed not significant enough to
warrant additional inquiry or research. Resolutions included personnel
actions against employees, repayment of funds, and certain administrative
actions.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Finding 21
PGCPS has not determined if various cost saving measures have had the
expected results.
Analysis
PGCPS did not establish a process to ensure that cost savings for programs
met the intent of the programs, nor report to the Board on the financial results
of these programs. In addition, PGCPS could not provide us with the expected
savings or target goals for the programs. As a result of economic difficulties,
decreasing revenue, and declining enrollments, PGCPS had implemented
strategies designed to reduce costs, primarily through the reduction of staffing
such as a reduction in positions, furloughs, and a retirement incentive
program for fiscal years 2010 to 2012. The goal of these programs was to
reduce employee costs.
For example, the Board approved retirement incentive program implemented
in fiscal year 2012, provided incentive to employees meeting the set criteria
to retire. However, PGCPS could reemploy program participants after a
certain period of time under criteria contained in the program documents,
which would reduce the savings desired. A PGCPS report of employees who
participated in the program disclosed that of the 370 participating employees,
179 were recalled back to employment before the end of the prohibited
period (generally 18 months to 3 years). Furthermore, PGCPS did not formally
determine if each of the actions had resulted in the anticipated savings on an
immediate or long-term basis, and as a result, the Board does not know if the
program met its intended objectives.
Recommendation 21
We recommend that PGCPS establish a process to monitor cost saving
initiatives based on pre-established goals.
Other Financial Controls
Charter School Funding was Calculated in Compliance with State Regulations
Funds paid to seven Prince George’s County charter schools totaling $21.2
million for the 2011-2012 school year were calculated in compliance with
State regulations. Charter school funding is based on a per pupil allotment to
ensure funding is commensurate with funding provided to traditional
students. The charter school funding totals are reconciled based on actual
enrollment for each year.
39

--- Page 42 ---
A charter school is a public school usually created or organized by a group of
teachers, parents and community leaders, or a community-based
organization. It is usually sponsored by an existing local public school board
or county board of education. Specific goals and operating procedures for the
charter school are detailed in an agreement (or “charter”). Charter schools
are generally exempt from most laws that apply to regular public schools so
administrators have considerable autonomy in designing an educational
program, hiring faculty and staff, using facilities, and developing a budget that
meets the needs of their students. Charter schools must meet all the student
performance and operational goals listed in their charters, or their charters
may be revoked.
Finding 22
PGCPS did not implement risk management strategies to identify, monitor,
mitigate, or prevent risk factors.
Analysis
PGCPS has not implemented a comprehensive risk management strategy to
help ensure that risks associated with operating a large school system are
mitigated to the extent practical. Currently, PGCPS insures itself against risks
related to auto and general liability, property damage, workers’ compensation,
theft, and other risks. In addition, PGCPS employs one full-time employee to
conduct risk management services for the System. Responsibilities for this
position are mainly focused on processing workers’ compensation claims
rather than developing and implementing strategies to reduce claims.
Workers’ compensation expenditures have increased from $6.2 million in
fiscal year 2004 to $17.5 million in fiscal year 2012.
We determined that PGCPS has not formally identified or evaluated potentially
significant risk factors within the school system, determined a strategy for
alleviating these risks, or evaluated the efficiency of procedures currently in
place, including workers’ compensation and other risks. Risk management
strategies could include training and workshops for employees, back-to-work
programs to decrease workers’ compensation expenses, and evaluating
insurance options.
Risk management is a program designed to identify potential events that may
affect PGCPS and to protect and minimize risks to PGCPS property, services,
and employees. The Government Finance Officers Association recommends
that entities develop a comprehensive risk management program that
identifies, reduces, or minimizes risk to its property, interests and employees
and specifies the steps to be taken (such as evaluating and identifying risks
and developing measure to treat them).
40

--- Page 43 ---
Recommendation 22
We recommend that PGCPS implement risk management strategies to
identify, evaluate, and mitigate risks to the System.
Finding 23
PGCPS did not take sufficient actions to control health care costs.
Analysis
PGCPS did not take all available steps to ensure that health care costs were
adequately controlled. PGCPS procured the services of a third party to
conduct an audit of claims accuracy and compliance with plan documents for
retiree medical and dental plans (for claims submitted between October 1,
2008 and September 30, 2010), which found a 15 percent error rate.
However, PGCPS has not conducted a claims audit for active employee claims
nor conducted a subsequent audit for retirees. In addition, PGCPS’ Internal
Auditor found in limited testing that adequate documentation was often not
on file to support the enrollment of employee dependents. Specifically, the
audit included a test of 52 active employees (during the period of July 1, 2009
through December 31, 2010) and found that in at least 10 instances,
adequate documentation was not on file to support employee dependents
enrolled in PGCPS health care plans. The audit was not meant as a
comprehensive review of all employees/retirees with dependents enrolled in
the System’s healthcare program. PGCPS provides health insurance coverage
for over 12,700 active employees and 6,000 retirees. Health insurance claim
payments totaled $196.9 million in fiscal year 2012.
PGCPS self funds all health care costs. PGCPS uses a third-party
administrator to pay claims on behalf of plan participants and authorized
dependents. Providers submit claims to the administrator who pays them on
behalf of PGCPS and then obtains reimbursement from PGCPS for actual
costs of claims paid. PGCPS pays an administrative fee for these services.
Recommended practices published by the Government Finance Officers
Association state that health care cost containment is a critical component of
long-term financial planning and budgeting. An example of a cost
containment practice would be audits of claims to ensure that third-party
administrators pay benefits according to plan rules and verification of enrolled
participants.
41

--- Page 44 ---
Recommendation 23
We recommend that PGCPS institute processes to
a. verify the propriety of claims paid by the third-party administrator for active
and retired employees, and
b. verify the eligibility of enrolled health care program participants and their
listed dependents.
42

--- Page 45 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Prince George’s
County Public Schools (PGCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority
of the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the PGCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the PGCPS policies provided for the efficient use
of financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of PGCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on PGCPS dated January 10, 2006, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the PGCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the
direct control or management of the Prince George’s County Board of
Education.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by PGCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at PGCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
43

--- Page 46 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). 2
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of PGCPS operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve
our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2010 through January 31,
2012. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits PGCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
PGCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to PGCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from September 2011 to October 2012. The
PGCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as
Appendix A to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise PGCPS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
2 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies or
practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
44

--- Page 48 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 1: Segregation of duties over the enrollment, collection, and deposit functions in the
Before and After School Care Program were inadequate.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that PGCPS ensure a proper segregation of duties is established over the
enrollment, collection, and deposit functions of the Before and After School Care Program
(repeat). For example, PGCPS should establish centralized enrollment and independently
reconcile program revenue to enrollment records on a periodic basis.
Management Response 1
Agree.
PGCPS has realigned the staffing and responsibilities within the Before & After School Care
Program to better address accountability and separation of duties within the current system
while the district evaluates online solutions. Two centralized Before & After School Care
Program Liaisons have been added and are now responsible for reconciling enrollment and
payment records; this task will no longer be performed by the Site Coordinators. Reconciliation
will be performed every two weeks to coincide with the bi-weekly payment cycle. In addition,
Program Liaisons will resume the practice of conducting site audits to review documentation
and ensure the number of children reconciles with reported enrollment.
PGCPS has also initiated a feasibility study to review software options available for centralizing
enrollment and providing electronic payment and tracking. This is a component of a larger
systemic initiative to evaluate cashless systems in multiple parts of the organization in order to
streamline payments for parents and increase internal controls surrounding payments. Upon
completion of this study, management will select an automated system that best integrates
with existing processes and systems.
Page 1

--- Page 49 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 2: PGCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain disbursements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that PGCPS
a. ensure the accuracy and propriety of all amounts invoiced including verification to
supporting documentation (repeat), and
b. segregate duties to ensure independent approval exists for the issuance of wireless phones
and the payment of the related invoices.
Management Response 2
Agree.
Monitoring utility usage: PGCPS has recently purchased a comprehensive facilities
management tool that combines work order management, utilities monitoring and facilities
usage. The application is a utility tracking and bill analysis management system that will
capture and track energy and utility usage and spending by facility by month. The system will
allow for comparison across all schools (not the small sampling used in the past) and across
time periods (month-to-month and year-to-year). During implementation, PGCPS will
incorporate several years of historical data in order to build a comprehensive system-wide
baseline profile. By implementing this system and tracking usage and the amount spent, the
district will also be able to assess the reasonableness of billings and evaluate facilities against
comparable facilities in other districts.
As part of the implementation of this software, PGCPS is working with existing utility vendors to
move from current paper billing processes to electronic billing, which will make the district’s
data storage, tracking, and analysis more timely and efficient. Although the district is still in the
planning phase, management expects to have the utilities solution fully implemented in FY15,
which will improve decision making around resource utilization.
o Verifying supporting documentation: PGCPS’ review of the transportation invoices
cited in this finding revealed a need for the following process improvements: PGCPS
will work with vendors to ensure all necessary information for price validation is
included on individual quotes and invoices. In the case of vehicle repair parts and
labor contracts, vendor invoices will include a breakdown of prices displaying list
price by part number, discount applied to parts, and number of hours and hourly
rate charged for labor.1
o Staff responsible for approving invoices will be granted access to a database that
displays contract pricing. This new process will be in place by June 2014.
1 For complex contracts such as those found in transportation, plant operations and supporting services, contracts
typically include a fixed percentage discount off list price for parts, and a fixed hourly labor rate. Price validation
for parts involves: 1) checking the list price, which is often not fixed in contracts, and 2) ensuring the percentage
discount applied to that list price matches the contract.
Page 2

--- Page 50 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
o For ‘piggybacked’ contracts from other jurisdictions, in addition to continuing to
require that requisitions include an attached copy of the contract, staff will ensure
the original contract is permissible for PGCPS use in its current form by confirming
that the specific items being purchased are included in the contract.2
Segregation of duties for issuance of wireless phones: PGCPS will further develop
Administrative Procedure 0700, Information Technology Services Acceptable Usage Guidelines,
Section I, to include a formalized policy and procedure for wireless phones. The AP will lay out
eligibility criteria and the requisition and approval process for adding new phone lines; it will be
applied district-wide and executed intra-departmentally. This AP will also include language that
will exclude the district from liabilities for phones purchased outside of the formalized process,
whereby prices can be validated against contracted rates with contracted providers. The district
will review all phone lines currently in use to validate school business need, uniformity for
employee eligibility, and auditing of phones to control for personal use and contracted pricing.
In order to segregate duties, PGCPS will update the automated workflow procedures for
monitoring and invoicing to differentiate these responsibilities; the new procedures will ensure
that the people authorized to add phone lines are not also able to authorize payments. In
addition, PGCPS will consider the feasibility of contracting with a telecommunications cost
reduction audit firm to assist with the identification and recovery of overpayments to cellular
phone carriers. Some of these best practices are already in place within the Division of
Information Technology and Office of Communications; management will integrate those
processes within Plant Operations and Supporting Services.
2 This finding illustrates examples where necessary contract price exceptions were made and documented but the
documentation was not available in Accounts Payable’s files.
Page 3

--- Page 51 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 3: PGCPS did not maintain required documentation justifying the use of sole source
procurements totaling $1 million.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that PGCPS maintain adequate documentation supporting sole source
procurements, including the Director of Purchasing’s approval of all bid exemption letters prior
to the related procurement, as required (repeat).
Response to Finding 3
Agree.
PGCPS Board Policy 3323 establishes thresholds for procuring services and materials without
the need for a formal bid. As per this policy, a formal bid is not required if, in any given fiscal
year, the cumulative sum of purchases from a single vendor is anticipated to be less than or
equal to:
1. $1,000,000 for instructional materials or supplies
2. $25,000 for non-instructional equipment, materials or supplies
3. $500,000 instructional or staff development contracted services
4. $250,000 non-instructional and non-staff development contracted services
The procedure referenced in this finding which requires the submission of a bid exemption
letter is found in the PGCPS Procurement Manual. A close review of the manual revealed that
there are internal inconsistencies in the procedures addressing documentation requirements
for consultants and professional services. PGCPS will revise the manual to clarify these
requirements and will subsequently adhere to the revised procedures. The revised
Procurement Manual will be effective July 1, 2014 and re-training of impacted personnel will
take place at that time.
The Procurement Department has modified current requisition procedures to require
requesting departments to provide the justification for bid exception. Additionally, for existing
no-bid contracts, PGCPS will obtain bid exception justification prior to executing contract
renewals.
Page 4

--- Page 52 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 4: Internal controls over payroll and personnel transactions were not adequate in both
the central office and at the various departments.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that PGCPS
a. perform and document evidence of supervisory reviews of critical human resources and
payroll transactions and ensure they are supported by appropriate documentation (repeat);
b. recover the identified duplicate payments;
c. separate the functions of recording and approving timecards within the automated system;
and
d. review current supervisory responsibilities for approving timecards and, to the extent
practical, reduce the number of timecards these individuals are responsible for approving.
Management Response 4
Agree.
Document evidence of supervisory review (4a): While the process PGCPS uses to document
personnel changes is partially manual, involving a paper form routed through several
departments within the organization, inherent checks and balances take place within the
process. As the form moves through the process flow, each subsequent staff member verifies
the accuracy of the data supplied up until that point. For example, when a salary change is
required for an employee, the staffing specialist completes the form and gives it to a Data Entry
Technician. The Data Entry Technician reviews the form and enters the employee’s new grade
and step, signs the form, and forwards a copy to both Payroll & Benefits Services and the
records room. By the end of the process the information entered into the form has been
reviewed twice by Human Resources staff. Going forward, PGCPS will audit a sample of
personnel transactions by comparing changes reflected in the Employee Information System
against the originating paper forms. This review will be conducted on a semi-annual basis and
results from the review will be used to inform which types of transactions should require
independent supervisory review and signature going forward.
In addition, the district has begun to shift toward completely automated processes for certain
types of personnel transactions. During fiscal year 2012, PGCPS automated the process for
entering and approving new hires as well as all employee transfers. By integrating technology
into additional processes, PGCPS will gain efficiencies and reduce errors associated with
manual paperwork, processing and data entry. Voluntary resignations, which should shorten
the timeline for notifying payroll and benefits staff, are currently in the testing phase.
Additional controls that will be put in place for payroll transactions are discussed in the
response to finding 5.
Page 5

--- Page 53 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Recover duplicated payments (4b): This effort is already underway; one employee has
reimbursed the district in full, the other is in the process of establishing a repayment
agreement. Corrective action for preventing duplicate payments is discussed in the response to
finding 5.
Segregate time entry and time approval functions (4c): PGCPS Payroll Department will work
with IT to modify current database responsibilities for Time Approvers to only include approval
rights, not editing. This will be completed in February 2014.
Reduce the number of timecards assigned to a single approver (4d): PGCPS currently has
Administrative Procedure 4132 in place whereby Division Chiefs, Executive Directors and
Department Directors may request exceptions to the default approver assignment for workload
or alternative time approval reasons. All requests for consideration are reviewed and approved
by the Chief Financial Officer. Requests currently occur when an assigned time approver is
unable to approve timecards because of long term illnesses, vacations, out of building
assignments, vacancies, or other reasons that prevent the assigned time approver from
completing this responsibility. Examples include assistant principals, supervisors and
managers. Any alternative time approver must complete time approver training before being
assigned time approval responsibilities and must meet required continuing professional
education activities. PGCPS will look into expanding the use of this functionality with individual
departments to address inequities in work load, low on-time entry or approver rates, or high
error rates for time entry personnel and time approvers.
Page 6

--- Page 54 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 5: PGCS did not implement adequate processes to prevent or timely detect
overpayments to employees.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that PGCPS develop appropriate processes to prevent overpayments (repeat).
Management Response 5
Agree.
The analysis to this finding cites types of circumstances under which employees have been
overpaid. The table below displays the corrective actions to address these.
Type of Error Corrective Action Target Completion
Date
Improper calculation  Revise procedure for calculating payouts to March 31, 2014
of leave payouts executive employees to specify the calculation
method for daily pay rate.3
 Seek clarification on when employees are eligible June 30, 2014
to receive leave payouts as per negotiated
agreements; revise procedures and train staff
accordingly.
 Improve existing tool used to calculate leave June 30, 2014
payouts. Consider feasibility of automating leave
payout calculations.
In place as of
 Require a payroll supervisor to review and approve
July 1, 2013
all leave payouts.
Inaccurate/delayed  Implement automated resignation process.4 June 2014
recording of  Develop tracking reports for time entry errors.
separation dates and Deliver training to timekeepers annually and
other personnel require annual recertification. Timekeepers with no
changes errors logged will be automatically recertified. Fiscal Year 2015
Potentially implement additional accountability
measures for those with recurring errors.
 Consider implementing an automated workflow
process that requires employees to review and
attest to the accuracy of their timesheet before
receiving payment.5
3 See response to finding 6 for more detail.
4 Submission of this resignation allows for automated notification of all relevant parties and the disabling of
timecards beyond the last date of employment. In addition, PGCPS will examine where additional staff training and
accountability measures may be needed to ensure compliance with existing processes.
5 Although such a process still relies on employee honesty, it may lower the likelihood that an employee is
overpaid due to a timekeeper’s inaccurate recording of time worked.
Page 7

--- Page 55 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Type of Error Corrective Action Target Completion
Date
Duplicate payments  Add an automated alert that informs staff when a June 30, 2014
leave payout has already been processed. If a
second payment needs to be processed (to correct
a prior error) the system will require staff to enter
explanatory notes to document the reason for the
secondary payment.
Payment for days not  Whenever possible, only allow new hires to start Fiscal Year 20156
worked work at the beginning of a pay cycle.
 Allow for non-equal payments when employees
start in the middle of a pay cycle. See explanation
below.
The district currently apportions an employee’s annual salary across bi-weekly payments in
order to provide equal payment amounts in every pay period. For example, if a 10 month
employee starts work at the beginning of a pay period, the employee works for 10 days in that
period but is paid for 8.7 days.7 Similarly, if the same employee started halfway through the pay
period, they would have worked five days but would still have been paid for 8.7. As exhibits 1
and 2 below illustrate, the practice of allowing employees to start working midway through a
pay period creates times of the year when the employee has been paid for more days than they
have worked.
6 Subject to union negotiations.
7 Ten month employees work a total of 192 contract days. This number is divided by the number of pay periods
(22).
Page 8

--- Page 56 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Exhibit 1
Pay Period Comparison of Days Worked versus Paid
for a Ten Month Employee by Start Scenario
Running Balance
Pay Period Cumulative (Cum. Earned - Cum. Paid)
Cumulative
Days Earned Cumulative Days Earned
Days Earned (Beginning Days Earned (Beginning Beginning
Pay (Mid-Pay Pay Period Cumulative (Mid-Pay Pay Period Mid-Pay Pay Period
Period Days Paid Period Start) Start) Days Paid Period Start) Start) Period Start Start
1 8.73 *5 *1 0 8.7 5 10 ( 3.73) 1 .27
2 8.73 8 8 1 7.5 13 18 ( 4.45) 0 .55
3 8.73 10 10 2 6.2 23 28 ( 3.18) 1 .82
4 8.73 10 10 3 4.9 33 38 ( 1.91) 3 .09
5 8.73 9 9 4 3.6 42 47 ( 1.64) 3 .36
6 8.73 10 10 5 2.4 52 57 ( 0.36) 4 .64
7 8.73 10 10 6 1.1 62 67 0 .91 5 .91
8 8.73 7 7 6 9.8 69 74 ( 0.82) 4 .18
9 8.73 10 10 7 8.5 79 84 0 .45 5 .45
10 8.73 5 5 8 7.3 84 89 ( 3.27) 1 .73
11 8.73 7 7 9 6.0 91 96 ( 5.00) -
12 8.73 9 9 1 04.7 100 105 ( 4.73) 0 .27
13 8.73 10 10 1 13.5 110 115 ( 3.45) 1 .55
14 8.73 9 9 1 22.2 119 124 ( 3.18) 1 .82
15 8.73 10 10 1 30.9 129 134 ( 1.91) 3 .09
16 8.73 10 10 1 39.6 139 144 ( 0.64) 4 .36
17 8.73 10 10 1 48.4 149 154 0 .64 5 .64
18 8.73 5 5 1 57.1 154 159 ( 3.09) 1 .91
19 8.73 9 9 1 65.8 163 168 ( 2.82) 2 .18
20 8.73 10 10 1 74.5 173 178 ( 1.55) 3 .45
21 8.73 9 9 1 83.3 182 187 ( 1.27) 3 .73
22 8.73 * 10 * 5 192.0 192 192 - -
Total 192 192 192
The first three columns in the table above display the number of days paid and days worked in a
given pay period for different start scenarios. When comparing days earned for both scenarios in
individual pay periods it is clear that all pay periods are identical except for the first and last pay
period (*highlighted in yellow).
The next three columns in the middle show the cumulative number of days paid and days earned for
both scenarios.
The final two columns on the left display the running balance in days paid by calculating difference
between the cumulative days earned minus days paid. A negative running balance represents days
overpaid, a positive running balance indicates underpayment. Exhibit 2 shows a graphical
representation of these two columns.
Page 9

--- Page 57 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Exhibit 2
Running Balance of Cumulative Days Earned versus Paid
for a Ten Month Employee by Start Scenario
Beginning Pay Period
(red line)
Mid-Pay Period
(blue line)
An employee that starts halfway through the pay period, shown in blue, is paid in advance for much
of the year. Thus, if this employee quits in the pay period 11 or 12 (just before or after the winter
break), that employee will owe the district for approximately four days of pay that they have been
advanced. An employee who starts at the beginning of a pay period is never paid for days not yet
worked.
Approximately one third of the overpayments that occurred last year and are still outstanding,
or $56,000, were paid to employees who started working in the middle of a pay period and
terminated employment before the end of the fiscal year.
Page 10

--- Page 58 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 6: PGCPS did not have a policy to support the method used to calculate leave payouts
upon employee separation.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that PGCPS establish a formal Board approved policy specifying the
appropriate daily pay rate basis for calculating leave payouts.
Management Response 6
Agree in part.
Every unionized employee is paid per the requirements in their respective union contract. All
negotiated contracts in place stipulate the calculation method for prorating salaries, which is
then used to calculate employee payouts. During the time of the audit, for the remaining less
than one percent of all employees who do not have a union contract governing their payouts
(executive, managerial and confidential employees), PGCPS utilized ASASP III contract
language to calculate leave payouts. On June 1, 2013, PGCPS adopted Administrative
Procedure (AP) 3174 which details the procedure for paying out leave to executive employees.
PGCPS will revise AP 3174 to specify the number of days per year that should be used to
calculate daily pay rates. The change in procedure will be formalized by March 31, 2014.8
8 In the fall of 2011, the district changed the practice of calculating daily pay rates for executive leave payouts
using 244 days and began using 261. However, this change was never documented as an official change to the
administrative procedure.
Page 11

--- Page 59 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 7: PGCPS paid for sick leave usage totaling $2.4 million in excess of donations to the
sick leave banks.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that PGCPS establish a policy over sick leave bank grants regarding the
permissibility for granting requests in excess of the available balance.
Management Response 7
Agree in part.
The union referenced in this finding has been notified that PGCPS will no longer contribute
funds in excess of the available balance; grants approved after contributed days have been
exhausted will be financed solely by the union going forward. Negotiations to determine a plan
and timeline for repayment of the existing negative balance are underway.
Internal controls have been put in place to ensure PGCPS does not approve sick leave grants in
excess of the available balance. As of July 1, 2013, staff perform monthly reconciliations and
projections to ensure balances are available to award new grants. Representatives from the
Payroll and Benefits and Employee Labor Relations offices now participate in sick bank reviews
with all unions to monitor available balances.
Additionally, the union referenced in this finding has implemented a number of changes to
manage the sick leave bank request and approval process. The union has:
 Modified the sick leave bank request form to ensure a more detailed medical diagnosis
is provided prior to grant approval;
 Increased the annual contribution amounts for those that elect to contribute to the sick
leave bank (from two days to two and a half days per person); and
 Adopted the use of the Official Disability Guidelines9 to inform the review and approval
of sick leave grant requests.
These changes appear to be having the intended effect. According to the most recent report
which reconciles monthly projections with actual expenditures, the union is currently on track
to maintain a positive balance in their sick leave bank account this fiscal year.
9 Official Disability Guidelines (ODG) are provided by Work Loss Data Institute (WLDI), an independent database
development company focused on workplace health and productivity. The ODG, now in its 18th edition, provide
evidence-based disability duration guidelines and benchmarking data for every reportable condition.
Page 12

--- Page 60 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 8: Internal controls and record keeping related to certain Transportation Department
employees were not adequate to ensure the propriety of salary payments.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that PGCPS ensure
a. that a standard time reporting process for transportation employees (such as timesheets or
time clock) is implemented and that related documents are retained (repeat), and all
overtime is properly supported and approved in accordance with PGCPS procedures;
b. that supervisors approving payroll records, review the source documentation, at least on a
test basis; and
c. that an employee independent of the driver verifies the propriety and accuracy of all
changes to permanent route assignments and documents the verification procedures
performed.
Management Response 8
Agree.
PGCPS acknowledges that a standard time reporting process is necessary for consistent record
keeping in all bus lots and will establish Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to instruct and
require staff to assign, document, validate and approve hours worked. As part of this effort,
PGCPS will examine the possibility of implementing an automated system to document and
verify actual hours worked. SOPs will be developed and piloted in one bus lot in calendar year
2014 and rolled out to all bus lots in the subsequent year. In the interim, for all bus lots,
transportation supervisors will review timesheets against source documentation and take
corrective actions as errors are discovered.
In 2013, all PGCPS buses were fitted with GPS units. In addition to using these units for asset
tracking purposes, transportation staff have begun to examine supplementary uses of offered
by the GPS reporting system. Transportation staff are now in the process of installing new
software to integrate GPS and routing technologies to allow for districtwide comparisons of
planned versus actual routes. Such expanded technology will enable transportation staff to
review, approve and document route changes using GPS system reports rather than having a
supervisor ride along. PGCPS anticipates that all route changes will be verified using this
technology by August 2014.
Page 13

--- Page 61 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 9: PGCPS equipment inventory records were not comprehensive or complete and items
were not physically marked as being property of the System.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that PGCPS
a. ensure that detailed equipment records are maintained for all appropriate assets (repeat);
b. ensure that detail records include all applicable information, including cost and serial
numbers or other specific identifying information (repeat); and
c. amend the Property Control Manual to require tagging of all equipment for identification
purposes.
Management Response 9
Agree in part.
Maintaining detailed equipment records (9a and 9b): In September 2013, PGCPS completed a
comprehensive physical inventory of all depreciable assets (those with value greater than or
equal to $5,000) across all district locations. As part of this process, accounting records were
updated and all depreciable assets tagged with barcodes. The barcodes are linked to the
inventory system by asset number. Assets over $5,000 are now being tagged as they are
purchased, as are non-depreciable assets with a value greater than $500. Going forward, the
inventory system for all tagged assets will also include cost information; the system will no
longer allow items to be entered with a value of zero.10 Construction in Process (CIP) items will
continue to be tagged and logged once projects are certified as complete.
Updating the Property Control Manual to require tagging of all assets (9c): PGCPS has
determined that retroactive tagging of inventoried assets currently in the database and valued
at between $500 and $4,999 is not cost-effective. However, the school system has directed
resources to cleaning the inventory database and will concentrate on future purchases instead
of conducting a wall-to-wall inventory of these less valuable durable goods. Beginning July 1,
2013, all assets with a value over $500 will be tagged.11
The PGCPS Public Property Control Manual has been revised and is currently being reviewed
and finalized. It has been updated to provide guidance on how items which typically do not
have a serial number (e.g. wrestling mat, bookcase, table, etc.) should be posted to the
detailed equipment records. As described further in the response to finding 10, PGCPS is
developing and will implement an Administrative Procedure (AP) setting forth requirements for
performing physical inventories and updating detailed inventory records. A draft of the AP has
been completed and is being finalized. The updated manual should be completed by February
28, 2014.
10 The finding states that there were 47,958 items with a value of $0 or $1 value, 42,469 of those items are
retired IT assets that were transferred from our legacy system in 2002/2003.
11 Prior to July 1, 2013 only technology assets valued over $500 were tagged.
Page 14

--- Page 62 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 10: Physical inventories of equipment were not conducted regularly and policies had
not established a process for performing physical inventories.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that PGCPS
a. amend the PCM to specify the frequency for conducting physical inventories (for example
every three years), designate inventorying responsibilities and require documented
reconciliations of the inventory counts to the detailed equipment records (repeat); and
b. ensure that all locations are inventoried on a regular basis (repeat).
Management Response 10
Agree.
Establish additional policies for performing physical inventories: PGCPS has drafted an
Administrative Procedure. Results from the comprehensive physical inventory were useful in
informing the requirements specified in this draft. The AP will:
1) define which assets should be inventoried;
2) set forth required components of detailed inventory records;
3) establish asset tagging requirements;
4) define the frequency for performing physical inventories by equipment type; and
5) establish inventory responsibility both at PGCPS central office and in locations
throughout the district.
As mentioned in finding 9, the Public Property Control Manual has also been revised to
reference this AP for use in the PGCPS Public Property Control section of the Internal Audit
Department. The AP is expected to be finalized and released by March 31, 2014.
Perform comprehensive physical inventories regularly: The timeline for inventories by
equipment type will be clearly outlined in the revised AP and PCM. The application of bar codes
mentioned in the response to finding 9 has streamlined the physical inventory process. This
added efficiency will enable staff to inventory all locations on a more regular basis using
handheld scanners and other technologies.
Page 15

--- Page 63 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 11: PGCPS did not ensure that employee access to its automated financial system was
appropriate.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that PGCPS ensure appropriate internal controls exist for granting and
periodically reviewing assigned access capabilities on the automated financial system.
Specifically, we recommend that PGCPS
a. develop security reports that readily identify employee access information for critical
responsibilities and functions within the automated system,
b. implement standardized user profiles,
c. periodically ensure that employee access capabilities are appropriate and warranted based
on the employee’s current job duties (repeat),
d. ensure that staff who are assigned programming capabilities do not also have capabilities
that would allow them to perform system operational functions, and
e. limit modification capabilities to independent supervisory personnel and ensure any
changes are reviewed for propriety.
Management Response 11
Agree.
Identifying employee access (11a): A custom report/query has been created to deliver an Excel
pivot output of all users with assigned responsibilities and functions, making the security
information much more readily available. The report includes User-Responsibility-Function
mapping for all PGCPS users, so it can be used to filter for a selected Responsibility or selected
Function. The Enterprise Resource Planning application (E-Business Suite) does not
automatically classify Functions as critical or otherwise.
Standardizing and certifying user access (11b and 11c): PGCPS has been using the vendor’s
built in utility to manage E-Business Suite entitlements. When an employee is on-boarded (e.g.
new hire), the system automatically provisions a basic set of responsibilities (i.e. Employee Self-
service and iRecruitment) that is applicable to everyone. Additional responsibilities are
assigned to individuals by request of his/her supervisor, and as approved by Departmental
Information Security Approver (DISA). When HR makes a change to an employee’s position or
location, the utility automatically disables any additional responsibilities other than Employee
Self-service and iRecruitment assigned to that individual. Even if the same responsibility is
required by the employee in the new position/location, it will only be assigned based on a new
request by the supervisor and approval by DISA. While all the employees are offered in-class
and web-based training for various business functions for which they are responsible, the DISA
are selected based on their rich experience with EBS, in addition to their business knowledge.
Management believes that the supervisors, with support and mentoring from a DISA, are best
positioned to determine the need for a responsibility for their staff performing specific job
Page 16

--- Page 64 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
functions. Further, the utility “attestation” workflow process12 currently being implemented,
will help streamline how supervisory employees review entitlements and approve them.
Implementing a Role Based Access Control (RBAC) for EBS is a major endeavor that requires
commitment of resources and time by all PGCPS divisions and departments. Yet the benefits
of such a model, in the context of an automated identity and access management system, are
unclear. PGCPS will generate internal discussions on the benefits of RBAC and conduct a
feasibility study for a phased approach to implementing RBAC. PGCPS also will simplify the
attestation process with OI&AM, and ensure that an appropriate level of access is maintained
for all the employees accessing EBS.
Programmer access to live production environment (11d): PGCPS Information Technology
employs functional analysts who work with the user departments to troubleshoot
production/operational issues, as well as develop new processes & reports in EBS. These
individuals also function as an EBS trainer/mentor to new hires in the end-user departments,
and provide operational coverage in case of emergencies.
To help these analysts perform their job expeditiously, they have been assigned one or more
responsibilities, with the “query only” attribute/profile turned on. As such, these individuals
can review live production data, but are not able to make any changes to it. In addition, the
applications DBA is required to run post-upgrade or post-patch steps that may involve a
functional setup or execution of specific concurrent requests using an operational
responsibility. In such cases, the DBA utilizes the required responsibility for the duration of the
maintenance only. Given that system technician and programmer access to the operational
functions is required for a smooth business operation; PGCPS will selectively grant access to
staff and monitor that access for appropriate use.
Monitoring Super Users in the Purchasing Function (11e): Super Users in the Purchasing
Department make changes to the purchasing hierarchy13 in order to keep requisitions moving
efficiently through the purchasing system when they get stalled because approvers are
unavailable or positions authorized to approve are vacant. When approval paths require
modification, the requisition continues to follow the hierarchy prescribed by Board Policy which
is based on the value of the requisition. Prior to modifying the approval path, the Purchasing
Department Super User obtains approval to modify the approval path via email. This request
must always come from the approver being skipped or someone higher in the hierarchy. For
instance, an Area Superintendent may request approval path modification when a Principal is
on leave. All such email requests are attached to the requisition for documentation purposes.
12 Attestation enables designated reviewers to be notified of reports they must review. These reports describe
entitlements of other users. A reviewer can attest to the accuracy of these entitlements by providing a response.
The attestation action, along with the response the reviewer provides, any associated comments, and an audit
view of the data that the reviewer views and attests to, is tracked and audited to provide a complete trail of
accountability.
13 Only supervisory level personnel have this capability.
Page 17

--- Page 65 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
In addition, the Purchasing Director reviews all requisitions that go through this augmented
approval process.
When a change to a Purchasing hierarchy is made, EBS creates a log of who made the change
and when it was made. PGCPS will look into creating an EBS Alert that notifies the appropriate
individuals that a change has been made to the hierarchy. Additionally, EBS does not have a
standard report to log when a supervisor must manually route a requisition to the authorized
alternate approver, but PGCPS will look into creating one. The district will also look into
implementing work flow rules in EBS to automate re-routing for stalled requisitions to a pre-
designated departmental back-up. This would allow not only allow for exception reporting for
auditing purposes but would also enable the district to calculate cycle times to identify the
need for process improvement.
Page 18

--- Page 66 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 12: Inadequate controls over the student management system and ERP databases
resulted in security vulnerabilities.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that PGCPS
a. log direct changes to critical tables and the use of critical database privileges for the
student management system and ERP databases,
b. document reviews of database logs and retain the documentation for verification purposes,
c. ensure that databases are fully supported by the database vendors and patched on a
current basis, and
d. disable the insecure service on the student management system database.
Management Response 12
Agree in part.
Logging changes (12a): PGCPS accepts the recommendation to log the use of critical database
privileges for the Student Information System and E-Business Suite. The change has already
been implemented and these events are currently logged.
While PGCPS recognizes the importance of auditing direct object modifications, the district
unable to implement the recommendation to “log direct changes to critical tables” due to the
following reasons:
 All the critical tables of E-Business Suite (EBS) and the Student Information System (SIS)
have seeded database triggers that populate a log of who made any change and when it
was made for auditing of data updates. Customer modifications or additional triggers
are not supported by the vendor for application performance and data integrity reasons.
 EBS and SIS use a common database user account (e.g. APPS) to perform all database
actions (while application security is maintained at the application layer). Therefore,
distinguishing a direct update from an application update, and auditing those
transactions requires the use of a sophisticated tool. PGCPS is currently investigating
the return on investment associated with this type of undertaking.
Currently, the databases log all changes made through the "application (Forms/GUI interface)"
by capturing who made the change and when it was made for each unique transaction.
However, if a privileged user (DBA) makes changes to the tables "directly" (using a SQL/API) the
change information may not be captured. The complexity of EBS (e.g. product design, number
of objects, referential integrity constraints, performance impact, etc.) and the vendor's support
policies preclude the district from making any structural modifications to capture any additional
audit information at such granularity. PGCPS will look into the possibility of using specialized
products to capture and report on such direct table modifications to EBS and SIS.
Reviewing change logs (12b): Audit logs for Student Information and E-Business Systems are
currently reviewed electronically. PGCPS will have in place electronic documentation that will
serve as the Audit log of such reviews by March 31, 2014.
Page 19

--- Page 67 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Updating database tables to current vendor specifications (12c): All district production systems
have been patched up to the current/supported code levels offered by the respective the
vendors.
Disabling insecure service (12d): The Student Information System database service identified
as insecure has been disabled.
Page 20

--- Page 68 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 13: PGCPS did not have an Information Technology Disaster Recovery Plan.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that PGCPS develop and implement a comprehensive information systems
disaster recovery plan (repeat).
Management Response 13
Agree.
PGCPS has an application level disaster recovery plan in place for the critical transactional
systems, namely E-Business Suite and SIS. This plan has been extensively tested using a
combination of backup/recovery and cloning techniques, making these primary production
systems (hosted at the central office datacenter) available as a cloned/standby copy at a
secondary datacenter. Servers have been placed at the secondary site; and the databases
and application are currently synchronized using various utilities.
PGCPS had an independent network assessment and audit performed in 2010 by Brocade.
While some of their recommendations may present adverse side effects in our environment
which could be mitigated with proper diligence, the general direction of the recommendations
in the report represents sound advice. PGCPS has performed network failover testing of each
of the datacenters.
PGCPS is currently working on a comprehensive disaster recovery plan documenting the
database, application and network recovery procedures using the State of Maryland IT Disaster
Recovery Guidelines. This plan will cover only critical information systems and a contracted
third party will help the district compile this document over the next six months. In addition, by
May 2014, PGCPS will have established an off-site location where payroll and accounts payable
activities can be conducted to ensure continuity of operations. This functionality is a
component of the comprehensive disaster recovery plan.
Page 21

--- Page 69 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 14: The PGCPS network was not properly secured.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that PGCPS adequately secure its network from potential attack. Specifically,
we recommend that PGCPS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks, identify how
IDP coverage should be best applied to its network, and implement IPD coverage for all
critical portions of its network as appropriate;
b. place publicly accessible servers in a separate protected network zone to minimize security
risk; and
c. implement controls to limit network level student access to only authorized local school and
headquarters network resources (repeat).
Management Response 14
Agree in part.
Assessment of network security risks (14a): Agree. PGCPS has developed a plan to implement
Intrusion Detection System on the network and has acquired the necessary equipment. It will
be implemented by June 30, 2014. PGCPS is also currently evaluating companies to select a
vendor to conduct a documented review and assessment of network security risks.
Management anticipates this review will take place before the 2014 – 2015 school year
begins.
Migration of publicly accessible servers onto a separate network (14b): Agree. PGCPS will
consider the deployment of additional firewalls for core servers to protect internal applications
by creating a multilayer approach.
Limiting network level student access (14c): Disagree. Given the age of servers and lack of
sufficient personnel resources, PGCPS cannot in good faith agree to establish VLAN in all of its
buildings to segment student traffic from the access given to teachers and staff as it would be
uneconomical and unmanageable to do so. PGCPS will look into separate VLANs for remote
connections.*
*See Appendix B for related auditor’s comment.
Page 22

--- Page 70 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 15: PGCPS did not adequately document preventive maintenance work performed.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that PGCPS complete and document all preventive maintenance performed in
compliance with the requirements of the comprehensive maintenance plan.
Management Response 15
Agree.
At the time of this audit, preventive maintenance was performed outside of the work-order
system with area supervisors providing only limited oversight of the auditing of school and
office log books. The district’s prior work order system provided no monitoring or future
scheduling for preventive maintenance. PGCPS has since purchased a comprehensive Plant
Operations and Supporting Services software suite. This software allows for the creation of
work orders for specific employees and tasks and will capture time and materials required. This
information will allow the use of analytical tools available within the work order system to
capture and report on the volume of work, timeliness of repairs, and future purchasing
requirements; it will also display schedules by facility.
As part of the implementation of the new system, existing work orders from prior system will be
migrated into the new system, and then schedules for future scheduled maintenance, by piece
of equipment, will populate. Existing equipment is being asset tagged (see finding 9), as well
as mobile equipment (buffers, tractors, etc.), so maintenance can be logged by serial number
at the time it is performed, along with the nature of the work (i.e. belt replacement). PGCPS is
actively in the process of rolling out the new system in all facilities and conducting system-wide
training on use of the system.
As is the case with many other school districts state-wide, funding for preventative
maintenance will continue to be an issue. Current priorities focus resources (personnel, time,
funding) on replacement or repair of broken equipment and preventative maintenance may
require the district to replace equipment that is actually currently working outside of its
prescribed ‘useful life’. However, by utilizing the new software solution and increasing training
and awareness, the preventative maintenance team will be better positioned to perform tasks
that will extend the life of equipment while minimizing cost.
In an effort to determine how the department can dedicate more time to preventative
maintenance activities, PGCPS has reassessed how the department operates and holds staff
accountable. As part of this effort, the department will be adopting a new training plan which
will include a time management component for supervisory staff. Additionally, custodial staff
have begun to transition away from zone cleaning to team cleaning, which should yield
efficiencies in both time and quality.
Page 23

--- Page 71 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Performing preventative maintenance to critical systems while schools are occupied will
continue to present a scheduling challenge as staff cannot perform most preventive
maintenance work without shutting down the building systems during normal school hours.
PGCPS acknowledges that all the hurdles for implementing a second shift preventive
maintenance program have not yet been cleared. The establishment of a dedicated evening
shift will be re-evaluated as part of the FY15 budgeting process. In the meantime,
management will work to evaluate staffing and identify staff with the availability and training to
transition from daily custodial work to preventive maintenance functions.
Plant Operations is also in the process of implementing new performance and tracking metrics,
as a part of PGCPS’ Performance Management system. Below are plans for FY14 and FY15.
OBJECTIVE: Reduce the number of unscheduled work orders by 5% in FY14; in FY15, an additional
5%.
Rationale: The increase of effective preventative maintenance will decrease the loss of educational
time due to school building system failures related to HVAC.
PERFORMANCE MEASURES:
MEASURE FY 2013 FY 2014 FY 2015
MEASURE NAME
CATEGORY ACTUAL TARGET TARGET
Labor hours devoted to HVAC Output *No Data *Baseline *Baseline
Preventative Maintenance
Percent of Preventive Output 85% 100% 100%
Maintenance HVAC work orders
completed
Percent increase in HVAC Output *No Data *Baseline *Baseline
Preventative Maintenance Hours
Number of unscheduled HVAC Outcome 3790 3600 3420
work orders
Number of HVAC Preventative Input 3790 3600 3420
Maintenance work orders
DEPARTMENT STRATEGY: Increase preventative maintenance activity.
ACTION(S) RATIONALE OWNER DATE
Develop a second shift to PM is accomplished Director Building FY15
perform PM more efficiently if done Services (if approved,
when the facility in not positions
in use open July
2014)
Increase training for all staff Increase skills of Training Coordinator FY14
that interface with building workforce Building Services
systems
Implement work order To track and monitor Director Building FY14
tracking system timeliness and quality of Services
completion of work
orders
Page 24

--- Page 72 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 16: ESCO contracts lacked necessary specificity to ensure timely project completion
and realization of expected savings.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that PGCPS develop an approach to ensure that projects are completed on
time and determine that guaranteed saving are achieved.
Management Response 16
Agree in part.
This finding implies that the Energy Performance Contracts (EPC) have lasted an inordinate
amount of time due to PGCPS’ inability to enforce timely completion of the work. PGCPS does
not agree with this implication. It is true that most EPCs are generally completed within two
years of the notice to proceed. However, most of these are projects with total contract values in
the range of two to five million dollars and are usually for a limited number of buildings using a
single Energy Service Company (ESCO). PGCPS took on a more comprehensive, complex, and
challenging program. With 200 buildings and thousands of individual energy conserving Facility
Improvement Measures (FIMs) it was very difficult to set accurate start and completion dates
for each school building. In many instances, even after nearly all improvements had been
made, projects could not be considered complete until the controls and monitoring equipment
were in place and tested. Moreover, staff training and commissioning of equipment, required
by the DGS, could only be performed during the appropriate season (i.e. chiller and cooling
equipment during the warm weather months and heating equipment during the cooler weather
months). These factors contributed to the protracted length of time required before an
individual school building could be considered completed. Given the scale and complexity of
the work undertaken by these ESCOs, execution of the full scope of work could not possibly be
completed in a two year period. The first three phases of the program were initiated in 2006
and the last phase was initiated in 2010). The district anticipates the entire EPC program will
be complete by March 1, 2014.
Although existing ESCO contracts do not directly incorporate language that addresses energy
savings measurement, these contracts include language which legally binds the ESCOs to the
terms in their original proposal. Proposals submitted by both ESCOs included base year 2005
utility consumption, annual rate increase assumptions, as well as methods of savings
calculations. These contracts also require that the ESCOs adhere to the terms set forth in the
State of Maryland Department of General Services’ Request for Proposal and Indefinite
Quantity Contract with Energy Services Companies. These documents require the ESCOs to
submit a secondary proposal specifying how energy savings will be measured and verified
annually over the course of the payback period.
In the latter half of 2013 both ESCOs submitted their proposals presenting their plan for
operations and maintenance of equipment as well as the measurement and verification of
energy savings. PGCPS has engaged a new contractor to assist with reviewing these proposals
Page 25

--- Page 73 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
and negotiating terms for the final phase of the EPC. The district acknowledges the benefit of
having contract language and exhibits which specify the baseline year, annual savings
guarantees, and savings calculation methodology directly incorporated into the EPCs and will
work to ensure that the final amendment to the ESCO contracts includes such detail.
Page 26

--- Page 74 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 17: PGCPS did not always obtain adequate assurance that payments were for proper
amounts or for services that had been provided in accordance with the approved contract.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that PGCPS ensure that
a. all goods and services invoiced by the ESCOs are provided prior to payment of the related
invoices and that the prices charged by the ESCOs are in accordance with the related
contract; and
b. comply with the recommendations and reviews of the third-party monitor, or document why
the recommendations were not accepted.
Management Response 17
Agree.
From the inception of the EPC program, PGCPS has had a process in place whereby a Project
Manager (which OLA refers to in this report as the “third party monitor”) reviews all invoices
submitted by both ESCOs. Since 2006, the Project Manager’s responsibility had been to review
invoices to: 1) ensure compliance with the contract; and 2) to confirm that the percentage of
completed work referenced in the invoice was accurate based on review of back-up materials
submitted by the ESCO and the Project Manager’s own field observations; this included both
confirming delivery of services and ensuring the receipt of materials was documented. When
the Project Manager discovered inaccuracies, the invoice was either sent back to the ESCO for
adjustment or was reduced according to the Project Manager’s recommendation.
In mid-2013, PGCPS initiated a review of the entire EPC effort. As part of this review
management discovered that a breakdown in the approval process for ESCO invoices occurred
during phase 2B of the EPCs. When the EPCs were modified the first two times (phases 1B and
2A) PGCPS enlisted the help of the Project Manager to review individual project costs proposed
by the ESCOs and suggest changes. These changes were subsequently incorporated in the
contract modifications for those phases. When the contract was modified once again for Phase
2B, the Project Manager was not involved in reviewing project costs. Consequently, the fourth
modification formalized changes in scope and price with which the Project Manager did not
agree. Therefore, the Project Manager in reviewing and forwarding any subsequent invoices for
payment included a disclaimer as to the veracity of the invoice prices. Despite this disclaimer,
management was under the impression that the Project Manager continued to review invoices
to verify the percentage of work completed and the receipt of materials invoiced. PGCPS has
since discovered that this was not the case. The district has since released this Project
Manager, and has enlisted the help of a new contractor to conduct a review of current invoices
and oversee the close-out of construction. This new contractor is also reviewing costs for each
scope type and doing cursory review of installed scopes to determine if adjustments to final
invoice values for different schools need revision or adjustment.
Page 27

--- Page 75 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
For the facility improvements that have yet to be paid out, totaling approximately ten million
dollars, PGCPS will work closely with the new Project Manager to ensure that all goods and
services invoiced by the ESCOs are provided prior to payment and that the prices charged are
in accordance with the related contract. In the event that PGCPS determines the need to pay
an invoice despite the Project Manager’s recommendation to the contrary, PGCPS will
document the rationale for making this determination.
Page 28

--- Page 76 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 18: PGCPS paid the ESCOs higher prices for certain projects than specified in the
contracts, without a formal contract modification or Board approval.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that PGCPS thoroughly investigate any increases in costs for energy
conservation measures and take action to recover any payments for unjustified increases or
seek retroactive Board approval for cost increases that are adequately explained.
Management Response 18
Agree in part.
Lack of Board approval: As stated in the finding, the Energy Performance Contracts (EPC)
consisted of four phases. Every new phase represented an expanded scope of work relative to
the original contract and was added as an amendment to the original contract. The additional
work increased the total contract value, and therefore every amendment and its corresponding
budget increase received Board approval. The first three phases of the project included facility
improvements and costs referenced in the original proposal. The last phase referenced a
second, final proposal. There were some increases to project costs between the original and
final proposals, but the fourth amendment that referenced the costs in the final proposal, was
agreed to by the parties, and was approved by the Board. Therefore PGCPS did receive Board
approval for all project costs, and is obligated to pay contractually agreed costs for work
delivered or performed.
Variances in costs between original and final proposals: PGCPS recognizes that there were
instances where the costs for particular facility improvement project types did change between
the original 2006 proposal and the final 2010 proposal. Cost for many project types remained
unchanged, while others increased or decreased. There are a number of justifiable reasons
why costs for particular improvement measures could have increased between the original
feasibility study in 2006 and when conditions were reassessed in 2010. For example:
1. the conditions of the equipment and related items deteriorated over time and the scope
therefore had to be modified (increased) to accomplish the same designated facility
improvement measure;
2. operating conditions and requirements at the facility (i.e. the school) had changed
leading to the determination that slightly revised improvement measures could be
accomplished; and/or
3. equipment/technologies outlined in the initial proposal were traded out for newer, more
efficient models that became available in the intervening years.
Unfortunately, PGCPS staff did not document justification for the modified costs before they
were formally incorporated in contract modifications. PGCPS is now bound to adhere to and
make payments consistent with the individual project costs incorporated into the final
amendment of the ESCO contracts.
Page 29

--- Page 77 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Investigation of cost increases: Due to the scale and level of complexity of the entire EPC effort,
the amount of time that has elapsed since the initial feasibility study in 2006, and the turnover
in staff both at PGCPS and the ESCOs, as well as the recent change in the contracted Project
Manager, a thorough investigation of the entire EPC program would be a significant, and
potentially costly, undertaking. Should such an investigation determine that cost increases
were unjustified, the district may nevertheless have limited legal recourse given the terms of
the contracts in effect. Be that as it may, PGCPS is weighing the options for and the benefits of
taking on such an endeavor and will make a final decision in consultation with legal counsel.*
*See Appendix B for related auditor’s comment.
Page 30

--- Page 78 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 19: PGCPS did not implement certain practices to promote more efficient use of its bus
fleet.
Recommendation 19
We recommend that PGCPS take steps to use buses more efficiently. Specifically, we
recommend that PGCPS
a. utilize an automated routing system to assist in developing efficient bus routes on a
system-wide basis;
b. take appropriate steps to ensure the accuracy of routing system data;
c. obtain manifests for all bus runs and periodically review bus ridership data and established
routes to ensure capacity goals are met to the extent practical; and
d. develop detailed policies and procedures to provide guidance for determining and revising
bus routes, including goals for bus utilization, capacity, and ride times (repeat).
Management Response 19
Agree in part.
Automated routing system use: For the last several years PGCPS has utilized routing software
to assist with various aspects of the planning process for bus routes. Understanding that there
is no routing system that can completely automate the routing function, PGCPS utilizes routing
software to develop an initial set of routes for the district. The routing team then adjusts routes
manually to reflect circumstances not captured by the software. Since the fall of 2012 when
auditors were on site, PGCPS has installed a number of software updates and has worked with
the Maryland-National Park and Planning Commission and other government agencies to
ensure the routing software is utilizing updated maps. These updates have greatly improved
the software’s ability to produce operational routes, calculate alternative routes, and
recommend route and stop consolidations ultimately resulting in a 5% reduction in the number
buses of in use and an 8% reduction in routes over the last two years (see exhibit below).
Page 31

--- Page 79 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Despite these improvements the need for manual adjustments remains as routing software is
only as good as the data utilized in the automated analysis. For example, maps available often
do not reflect availability of sidewalks nor distinguish roads that are unsafe for walking;
temporary road closures or road construction which could substantially affect a route’s
efficiency are also not always reflected. In addition, the school district currently does not have a
process in place to allow eligible students to opt out of transportation services. As a result,
manual adjustments are made to reflect these circumstances including intentionally over-
booking routes for schools with historically low ridership.14
Routing system data quality: As mentioned in the response to finding 8, PGCPS is piloting a tool
to integrate routing software with newly available GPS technology. This integration will allow
staff to conduct a districtwide analysis of planned versus actual routes. As part of this pilot
staff will explore the extent to which this tool can help the district maintain accurate routing
system data.
Policies and procedures and evaluation of efficiency: PGCPS agrees that detailed policies and
procedures are necessary to provide guidance for determining and revising bus routes.
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) will be developed to document processes used to plan,
review and revise bus routes and to evaluate the district’s overall transportation efficiency.
SOPs will be drafted in calendar year 2014, piloted during the 2014 - 2015 school year, and
fully adopted in the subsequent school year. Manifests to capture actual ridership are critical
to the successful implementation of the SOPs and rider counts will be conducted at least twice
a year.15
Metrics addressing costs and efficiency in transportation have been added to the district’s
Master Plan. The following measures and performance targets were added to the
Transportation Department’s list of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) in the current (2013 -
2014) fiscal year:
1. Measure: Cost per total mile operated (all buses)
Target: $4.20
2. Measure: Cost per student
Target (FY 14): $1,150
In addition, PGCPS management will arrange training sessions with staff to ensure staff
understands the full functionality of the routing system including real time reporting
capabilities. Training will also address how these reports can be used for improved decision
making and efficient resource management. This training will occur in the spring of 2014 in
preparation for planning of routes for the 2014 – 2015 school year. Management will continue
to examine where additional measures, such as ride times, need to be added to the
department’s list of KPIs.
14 These include schools where many students attend before or after-school programs or where parents transport
their children to/from school.
15 Semi-annual execution of ridership manifests has already resumed in the current fiscal year. Manifests were
completed in December 2013 and will be collected once again in April 2014.
Page 32

--- Page 80 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 20: PGCPS did not adequately control access to the automated fuel dispensing system.
Recommendation 20
We recommend that PGCPS ensure access to the automated fuel dispensing system is
adequately controlled. Specifically we recommend that PGCPS
a. develop a standard user agreement, which is signed by employees authorized to use the
system, delineating employee responsibilities and inappropriate use;
b. deactivate user access immediately upon employee termination or position transfer; and
c. review user access on a periodic basis and remove access from employees who do not
need the access.
Management Response 20
Agree.
PGCPS has developed a user agreement outlining the rights and responsibilities, usage
parameters, and consequences of inappropriate use. All employees with fuel system access
will be required to review and sign this agreement. PGCPS will ensure this usage agreement is
on file for all authorized employees as soon by June 30, 2014.
Since the audit PGCPS has implemented a system whereby Human Resources staff informs
Central Garage personnel of employees who no longer work for the school system to ensure
termination fuel system access. Previously, HR provided Central Garage with report of
employee separations twice a year. Beginning in 2014, Central Garage staff will receive the
employee separation report monthly to deactivate access for users who are no longer
employed by the district. At the moment this process is manual. However, PGCPS is exploring
the feasibility of implementing automated processes for the authorization request, verification
of access, and notification of termination. Central Garage staff has also begun to work with
department heads to review user access for all personnel and recertify that continued access
to the fuel system is still warranted. Going forward fuel access will be reviewed and recertified
on an annual basis.
Page 33

--- Page 81 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 21: PGCPS has not determined if various cost saving measures have had the expected
results.
Recommendation 21
We recommend that PGCPS establish a process to monitor cost saving initiatives based on pre-
established goals.
Management Response 21
Agree.
While there was no formal process in place to measure the specific financial outcome of the
early retirement incentive (ERI) program established in fiscal year 2012, the district’s growth in
its fund balance from $3.7 million in fiscal year 2011 to $93 million in fiscal year 2012 offers
an indication of the success of this initiative. However, management agrees that having a more
granular understanding of the impact of specific cost savings initiatives would be beneficial.
Since the time of the audit, no situations such as those cited in the finding have been
requested by Administration. In the future, should revenue suggest the need to implement
short-term cost savings measures, PGCPS will institute formal procedures and
recommendations and submit them for CEO review and, if Board approval is needed, through
the monthly Finance and Budget (FAB) committee meetings. The results of cost savings
strategies will be published in the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, to include cost
cutting initiatives such as furlough plans, early-retirement incentives, or other management
strategies implemented to conserve funds or reduce spending.
Page 34

--- Page 82 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 22: PGCPS did not implement risk management strategies to identify, monitor,
mitigate, or prevent risk factors.
Recommendation 22
We recommend that PGCPS implement risk management strategies to identify, evaluate, and
mitigate risks to the System.
Management Response 22
Agree.
Currently, the Division of Risk Management and Workers’ Compensation has been realigned to
report directly to the Chief Financial Officer rather than the Director of Finance. Recognizing
the need to expand its focus beyond claims management, PGCPS has reconstituted the Office
of Risk Management to add loss prevention and mitigation capacity. Specifically, three new
full-time positions— a Program Coordinator and two Workers’ Compensation Safety Analysts—
have been approved. Their role will be to:
 focus on the reduction of worker’s compensation expense;
 partner with the Safety Office to design and implement a comprehensive loss
prevention program;
 identify trends in PGCPS data and conduct root cause analysis;
 expand school and office-based training programs to reduce claims.
PGCPS will onboard these new employees by March 2014. Additionally, a previously vacant
Safety Officer position, which works under the Chief Operating Officer, has been filled and will
establish in-house expertise in avoiding, eliminating, and mitigating risks and costs associated
with property damage and worker injury.
From a claims perspective, PGCPS is working with the district’s third party administrator and
outside counsel to analyze data around incidences, locations, types of accidents, etc. in order
to develop strategies for loss prevention. For on-going claims management, PGCPS is working
to settle or mitigate older claims and reduce new claims.
Page 35

--- Page 83 ---
Prince George’s County Public Schools
Response to Financial Management Practices Audit
Finding 23: PGCPS did not take sufficient actions to control health care costs.
Recommendation 23
We recommend that PGCPS institute processes to
a. verify the propriety of claims paid by the third-party administrator for active and retired
employees, and
b. verify the eligibility of enrolled health care program participants and their listed dependents.
Management Response 23
Agree.
In fiscal year 2015, PGCPS will contract with a vendor to conduct an audit of claims accuracy
and compliance with plan documents for active employees and retired employees.
Management will use the findings of these audits to gauge the need for and frequency of
similar audits going forward. In addition, staff will initiate an effort to ensure that eligibility
documentation is on file for health care program participants’ dependents.
Page 36

--- Page 84 ---
APPENDIX B
Auditor’s Comments on the Prince George’s County Public Schools’ Response
While Prince George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) concurred with the recommendations
included in the report, in some cases disagreement was indicated regarding the underlying
conditions noted. Our comments addressing these disagreements are presented below. In
accordance with State law, all areas of disagreement will be addressed through separate
correspondence between this Office and PGCPS.
Finding 14c:
PGCPS does not disagree with the finding but rather takes issue with the cost and size of the
project required to implement our recommendation that they establish controls to limit
network level student access to only authorized local school and headquarters network
resources. While we understand their concerns, we continue to believe that implementation
of our recommendation is important to provide adequate security controls over critical PGCPS
resources.
Finding 18:
Although the Board approved each of the four phases, there was no evidence provided to us
that the Board was aware that the overall contract cost increase for a particular phase
included not only new work, but also price increases made for certain project components it
had previously approved at a lower specified cost in earlier phases. As noted in the report
finding, the contract states that costs shall not be modified unless PGCPS requested
additional services which were approved by PGCPS.

--- Page 85 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Daniel R. Brann, CPA
Lisa M. DeCarlo
Brian S. Han
Jeneba R. Jalloh
Staff Auditors