Title: Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration - Possible Conflicts of Interest Involving Certain Construction-Related Contracts
Date: 06/24/2011
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509e0
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:02:06.273599
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
A Senior Management Employee Appeared to Have Solicited Funds from Firms
Doing Business with SHA
A Former Senior Management Employee was Hired by a Firm and was Directly
Involved in an SHA Contract which this Employee Helped to Procure
Bid Evaluation Processes were not Adequately Documented and Certain Contract
Funds were Improperly Used
June 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
June 24, 2011
Delegate Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator James C. Rosapepe, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a review of allegations received through our fraud, waste, and
abuse hotline regarding possible conflicts of interest involving several senior State
Highway Administration (SHA) management employees responsible for certain
construction-related contracts.
Our review disclosed that one employee appeared to have solicited funds from
firms doing, or seeking to do, business with SHA potentially violating State
Ethics Laws, a Governor’s Executive Order, and SHA policies. In this regard, we
further noted that this employee was directly involved in certain questionable
transactions with these firms.
In addition, SHA did not ensure that these firms complied with State Ethics Laws
and SHA policies regarding the hiring and subsequent involvement of former
SHA employees on SHA contracts. This is significant because SHA employees
were routinely hired by firms doing business with SHA. For example, a former
senior management employee was hired by a firm doing business with SHA
within 12 days of retiring from SHA. The employee had significant involvement
in approving the scope, amount, and award of a $16 million contract awarded to
this firm and was subsequently involved in the contract in his capacity as an
executive of the firm.
Our review also noted that SHA circumvented certain established bid evaluation
processes for a procurement that resulted in the award of two $16 million
contracts. For example, there were significant disparities between technical
evaluations that were not resolved and certain key components of the rating
process were not documented as required. Finally, SHA solicited the cooperation
of firms involved in the hotline allegations to redirect contract funds for unrelated

--- Page 4 ---
projects, and/or to conceal overspending on other contracts, thereby
circumventing Board of Public Works oversight and approval. As a result, we
have expanded our review at SHA of redirected contract funds and will be
issuing the related report in the near future.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 5
Background Information 7
Agency Responsibilities 7
Background 7
Findings and Recommendations 9
Potential Violation of State Ethics Laws, Governor’s Executive Order,
and SHA Policies
Finding 1 – A Senior SHA Management Employee Appeared to Have 9
Solicited Funds from Firms Doing, or Seeking to Do, Business with
SHA
Finding 2 – A Former Senior SHA Management Employee Was Hired 11
by a Firm within 12 days of Retirement and Subsequently Worked on
an SHA Contract that, as an Employee, this Individual had Helped to
Procure
Finding 3 – SHA Did Not Ensure that Firms Doing Business with SHA 12
Complied with State Ethics Laws and SHA Policies
Questionable Procurement Practices
Finding 4 – SHA Circumvented Certain Established Independent Bid 14
Evaluation Processes
Improper Use of Contract Funds
Finding 5 – SHA Solicited the Cooperation of Firms to Redirect Contract 16
Funds for Unrelated Projects, and/or to Conceal Overspending on
Other Contracts, Thereby Circumventing BPW Oversight and
Approval
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of several allegations related to the State Highway
Administration (SHA) that were received through our fraud hotline. The
allegations related to possible conflicts of interest involving several senior SHA
management employees responsible for certain construction-related contracts.
The purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegations we received
were valid and to determine if the related activities violated State law, regulations,
and policies. This review was performed in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with SHA
personnel and others, as we deemed necessary, to achieve our objectives. The
results of our review of the allegations are identified in findings 1 and 2. Other
issues that came to our attention during our review are identified in findings 3, 4,
and 5. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Our review was conducted
from July through December 2010.
The response from the Department of Transportation, on behalf of SHA, to our
findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its
response.
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Transportation Article, Section 8-201 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
establishes the State Highway Administration (SHA) in the Maryland Department
of Transportation. SHA is responsible for the planning, construction,
improvement, maintenance, and operations of the State highway system. SHA
operates numerous facilities throughout the State, including a headquarters in
Baltimore City and seven district offices.
Background
SHA entered into multi-year contracts with engineering firms to provide both
construction management and inspection services for SHA construction projects.
Separate contracts are issued for each of the seven SHA district offices.
According to SHA records, there were seventeen open contracts1 as of December
31, 2010 with an original contract cost of $146 million and a remaining balance of
approximately $64 million. SHA’s Office of Construction (OOC) was
responsible for developing the scope of these
contracts on behalf of the district offices, and the Office of Office of
Construction Procurement and
Office of Procurement and Contracts (OPC) was
(OOC) Contracts (OPC)
responsible for conducting the actual procurements
(such as issuing the requests for proposals and
Independent
publishing the solicitations). Both units were
Screening
responsible for independently evaluating and rating Committee
the related technical proposals, and then comparing
their results. After purportedly resolving any
significant discrepancies, the final rankings were SHA Administrator Approval
submitted to an independent screening committee
which made the final recommendation to SHA’s
Administrator for awarding the contract.
The hotline allegations we received pertained to several senior management
employees involved with the OOC who participated in the procurement and
subsequent administration of the aforementioned contracts. Although the
procurement of these contracts involved several SHA units and the awards were
ultimately approved by the SHA Administrator, the allegations indicated that
1 Contracts span several years so certain jurisdictions had multiple contracts open at the same time.
7

--- Page 10 ---
certain senior employees had significant involvement in the scope of the contracts
and the selection of the related firm(s).
Our review of the hotline allegations also included a review of the procurement of
two $16 million contracts for construction management and inspection services in
one SHA district. The contracts were procured by one request for proposal with
the award going to the two highest-ranked firms. We selected these two contracts
for review because of the association of the related firms with the hotline
allegations.
Based on our review, we identified a number of questionable matters as described
in the findings which follow. Consequently, we referred these matters to the
Criminal Division of the Office of Attorney General. SHA should consult with
the Office of the Attorney General before taking any actions related to the
findings contained in this report. A referral to the Criminal Division does not
mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be
filed.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Potential Violation of State Ethics Laws, Governor’s Executive
Order, and SHA Policies
Finding 1
A senior Office of Construction (OOC) management employee appeared to
have solicited funds from firms doing, or seeking to do, business with SHA
potentially violating State Ethics Laws, a Governor’s Executive Order, and
SHA policies.
Analysis
A senior OOC management employee appeared to have solicited funds from firms
doing, or seeking to do, business with SHA potentially violating State Ethics
Laws, a Governor’s Executive Order, and SHA policies. Specifically, the
employee was a partial owner of an out-of-state company that promoted certain
sports activities. Our review of the company’s website disclosed that seven firms
that do business with SHA were listed as sponsors for a charity event being hosted
by the company in April 2009.2 These firms accounted for seven of the eight
sponsors of the event, with sponsorships ranging from $250 to $2,500.
The employee’s financial relationship with these firms is significant because five
of these firms had ongoing contracts with SHA as of December 31, 2010, which
were procured, in part, by this employee’s unit (OOC). Two of these firms were
each awarded a $16 million contract ($32 million in total) for construction
management and inspection services, in October 2008 and December 2008,
shortly before the aforementioned sporting event. The employee may have
attempted to expedite the award of these two contracts. Specifically, during the
procurement process, the employee sent an email to SHA headquarters
procurement staff stating “…we need to get this contract out ASAP as it’s LONG
overdue…we want to get it resolved… .” In addition, as noted in the subsequent
findings, our review of the procurement of these contracts and certain related
contract activity identified several questionable transactions. For example, the
employee facilitated payments to these firms for certain services that were not
within the scope of the contracts (for examples, refer to finding 5). SHA
management advised us that they were unaware of the employee’s business
relationship but that their subsequent inquiries disclosed that the employee may
have solicited financial sponsorships from current and prospective SHA firms for
other events in previous years.
2 The business website indicated that similar events had been held since 1999 but sponsorship
information was not readily available.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Senior management personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that the
aforementioned conditions could violate a number of State Ethics Laws including
Sections 15-501, 15-505, and 15-506 of the State Government Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. For example, Section 15-505 states that an
“official or employee may not knowingly accept anything of economic value,
regardless of form, directly or indirectly, from an entity that the official or
employee knows, or has reason to know, does or seeks to do any business of any
kind, regardless of the amount, with the official’s or employee’s governmental
unit.” Any final decision related to violations of the State Ethics Laws would
ultimately be determined by the State Ethics Commission.
Finally, we noted that the employee’s business interest was not always disclosed
on the annual Financial Disclosure Statements filed with the State Ethics
Commission. Specifically, personal business interests were only disclosed on the
employee’s calendar years 1999, 2004, 2008, and 2009 statements.3 The full
disclosure of this business interest on the Financial Disclosure Statements for the
specified time periods would not alleviate the need to comply with other laws and
policies.
These conditions also appear to violate SHA’s ethics policies, which state that
employees should not accept any gift, regardless of its value, from any person or
entity that does business with the State and should conduct themselves in a
manner that is free of the existence or perception of any corruption or other
misconduct. The aforementioned condition also appeared to violate several
provisions of the Governor’s Executive Order, issued in February 2007.
Specifically, the Executive Order states, in part, that an employee shall not
“solicit or accept any gift or other item of monetary value from any person or
entity seeking official action from, doing business with, or conducting activities
regulated by the employee’s agency, or whose interests may be substantially
affected by the performance or nonperformance of the employee’s duties.” The
Order further states that employees shall avoid any actions creating the
appearance that they are violating applicable laws or the ethical standards.
Finally, the Executive Order provides that violations of the aforementioned
provisions are “grounds for employee disciplinary action, including termination
from State employment.”
3 For all four years, the employee disclosed a partial ownership of the company but stated that no
income had been received from this business.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHA
a. take appropriate action regarding the aforementioned employee’s
apparent violation of State Ethics Laws, Governor’s Executive Order,
and SHA ethics policies;
b. ensure that employees comply with State Ethics Laws, the Governor’s
Executive Order, and SHA’s ethics policies; and
c. refer the matter to the State Ethics Commission and obtain advice as to
whether the employee needs to file amended Financial Disclosure
Statements for years when the relationship was not disclosed.
Finding 2
A former senior management employee was hired by a firm doing business
with SHA within 12 days of retirement and subsequently worked on an SHA
contract that, as an employee, this individual had helped to procure.
Analysis
A former senior SHA management employee started working for a firm doing
construction management and inspection services for SHA4 within 12 days of
retiring from SHA in December 2008. The employee was directly involved in
SHA’s procurement of the firm’s contract and subsequently was directly involved
in this contract as an executive of the firm. For example, while at SHA, the
employee approved the decision to procure construction management and
inspection services from outside firms. We were advised that the procurement
that resulted in this $16 million contract represented the first time SHA used an
outside firm to provide construction management services instead of utilizing
SHA staff, as in the past. This senior employee also approved the scope and
award amount of the related contract. While this procurement was also approved
by the employee’s subordinates and the SHA Administrator, the employee had
sufficient authority to significantly impact these other approvals. Within ten
months of retiring from SHA, the employee approved the first two invoices on
this contract, totaling $96,896, in his capacity as an executive of the firm. In
addition, in his role as an executive, the former employee agreed to SHA’s
request5 to submit bills under this contract for work performed for another district
under another contract for which funds were depleted (as discussed in finding 5).
Senior management personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that the
aforementioned conditions could violate Section 15-504(d) of the State
4 This firm received one of the two $16 million contracts noted in finding 1 and is referenced in all
of the other findings.
5 The request was made by the employee commented upon in finding 1 who was a subordinate to
this former employee while employed at SHA.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, which states that an
official or employee is precluded from working on a contract if that official or
employee participated significantly in the matter. Any final decision related to
violations of the State Ethics Laws would ultimately be determined by the State
Ethics Commission. This statute is also referenced in a Governor’s Executive
Order.
Furthermore, the aforementioned condition may have violated SHA’s ethics
policies and contract provisions. Specifically, SHA’s policies prohibit a former
SHA employee from having a direct or indirect interest in an SHA consultant
contract (for example, working on an SHA consultant services contract) for one
year (referred to as limited duration) after the employee’s tenure with SHA. The
policies further provide that employees who “participate significantly” in a
contract as State employees (which we believe applies to this employee) are
prohibited from having any direct or indirect interest in the contract (that is, for
the duration of the contract regardless of the duration). Furthermore, the policies
provide that this prohibition is imposed on the firm through the firm’s contract
with SHA and is also imposed on former SHA employees by State Government
Article 15-504(d) of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SHA
a. take appropriate action regarding the aforementioned former employee’s
continued involvement with this contract and refer the matter to the State
Ethics Commission; and
b. ensure that employees comply with State Ethics Laws, Governor’s
Executive Orders, and SHA policies.
Finding 3
SHA did not ensure that firms doing business with SHA complied with State
Ethics Laws and SHA policies regarding the hiring of former State
employees.
Analysis
SHA did not ensure that firms doing business with SHA complied with State
Ethics Laws and SHA policies regarding the hiring of former State employees.
We were advised SHA employees were routinely hired by firms doing business
with SHA but no attempts were made to identify these employees and/or to ensure
that their employment was not violating State Ethics Laws and SHA policies. For
example, our review of the bid proposal submitted by one firm6 disclosed that the
6 This firm received one of the $16 million contracts noted in finding 1 and is referenced in all of
the other findings.
12

--- Page 15 ---
firm actively promoted former SHA employees in its bid submission.
Specifically, the bid submission stated that no learning curve would be needed
because its staff included a former SHA Chief Engineer, District Engineers from
three districts, Area Engineers from two districts, a District Traffic Engineer, and
many SHA project engineers, construction inspectors, and design engineers. SHA
did not attempt to identify the former employees to ensure they were not working
on SHA contracts in violation of the aforementioned laws and policies.
We requested that SHA obtain the listing of former employees for both of the
firms that were awarded the $16 million contracts noted in finding 1. One firm
refused to provide SHA with the listing but the aforementioned firm (discussed in
the preceding paragraph) disclosed that 35 former SHA employees were
employed by the firm as of September 2010 (including the employee in finding
2).
Our review of these 35 employees disclosed that, in addition to the individual
referred to in finding 2, another individual was hired within nine months of
retirement from SHA and was on the screening committee that was responsible
for evaluating bid proposals for a contract that was awarded to the firm. SHA
management advised us that these employment arrangements did not conflict with
State laws and regulations or SHA policies (excepting the relationship in finding
2) as long as former employees were working on different projects (that is, other
than those for which they were specifically involved in procuring). However,
SHA had no way of knowing whether these firms were using former employees
on its SHA contracts.
State law provides that a former official or employee may not assist or represent a
party, other than the State, in a case, contract, or other specific matter for
compensation if the matter involves State government and the former official or
employee participated significantly in the matter as an official or employee. In
addition, SHA policy prohibits a firm from hiring a former SHA employee to
work on a matter in which the former SHA employee “participated significantly”
as a State employee and prohibits a former SHA employee from having a direct or
indirect interest in an SHA contract for one year after the former employee’s
tenure with SHA.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SHA
a. periodically obtain a record of former SHA employees from those firms
that provide contractual services for SHA; and
b. refer to these records during the invoice payment approval process to
determine if the firms were in compliance with State laws, regulations,
and SHA policies prohibiting former employees from working on
13

--- Page 16 ---
contracts/projects for which they were involved with the related
procurement.
Questionable Procurement Practices
Finding 4
SHA’s procurement of two $16 million contracts circumvented certain
established independent bid evaluation processes and was not adequately
documented.
Analysis
SHA’s procurement of the aforementioned two $16 million contracts for
construction management and inspection services, awarded in October 2008 and
December 2008, circumvented certain established independent bid evaluation
processes and was not adequately documented. SHA consolidated the
procurement of these contracts and issued awards to the two highest-rated firms.
Our review of the evaluation processes involving these firms disclosed the
following conditions:
 SHA’s Office of Procurement and Contracts (OPC) did not perform a
complete rating of the technical proposals as required. Specifically, OPC only
evaluated and rated four of the fourteen categories used to rank the firms
(scope of services, work plan, time distribution, and past performance) which
accounted for less than 50 percent of the possible assignable points. In this
regard, we noted that OPC did not evaluate the “key employee” category
which was the highest-weighted category. According to senior SHA
management, all of the categories had been rated by OPC in the past but, this
practice had been discontinued. OPC management advised us that they
normally would have performed the review of the category with the highest
weight, but did not do so this for this contract to expedite the contract
approval process. If OPC had rated the remaining ten categories, the final
ratings of the firms could have been different which could have impacted the
ultimate award of the contracts.
 SHA did not document how disparities in the evaluation of technical
proposals by the Office of Construction (OOC) and the portion of the
evaluation performed by OPC were resolved. In this regard, the OPC rated
one of the winning firms sixth out of the ten firms who submitted a proposal,
while OOC rated this firm second (a contract was awarded to the two highest
ranked firms). This is significant because these large disparities could have
impacted the ultimate award. The OPC employee who performed these
evaluations advised us that the recommendation to award these contracts was
14

--- Page 17 ---
basically deferred to the OOC since OOC personnel were the ultimate users of
the services being procured. (Also, as noted above, OPC had not completed
the evaluation process.) As a result, the scores provided to the screening
committee reflected the OOC ratings.
 SHA could not adequately document certain key components of the rating
process. For example, although the OOC performed a rating of the key
employees based on nine attributes, the individual rating forms were not
always signed by the raters, there was no documentation to support changes to
the forms, and the ratings on the individual forms did not always agree with
the summary schedules. In addition, OOC did not prepare the required
documentation to justify the key employee ratings. Specifically, although
OOC rated the key staff in October 2006, the related narrative documentation
was not prepared until April 2008, after the OOC and OPC recommendations
had been submitted to the screening committee. In addition, there was no
documentation of the OOC evaluation of a change in one of the firm’s key
staff in calendar year 2007. According to management employees from both
the OOC and the OPC, the documentation should have been prepared in
conjunction with the key staff category ratings to support the assigned ratings.
 SHA’s independent contract approval process normally provided by the
screening committee was compromised. Two of the four members who served
on the committee for these contracts were not officially designated to serve on
the screening committee and there was no documentation to substantiate that
they were subsequently authorized to serve on the committee. In addition,
these two members were OOC employees who had previously evaluated the
proposals and rated the firms. As such, these two members reviewed their
own evaluations in the capacity as screening committee members which, in
effect, compromised the independent approval process. We were advised by
SHA management that, although there was no written policy regarding the
composition of the screening committee, the intent was for the committee and
its members to be independent of other procurement-related groups. Finally,
another committee member that retired from SHA was hired by one of the
winning firms within nine months of leaving SHA (finding 3).
The aforementioned discrepancies raise significant concerns with the integrity of
the contract awards considering the potential conflicts of interest noted in our
preceding findings.7 Accordingly, there is a lack of assurance that the contracts
were awarded to the two most qualified firms.
7 As previously mentioned, two employees involved in the contract procurement (commented
upon in findings 1 and 2) had certain financial relationships with one of the firms awarded the
contract. These individuals were directly involved in the procurement process and supervised
employees who were directly involved in the procurement.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SHA
a. ensure that OPC evaluates all proposal categories,
b. document the resolution of rating variances between OPC and units
requesting services,
c. ensure that bid evaluations and ratings are fully and adequately
documented, and
d. establish a written policy regarding the composition of the screening
committee and ensure that the committee’s independence is maintained
during the evaluation process.
Improper Use of Contract Funds
Finding 5
SHA solicited the cooperation of two of the firms involved in the hotline
allegation to redirect contract funds from the two aforementioned $16
million contracts for unrelated projects, and/or to conceal overspending on
other contracts, thereby circumventing Board of Public Works oversight and
approval.
Analysis
SHA solicited the cooperation of two of the firms involved in the hotline
allegation to redirect contract funds from the two aforementioned $16 million
contracts for unrelated projects, and/or to conceal overspending on other
contracts, thereby circumventing Board of Public Works oversight and approval.
SHA solicited the cooperation of these two firms through correspondence referred
to as “extension of services” letters which requested the firms to provide services
that were not within the defined scope of their BPW-approved contracts and
instructed the firms how to submit their invoices to facilitate the payments.
Specifically, we noted the following issues related to the senior SHA
management employee discussed in Finding 1 and the aforementioned $16
million contracts:
 The contracts were used to cover overspending on other contracts. For
example, on January 21, 2009, this senior SHA management employee
emailed another SHA management employee asking if it was possible to “rob
some funds” from one of the contracts to pay approximately $60,000 for
services provided by this same firm under another contract in another district
that had no funds available. In addition, on October 27, 2010, the senior SHA
management employee sent a letter to a firm requesting its cooperation to use
one of the contracts to provide inspection services in another district when the
funding on a different contract with this firm was fully expended. In the letter,
16

--- Page 19 ---
the employee anticipated that up to $400,000 would be used but stated that the
total amount should not exceed $800,000 and provided detailed instruction for
how the bills for these non-contract services were to be prepared and
submitted for payment. The request was subsequently accepted by the former
SHA employee commented in finding 2 in this individual’s role as an
executive of this firm.
 Contracts were used for services that were not within the scope of the
contract. For example, on November 6, 2008, the senior SHA management
employee sent a letter to one firm requesting that it use funds from one
contract (its $16 million construction management and inspection services
contract) to provide technical support, maintenance, and enhancements to the
OOC’s internal Management Construction Management System (MCMS).
While SHA considered this scope modification as an “extension of our
Supplemental Construction Inspection Contract,” the firm indicated in its
response that this request was not an extension of service, but an additional
task and nevertheless agreed to the modification request.
SHA did not maintain records to account for the potential financial impact of
these activities and could not readily provide us with the total amount improperly
expended on these contracts. However, we were advised that, as of August 3,
2010, approximately $1.5 million had been diverted from one of these contracts to
cover certain over-expenditures on another contract for inspection work in another
district. In addition, our review of two paid invoices (dated June 3, 2010 and
October 14, 2010) submitted by one of the firms for one of these contracts
disclosed that the majority of the invoiced amounts (71 percent of $250,583 and
65 percent of $274,505) related to projects that were not within the defined scope
of the BPW-approved contract from which they were paid (that is, the projects did
not relate to work in the district for which the contract had been approved).
SHA management advised us that there was no documentation to substantiate the
$16 million estimated cost submitted to and approved by BPW for each of the
aforementioned contracts. In addition, we noted that several of the firms that
agreed to use their contract funds to cover unrelated services were subsequently
awarded additional contracts. These factors could help to enable the
aforementioned practices to occur.
SHA’s improper use of these contracts appears to violate State laws and
regulations which require contract modifications that materially change the scope
of a contract or change the amount of the contract, or any cost component of the
contract, by more than $50,000 to be submitted to BPW for approval. In addition,
the aforementioned conditions may have federal implications since these contracts
are funded in part with federal funds.
17

--- Page 20 ---
During our review we noted that the improper use of contract funds by OOC was
not limited to the aforementioned firms and that senior SHA management was
copied on certain correspondence sent to the cooperating firms. As a result, we
are performing a special review of these activities and will be issuing the related
report in the near future.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SHA
a. take appropriate corrective action regarding these matters,
b. develop procedures and controls to ensure contract funds are only used
as authorized,
c. document the basis of contract amounts submitted to the BPW, and
d. obtain BPW approval for significant contract modifications.
18

--- Page 22 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review Responses
For the period covering July through December 2010
Potential Violation of State Ethics Laws, Governor’s Executive Order and
SHA Policies
Finding 1
A senior Office of Construction (OOC) management employee appeared to have solicited
funds from firms doing, or seeking to do, business with SHA, potentially violating State
Ethics Laws, a Governor’s Executive Order, and SHA policies.
Response 1:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The employee to whom
the auditor is referring to is no longer employed by SHA. This matter was referred to the
State Ethics Commission by SHA on March 30, 2011.
b. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. On March 7, 2011,
SHA’s Administrator issued a memorandum to SHA’s senior management team
reminding them of the May 2, 2011, deadline for filing the SEC’s annual Financial
Disclosure Statement (FDS) and requiring that they advise all appropriate staff of the
deadline and their obligation to file. Employees are required to provide proof of filing to
the SHA Office of Administration.
Periodically, SHA’s Administrator issues a memorandum to all SHA employees
regarding the State Ethics Laws, the Governor’s Executive Order, and SHA’s policy on
gifts. The most recent memorandum was issued on April 18, 2011, which required
employees to sign and date an acknowledgment form. The signed acknowledgment
forms will be retained for future reference and audit. The importance of complying with
the State Ethics Laws, the Governor’s Executive Order, and SHA policies will continue
to be discussed at SHA’s Senior Management Team meetings. All employees will be
informed that a failure to comply will result in disciplinary action, including termination,
when warranted. The SEC has provided ethics training regarding the above-referenced
law, Executive Order and policy to SHA’s employees. The next training will be
scheduled within sixty (60) days.
SHA’s Administrator has appointed one of the Deputy Administrators as Ethics
Coordinator for the SHA. Employees are encouraged to consult with the Ethics
Coordinator concerning ethics questions or consult with the State Ethics Commission
directly. In addition, SHA’s Office of Audits has a fraud hotline where alleged ethics
violations can be reported.
1

--- Page 23 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review Responses
For the period covering July through December 2010
c. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and discussed with the
State Ethics Commission the need for the former employee to file amended disclosure
statements for years when the relationship was not disclosed. As mentioned above, this
matter was formally referred to the State Ethics Commission on March 30, 2011, for
follow-up.
Finding 2
A former senior management employee was hired by a firm doing business with SHA
within 12 days of retirement and subsequently worked on an SHA contract that, as an
employee, this individual had helped to procure.
Response 2:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. A letter dated April 6,
2011, was sent to the aforementioned former employee’s consulting firm along with a
copy of the Administrator’s March 9, 2011, memorandum to all consulting firms doing
business with SHA, reminding it that failure to comply could result in violations of the
State Ethics Laws, Governor’s Executive Order and SHA policies. The firm was also
notified that this matter was referred to the State Ethics Commission. SHA’s Office of
Audits will be conducting random audits of invoices to confirm compliance with the
State Ethics Laws and SHA’s one year prohibition. A letter was sent to the
aforementioned former employee’s consulting firm on June 22, 2011, prohibiting the
aforementioned former employee from working on this contract until further notice. In
this letter, SHA requests the firm to conduct a comprehensive review of SHA contracts,
for the period of January 1, 2009, to the present, to determine whether the
aforementioned former employee or any other former SHA employees violated the terms
of the General Conditions for Consulting Services Contracts and also determine whether
any former SHA employees are involved in these contracts regardless of the date of the
employees’ termination of their employment with SHA.
b. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. SHA respectfully directs
your attention to its response to Finding 1 above and incorporates that response by
reference here.
2

--- Page 24 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review Responses
For the period covering July through December 2010
Finding 3
SHA did not ensure that firms doing business with SHA complied with State Ethics Laws
and SHA policies regarding the hiring of former State employees.
Response 3:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. SHA will require that all
consulting firms submit on a quarterly basis a list of all former SHA employees who are
employed by the firm. By June 30, 2011, an electronic mailbox will be established in
order to facilitate the first quarterly reporting. The consulting firms will be required to
certify these lists indicating that they are in “compliance with the General Conditions
prohibiting a former SHA employee from working on any SHA contract for one year
after leaving SHA and State Ethics Laws prohibiting work on a matter in which a former
SHA employee participated significantly as a State employee, for an unlimited duration.”
Failure to provide the above information could result in termination of the consultant
services contract. In the future, this certification will be required for all solicitation
documents as well. The firms will be directed to identify any potential ethics issues
concerning its former SHA employees and seek an opinion from the State Ethics
Commission regarding any potential conflicts of interest. This certification will be
added to SHA’s standard invoices for architectural and engineering services and
solicitation documents and will be subject to periodic audit. These measures will be in
place by December 31, 2011.
b. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. Beginning August 1,
2011, SHA will require that contract managers perform a regular review during the
invoice payment approval process to ensure that firms are complying with the restrictions
indicated in the certification statement. SHA will direct the consulting firms to obtain an
opinion from the State Ethics Commission regarding any potential conflicts of interest.
SHA’s Office of Audits will conduct periodic follow-up audits to ensure that the review
by the contract managers is occurring. An advisory group comprised of SHA managers
was formed in June 2011 and one of its tasks is to review the lists on a quarterly basis and
identify, based on their knowledge of the former employees’ involvement in the contract
process at SHA, any former SHA employees who should not be working on SHA
contracts.
3

--- Page 25 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review Responses
For the period covering July through December 2010
Questionable Procurement Practices
Finding 4
SHA’s procurement of two $16 million contracts circumvented certain established
independent bid evaluation processes and was not adequately documented.
Response 4:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The Department will
assess the existing structure of the SHA Office of Procurement and Contracts. Processes
were in place but not followed. The Department’s Deputy Secretary will begin working
with SHA as the Acting Administrator on July 1, 2011. Accordingly, the Deputy
Secretary/Acting Administrator will determine whether additional personnel actions need
to be made to ensure that policies and procedures will be followed, without fail, in the
future. Further, the Office of Audits will have an increased role in reviewing the
consultant firm selection process. By August 1, 2011, a plan will be in place concerning
restructuring the Office of Procurement and Contracts.
b. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The Deputy
Secretary/Acting Administrator will establish a work group to review the procedures and
guidelines and determine the membership of the Consultant Screening Committee within
sixty (60) days. We will re-evaluate the composition of the independent Consultant
Screening Committee. The resolution of rating variances of the Office of Procurements
and Contracts and units requesting services will be documented and retained.
c. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. Effective August 31,
2011, a separate quality control review function will be established within the Office of
Procurements and Contracts. This function will ensure that all technical evaluations and
ratings are fully and adequately documented and retained in the selection file. The
SHA’s Office of Audits will conduct follow-up audits to ensure compliance.
d. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. As a result of the efforts
described in responses 4(a) and 4(b), SHA will establish a written policy regarding the
composition of the Consultant Screening Committee and ensure that the Committee’s
independence is maintained during the evaluation process.
4

--- Page 26 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review Responses
For the period covering July through December 2010
Improper Use of Contract Funds
Finding 5
SHA solicited the cooperation of two of the firms involved in the hotline allegation to
redirect contract funds from the two aforementioned $16 million contracts for unrelated
projects, and/or to conceal overspending on other contracts, thereby circumventing Board
of Public Works oversight and approval.
Response 5:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. SHA has taken
corrective actions concerning personnel who were the subject of OLA’s findings. As
mentioned previously, in June 2011, SHA organized an advisory group to review the
procurement process and recommend process improvements. The Office of Finance will
coordinate with the Office of Procurement and Contracts to implement additional
adjustments to the financial management system that will strengthen internal controls and
improve accountability. By September 30, 2011, the Office of Audits will be restructured
to provide a more focused and effective oversight of the procurement process. Finally,
additional mandatory training will be provided to procurement staff and contract
managers by December 31, 2011.
With regard to the two aforementioned contracts, SHA will suspend awarding additional
task orders until an internal assessment is completed. SHA is reviewing all task orders
issued under these two contracts and to the extent practical any necessary corrective
action will be taken including seeking retroactive BPW approval.
b. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. As stated above, SHA’s
Administrator issued a memorandum dated March 9, 2011, to SHA’s senior managers
addressing the procurement and management of consultant contracts. The memorandum
specifically discusses limiting the use of contracts that are awarded for a certain scope of
services to only that scope of services unless a contract modification is approved by the
BPW. The memorandum also instructed offices that if they have any tasks that are
currently being performed outside the original scope of the contract, those tasks must
have ended by March 31, 2011. SHA is currently performing a review of all active
consultant contracts to determine that any such tasks have ended and that contract funds
are used only as authorized. Any out of scope contract usage identified will be analyzed
and appropriate corrective actions taken, including seeking retroactive BPW approval.
This review will be completed by December 31, 2011. As these reviews are conducted,
we are and will continue to cooperate fully with the Office of Legislative Auditors as
they perform an expanded special review of improper use of consultant contract funds.
5

--- Page 27 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review Responses
For the period covering July through December 2010
To strengthen internal controls, SHA’s Office of Finance will require a checklist that
documents contract manager’s certification of compliance with contract terms and
conditions. This checklist will be a required document in the invoice payment process.
SHA’s Office of Audits will audit invoices on a random basis to ensure compliance with
contract terms and conditions. This process, including necessary training, will be
implemented by August 31, 2011.
c. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and will develop
procedures for documenting the basis for the dollar amount of contracts submitted to the
BPW for approval consistent with what is anticipated to be the business need. Interim
procedures will be in place by mid-July 2011. More comprehensive procedures will be
developed and implemented as part of the effort referenced in response 5(d) below.
d. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and will seek retroactive
approval from the BPW for significant contract modifications. The Department will seek
the advice of state procurement experts, including BPW staff, to conduct a systematic
review of the overall procurement process at SHA to assure that a comprehensive
corrective action plan is developed and implemented. We recognize that this may be a
time consuming approach, but given the complexity of the procurement process, we
believe this review is warranted. The resultant corrective measures will be in place by
December 31, 2011.
6