Title: Review of Local Government Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2013
Date: 09/11/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150b10
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:12:48.857790
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Local Government Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction and Scope 4
Results of Desk Reviews
Audit Reports
Audit Reports Were Not Filed or Were Not Filed on Time 6
Auditors’ Reports Contained Qualified and Adverse Opinions 7
Auditors’ Reports Were Not Presented in Accordance with Generally 8
Accepted Auditing Standards
Financial Statements
Financial Statements Did Not Meet Certain Requirements of Generally 9
Accepted Accounting Principles
Financial Statements and Accompanying Notes Did Not Include Certain 9
Required Disclosures
Noncompliance with State Law
Cash Deposits Were Not Adequately Collateralized or Insured 10
Potential Financial Problems
One Local Government Had an Unrestricted General Fund Deficit 10
Special Taxing Districts
Certain Required Reports Were Not Filed 11
Exhibit A – Schedule of Audit Reports Containing Disclosures That Cash 12
Deposits Were Not Fully Collateralized or Otherwise Insured
Exhibit B – Schedule of General Fund Deficits 13
3

--- Page 6 ---
Introduction and Scope
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires each county, incorporated city or town, and taxing district in
Maryland to file annual (or once every four years under specified conditions)
audit reports. There were 187 local government audit reports due for fiscal year
2013 (25 counties, 148 cities and towns, and 14 taxing districts). The reports are
to include financial statements, with accompanying notes, and auditors’ reports
that express opinions as to whether the financial statements are fairly presented.
The financial statements are required to be prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles and audited in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards. We have prepared and distributed audit guidelines to provide
additional information regarding the accounting, reporting, and auditing
requirements.
The Local Government Article, Section 16-307 of the Code requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to perform a desk review of each local government’s annual
audit report for compliance with generally accepted accounting principles and
auditing standards. Section 16-308 of the Article specifies the reporting and
review requirements applicable to special taxing districts created by the counties.
The applicable county is responsible for reviewing each special taxing district’s
compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and for submitting the
districts’ reports to the Office of Legislative Audits. The Office is required to
review the results of the counties’ reviews and the districts’ reports for
compliance with the law.
We conducted a desk review of each of the fiscal year 2013 reports that had been
received from the counties, incorporated cities and towns, and taxing districts, as
well as three fiscal year 2012 reports (Baltimore City, Town of Sharptown, and
City of Fruitland) and one fiscal year 2011 report (City of Hyattsville). The desk
reviews were performed to accomplish the following tasks:
 Identify areas of noncompliance with our audit guidelines and accounting and
auditing standards.
 Identify any instances of noncompliance with certain provisions of State law
(for example, collateral for bank deposits).
 Identify local governments with potential financial problems relating to deficit
fund balances or unfavorable trends and ratios, based on analyses of financial
data over the most recent five-year period (July 1, 2008 through June 30,
2013).
4

--- Page 7 ---
We also reviewed each of the fiscal year 2013 special taxing district reports
received and the related results of the counties’ reviews of these reports. The
purpose of our review was to ensure that the counties had reviewed the reports
submitted for compliance with the provisions of the law and to identify instances
in which required reports were not submitted.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Results of Desk Reviews
Audit Reports
Certain audit reports were not filed or were not filed on time.
Two local governments had not filed audit reports for fiscal years 2012 and 2013,
and four other local governments had not filed audit reports for fiscal year 2013.
Furthermore, 19 local governments submitted audit reports after the required
filing date. The failure of a local government to file an audit report, or a delay in
filing, results in the lack of timely accountability to its citizens. The submission
of audit reports after the required filing date was also noted for 8 of these 19 local
governments during our preceding year’s review. The Local Government Article,
Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of Maryland generally requires audit
reports to be filed on or before October 31 after the close of the fiscal year or on
or before December 31 after the close of the fiscal year for those local
governments with a population of more than 400,000.
Audit reports for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012 and June 30, 2013 had not
been received, as of July 31, 2014, for the City of Hyattsville and the Town of
Deer Park. The failure of these local governments to submit audit reports has
been reported to the Executive Director of the Department of Legislative Services.
If these reports are not filed, the State Comptroller, acting upon the advice of the
Executive Director, is authorized by law to discontinue the payment of all funds,
grants, or State aid to which the local governments are entitled.
Additionally, audit reports for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013 had not been
received, as of July 31, 2014, for the following four local governments:
1. City of Glenarden
2. Town of Marydel
3. Town of Morningside
4. Town of Pittsville
We will review these fiscal year 2013 audit reports and take any follow-up action
necessary when the reports are received. The results of these reviews will be
included in the report on our review of fiscal year 2014 local government audit
reports.
The towns of Brookview, Church Creek, Eldorado, Galestown, Goldsboro,
Henderson, Hillsboro, Mardela Springs and Queen Anne’s requested and were
granted a waiver from filing an audit report for fiscal year 2013 because the local
governments met the conditions for filing an audit report every fourth year as
6

--- Page 9 ---
provided for under the Local Government Article, Section 16-305 of the Code.
These entities will next be required to file an audit report for fiscal year 2016.
The towns of Barclay, Burkittsville, Eagle Harbor, and Port Tobacco and the
Ellerslie and Mount Savage special taxing areas had previously requested and
were granted waivers from filing audit reports. These entities will next be
required to file audit reports for either fiscal year 2014 or fiscal year 2015.
The auditor’s report for one local government contained an adverse opinion
on one opinion unit and a qualified opinion on another opinion unit, and one
other local government report contained a qualified opinion on one opinion
unit.
The audit report for one local government contained an adverse opinion on one
opinion unit and a qualified opinion on another opinion unit and one other local
government report contained a qualified opinion on one opinion unit. The
following is a summary of these opinions.
The auditor’s report for the Town of Sykesville contained an adverse opinion (a
statement that the financial statements are not presented fairly in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles) on the discretely presented component
unit opinion unit because of the omission of financial data for the Town’s
component unit. Specifically, financial data related to a development corporation
that is a component unit of the Town had not been audited and was not included
in the Town’s financial statement.
The Town’s audit report also contained a qualified opinion (a statement that,
except for the effects of the matter to which the qualification relates, the financial
statements are presented fairly in conformity with generally accepted accounting
principles) on the governmental activities opinion unit because the Town had not
measured the effect of Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No.
49 entitled “Accounting and Financial Reporting for Pollution Remediation
Obligations.” According to the report, certain buildings of the development
corporation contained asbestos and, although deemed improbable, the Town could
become liable for the cost of abatement.
As a result, the Town’s financial statements were not presented in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles as required by State law. The
Town’s audit reports for each fiscal year since 2009 also contained an adverse
opinion and a qualified opinion due to these situations.
The audit report for Somerset County contained a qualified opinion on the
Crisfield dispensary (part of the Liquor Control Board) component unit because
the auditor was unable to obtain sufficient evidence about the completeness,
existence, or classification of financial statement assertions for expenditures.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Thus, the County’s financial statements were not presented in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles as required by State law.
Although required by our audit guidelines, the auditor for Somerset County did
not submit a separate letter to the Office of Legislative Audits explaining the
reason for the qualified opinion, and the County’s plan to rectify the problem to
enable the auditor to express unqualified opinions in the future. The auditor for
the Town of Sykesville submitted a letter explaining the qualified opinion as
required.
Auditors’ reports for 24 local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with certain generally accepted auditing standards.
Auditors’ reports for 24 local governmental units were not presented in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. The auditor’s report for
one of these local governmental units included a deficiency that was also cited
during our preceding year’s review. The following is a summary of these
deficiencies:
Number of
Area of Noncompliance
Audit Reports
Auditor did not express an opinion(s) on all opinion units 11
or on all financial statements.
Auditor’s report did not include all basic elements (for 10
example, auditor did not include appropriate
reference to the work of another auditor).
Auditor’s report did not report on all required 3
information (for example, supplemental information
accompanying the basic financial statements).
The Local Government Article, Section 16-306 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that audits be performed in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards. These standards require, in part, that the auditor express an
opinion(s) as to whether the basic financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position, the respective changes in
financial position, and cash flows, where applicable, of the local government in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Financial Statements
Financial statements submitted by 25 local governments did not meet certain
requirements of generally accepted accounting principles.
Financial statements submitted by 25 local governments did not meet certain
requirements of generally accepted accounting principles. The financial
statements of four of these local governments included two such deficiencies and
the financial statements of one of these local governments included four such
deficiencies. Furthermore, the financial statement of one of these 25 local
governments included a deficiency that was also cited during our preceding year’s
review. The following is a summary of the deficiencies and the corresponding
number of instances:
Number of
Deficiency
Instances
Items reported as assets, deferred outflows of resources, 15
liabilities, and deferred inflows of resources were
not properly displayed.
Misclassification or improper presentation (for example, 10
presentation of net assets was improper).
Governmental fund balances were not properly 4
classified.
All required financial statements were not presented or 3
presentation of statement(s) was inappropriate.
Financial statements and accompanying notes for seven local governments
did not include certain disclosures required by generally accepted accounting
principles.
Certain required information was not included in the financial statements, or in
the accompanying notes, for seven audit reports. Adequate disclosure is
necessary to facilitate the understanding of, and to provide for fair presentation of,
the financial information. The following is a summary of these areas of
insufficient disclosure and the corresponding number of instances:
Number of
Area of Insufficient Disclosure
Instances
Long-term debt 6
Reconciliation of the budgetary basis of accounting to 1
the modified accrual basis
9

--- Page 12 ---
Noncompliance with State Law
Financial statements of 13 local governments contained disclosures that cash
deposits were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required
by State law.
Financial statements of 13 local governments contained disclosures that cash
deposits were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by
State law (Exhibit A). The Local Government Article, Section 17-101 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland requires that deposits with financial institutions by
local governmental units be fully collateralized. Full collateralization minimizes
the risk of loss of deposits in the event the financial institution defaults. In
addition, this law requires that collateral be of the types specified in the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 6-202 of the Code.
Potential Financial Problems
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013, the following potential financial problem
was noted based on the information presented in the local governments’ audited
financial statements and accompanying notes.
An unrestricted general fund deficit balance was noted for one local
government as of June 30, 2013.
An unrestricted general fund deficit balance was noted for one local government
as of June 30, 2013 (Exhibit B). The general fund is used to account for most of
the current operating expenditures of a local governmental unit. A general fund
deficit balance represents the costs of current or past services that will need to be
financed in future periods. Consequently, a general fund deficit may indicate a
potential financial problem.
Special Taxing Districts
The preceding contents of this report are applicable to local governments filing
audit reports in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Article,
Section 16-306 of the Code. Section 16-308 of this Article requires that certain
types of special taxing districts file annual audit or financial reports with the
county in which the districts are located not later than 90 days after the close of
the fiscal year, in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the
applicable county. The applicable county is responsible for reviewing each
10

--- Page 13 ---
district’s compliance with the applicable provisions of the law and for submitting
copies of these reports to the Office of Legislative Audits.
The required reports have not been filed for three special taxing districts as
of August 6, 2014.
As of August 6, 2014, we had not received the required reports for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2013 for three special taxing districts which are located in Anne
Arundel County. Anne Arundel County advised us that they were in the process
of pursuing compliance with applicable filing requirements for these districts and
that appropriate follow-up action would be taken (for example, withholding
funds).
11

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit A
Schedule of Audit Reports Containing Disclosures That Cash
Deposits Were Not Fully Collateralized or Otherwise Insured
Similar Disclosures
Uninsured/ Included in Audit
Uncollateralized Reports for Each Year
Entity Amount Since Fiscal Year
At June 30, 2013
Counties
Anne Arundel County $2,673,136 2000
Dorchester County 554,692 2012
Garrett County 1,558,144
Cities and Towns
City of Annapolis 1,432,195
Town of Barton 4,440
Town of Capitol Heights 1,212,007
Town of Grantsville 116,295
Town of Lonaconing 201,615
Town of Rising Sun 441,273
Town of Thurmont 6,913 2009
Town of Upper Marlboro 271.964
Special Taxing Areas
Drummond Citizens’ Committee 223,089
Maryland-National Capital Park
And Planning Commission 1,240,437
12

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit B
Schedule of General Fund Deficits
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2013
Unrestricted Unrestricted
Fund Balance Revenues Expenditures Fund Balance
(Deficit) at and Other and Other (Deficit) at
Entity July 1, 2012 Increases Decreases June 30, 2013
Cities and Towns
Town of Cecilton $ 13,123 $ 401,912 $ 442,722 $ (27,687)
13

--- Page 16 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Garman, CPA
Assistant Director
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor
Michael A. Klausmeier
Nathan H. Suffin, CPA
Staff Auditors