Title: Department of Transportation - State Highway Administration - Construction Inspection Services Contracts
Date: 11/21/2011
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509de
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:01:54.999869
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Construction Inspection Services Contracts
SHA and 10 Firms Arranged to Use $11.3 Million in Contract Funds for
Unrelated Projects, and/or to Conceal Overspending on Other Contracts
SHA Did Not Obtain Board of Public Works Approval for
Certain Contract Activity
Certain Contract Values Could Not be Substantiated
November 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 W. Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Background Information 5
Agency Responsibilities 5
Background 5
Findings and Recommendations 6
Improper Use of Contract Funds
Finding 1 – SHA and 10 Architectural and Engineering Firms Arranged to Use 6
Unexpended Balances of Contracts, Totaling $11.3 Million, to Pay for Work
That Was Outside the Contract Scope Without Obtaining Board of Public
Works Approval
Lack of Task Orders
Finding 2 – SHA Did Not Issue Task Orders to Formally Assign Work and to 8
Manage Construction Inspection Services Contracts
Improper Extension of Contract Terms to Retain Funds
Finding 3 – SHA Extended Contract Expiration Dates Without BPW Approval 9
Lack of Support for Funding Requests
Finding 4 – SHA Could Not Adequately Document the Basis for the Maximum 10
Value of Construction Inspection Contracts Submitted to the BPW for
Approval
Accumulating Unspent Funds
Finding 5 – SHA Procured New Construction Inspection Contracts Even 12
Though Unspent Funds Remained on Existing Contracts
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a special review of certain contracts for construction inspection services at
the State Highway Administration (SHA). The review was performed based on certain
issues noted in our June 2011 Special Review on SHA, which addressed several
allegations received through our fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. Specifically, in the
related report, we identified several questionable financial transactions with construction
inspection services contracts1 procured and managed by SHA’s Office of Construction
(OOC) that were not part of the reported allegations.
For example, in our June 2011 Special Review, we noted instances where OOC used
contract funds for services that were not within the scope of the contracts and that SHA
could not document the basis for the estimated funding requests for contracts submitted to
the Board of Public Works (BPW). Furthermore, we noted that SHA senior management
personnel were copied on certain correspondence sent to the firms involved. As a result,
we determined that an expanded review of OOC’s construction inspection services contract
funds and related issues was warranted.
We focused our current review on the 17 construction inspection services contracts,
totaling $146 million (identified in the aforementioned Special Review), that were active
as of December 2010. We obtained a list of all invoices processed on these contracts
between January 2008 and April 2011. Invoices relating to 16 of these contracts, totaling
$70 million, were paid during this period to 12 architectural and engineering firms (some
of which had multiple contracts with SHA, including joint ventures with other firms).
Our review was conducted from April through August 2011 and consisted of tests,
analyses, observations, and discussions with SHA personnel and others, as we deemed
necessary, to achieve our objectives. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Our review was
performed in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
1 In our June 2011 report, we referred to these contracts as construction management and inspection services
contracts. We were advised by SHA management that the services provided under the contracts reviewed did
not include construction management services as of August 30, 2011.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Transportation Article, Section 8-201 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, establishes
the State Highway Administration (SHA) in the Maryland Department of Transportation.
SHA is responsible for the planning, construction, improvement, maintenance, and
operations of the State highway system. SHA operates numerous facilities throughout the
State, including a headquarters in Baltimore City and seven district offices.
Background
SHA entered into multi-year contracts with architectural and engineering firms to provide
construction inspection services for SHA construction projects. According to SHA
records, there were 17 open contracts2 with 12 firms (some of which had multiple contracts
with SHA, including joint ventures with other firms) as of December 31, 2010 with
contract costs totaling $146 million and a remaining balance of approximately $64 million.
SHA obtained Board of Public Works (BPW) approval for each of these contracts,
including the contract period and the maximum dollar amount to be paid to the contractor.
SHA’s Office of Construction (OOC) was responsible for developing the scope of these
contracts on behalf of the district offices, and the Office of Procurement and Contracts
(OPC) conducted the related procurements (including issuing the requests for proposals
and publishing the solicitations). SHA’s district offices were responsible for assigning
work to the firms under contract in their respective districts, for monitoring the related
work, and for approving the invoices.
These contracts provided for the firms to perform construction inspection services for an
undetermined number of highway construction projects in specific SHA districts. The
contracts required the firms to submit a list of staff that would be assigned to the contract,
along with their salaries and resumes, for SHA approval. SHA was to submit written
requests for staff as needed for various construction projects. Payments to the firms were
primarily based on salary costs (that is, reimbursements for direct salary costs and an
overhead rate applied to these costs).
2 Separate contracts are issued for each of the seven SHA district offices, each of which span several years,
so certain jurisdictions had multiple contracts open at the same time.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Improper Use of Contract Funds
Finding 1
The State Highway Administration (SHA) and 10 architectural and engineering firms
arranged to use unexpended balances of contracts, totaling $11.3 million, to pay for
work that was outside the scope of those contracts without obtaining required Board
of Public Works approval.
Analysis
SHA and 10 architectural and engineering firms arranged to use unexpended balances of
contracts for construction inspection services to pay for work that was outside the scope of
those contracts. These arrangements circumvented State procurement regulations which
require a formal contract modification and Board of Public Works (BPW) approval for a
significant change in contract scope. Specifically, we tested invoices totaling
approximately $70 million from 16 contracts for construction inspection services provided
by 12 firms which constituted all invoices paid during the period from January 1, 2008
through April 4, 2011. Our testing disclosed that, for 10 of these contracts, SHA and the
firms arranged to use $11.3 million of the $45.5 million invoiced and paid on these
contracts (or 25 percent) for unrelated projects, and /or to conceal overspending on other
contracts.
For example, on October 15, 2008, the BPW approved a $16 million contract for
construction inspection services in a specified district. SHA subsequently made several
requests of the firm to use contract funds for services that were not within the contract
scope and instructed the firm how to submit its invoices to facilitate payment. The first 28
invoices submitted on this contract, between January 6, 2009 and January 31, 2011, all
included charges unrelated to the contract. Specifically, $4.4 million (66 percent) of the
$6.7 million invoiced and paid by SHA during this period were for services that were not
within the defined scope of the BPW-approved contract (for example, the charges were for
work performed in other districts).
For another contract, we noted a number of requests from a firm to use unexpended
balances from an $8 million construction inspection services contract to provide services
under a contract with another SHA unit. During the period from January 12, 2008 through
March 1, 2010 the firm submitted 31 invoices totaling $6.1 million on this $8 million
contract. Our review disclosed that 29 of the invoices included expenditures, totaling
approximately $962,000 (16 percent), that were not within the defined scope of the firm’s
BPW-approved contract.
6

--- Page 9 ---
SHA did not maintain records to account for the funds used on other projects that were
outside the contract scope and could not readily provide us with the total amount
improperly expended on these contracts. In response to our request, SHA initiated a
survey of its units to identify the total amount of contract costs incurred for unrelated
work. As of November 2, 2011, the survey had not been completed. However,
preliminary results from one unit suggest that improperly expended funds could involve
services outside of SHA (that is, other Maryland Department of Transportation units.)
SHA’s use of contracts to perform work outside of the contract scope instead of requesting
BPW approval for change orders violates State laws and regulations which require contract
modifications that materially change the scope, amount, or any cost component of a
contract by more than $50,000 to be submitted to BPW for approval. In addition, the
aforementioned conditions may have federal implications since these contracts are funded,
in part, with federal funds.
Furthermore, the arrangements made between SHA and the firms are indicative of a less
than arm’s-length relationship between those parties that, in turn, could raise questions
regarding the integrity of the procurement and payment process for subsequent contracts
involving these firms. Specifically, SHA personnel advised us that, with respect to the
aforementioned arrangements, it was an accepted practice for the “reimbursement” of the
contract funds, which were used to perform work outside of the contract scope, once a
subsequent contract was entered into with the same firm. We noted that, in response to
one request, Office of Construction (OOC) management stated that “the other unit will be
responsible for reimbursing OOC when their [sic] new contract(s) is (are) in.” If the
same firm did not get the replacement contract, that would not be a viable option because it
would be difficult to reimburse the funds redirected from the contract.
In this regard, our test of 5 of the aforementioned 10 construction inspection contracts
disclosed that all of the participating firms had been awarded one or more replacement
contracts totaling $55 million by SHA during the period from July 2009 through March
2011 for construction inspection services and other services. For example, the
“reimbursement” process for the previously noted $8 million contract worked in the
following manner: Some of the contract funds from the $8 million construction inspection
services contract attributable to one unit (lending unit) were used for services applicable to
another SHA unit (borrowing unit). According to the firm, this was necessary because its
contract with the borrowing unit had been fully expended. SHA subsequently awarded this
firm a $4 million replacement contract, approved by the BPW on January 20, 2010, to be
used for services rendered to the borrowing unit. In an attempt to make the lending unit’s
contract with the firm whole for the funds borrowed, the firm then began charging the new
$4 million contract for services applicable to the lending unit. In fact, we noted that the
first 11 invoices paid on this new contract, totaling $1.1 million, included $733,119 in
payments for construction inspection services related to the lending unit’s contract.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHA
a. develop procedures and controls to ensure contract funds are only used as
authorized,
b. obtain BPW approval for significant contract modifications including the
aforementioned $11.3 million that was improperly used on other projects, and
c. evaluate its procurement activities to ensure the processes promote competition
and integrity.
Lack of Task Orders
Finding 2
SHA did not issue task orders to formally assign work and to manage construction
inspection services contracts awarded to the firms.
Analysis
SHA did not issue written task orders to formally assign work and to manage construction
inspection services contracts awarded to the firms. Specifically, we were advised by OOC
personnel that the contracts between SHA and the firms were considered the task orders
and that it would be too cumbersome to prepare a task order for individual projects
completed. In this regard, the initial contracts did not contain specific deliverables for the
contractors, such as the projects that were to be performed, the number of inspections
required, and the estimated hours and cost for each inspection. Rather, the contracts only
provided for a maximum dollar amount and for the firms to perform construction
inspection services for an undetermined number of highway construction projects in
specific SHA districts.
Task orders should be completed prior to the initiation of any work and should be agreed
to by both SHA and the firm. Generally, a task order should specify the work to be
performed by the firm, a budget identifying the allowable labor hours and associated rates,
firm personnel that will be assigned to complete the task, and fees that can be charged.
Because task orders were not used, SHA could not effectively monitor services provided
by firms, as well as the related charges billed by the firms. For example, if an invoice
included charges for 100 hours worked by one employee, there was no assurance that the
services warranted 100 hours and that the services performed correlated to the hours
charged.
SHA policies and procedures required task orders for architectural and engineering design
work, but not for inspection work. We were advised by SHA management that task orders
are also generally required by other SHA units.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SHA
a. ensure that task orders are issued for all construction inspection services provided
before the work is initiated, and
b. use the task orders to monitor the work and related invoices.
Improper Extension of Contract Terms to Retain Funds
Finding 3
SHA extended contract expiration dates without BPW approval, resulting in the
accumulation of approximately $26 million in unspent contract funds.
Analysis
SHA extended contract terms without BPW approval. Specifically, our review disclosed
that, during the period from September 2008 through August 2009, SHA improperly
extended the contract expiration dates for all nine construction inspection services
contracts reviewed that had expired, allowing SHA to retain approximately $26 million in
unspent contract funds.3
SHA usually used correspondence referred to as “extension time” letters to request the
firms to extend the expiration dates for the contracts. The reason SHA extended the
contract expiration dates was to retain authority to spend the remaining funds within the
contracts. For example, in April 2009, SHA sent a letter to one firm stating that its $8
million contract was to expire on June 1, 2009 and that there were funds totaling $3.2
million remaining as of February 17, 2009. The letter stated that SHA “desires to extend
the time limit on the contract until June 1, 2010…to utilize the remaining funds within the
existing contract.” This contract was subsequently extended two more times until July 8,
2011.
Although seven of these nine contracts had been initially approved by BPW for a three-
year contract period, SHA subsequently extended the related contract periods for these
contracts a total of 19 times—resulting in extensions of each for two or more additional
years—without BPW approval.
SHA does not have the authority to extend the term of a contract without formal BPW
approval. Specifically, BPW approval is required for extensions of contracts that meet
certain criteria (such as significant modifications to the contract, and extensions not
3 The amounts of unspent contract funds stated here were referenced in the letters to the firms requesting the
contract period extensions.
9

--- Page 12 ---
disclosed in the original contract). As a result, the firms were able to submit invoices to
SHA for payment and likewise receive payment for work that was performed beyond the
BPW approved contract period.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SHA
a. submit the aforementioned improperly extended contracts to the BPW for
approval;
b. refrain from using any contract funds on existing contracts unless BPW approval
is obtained; and
c. ensure that, in the future, BPW approval is obtained for significant contract
modifications, including the extension of contract expiration dates.
Lack of Support for Funding Requests
Finding 4
SHA could not adequately document the basis for the maximum value of construction
inspection contracts submitted to the BPW for approval.
Analysis
SHA could not adequately document the basis for the maximum value of construction
inspection contracts submitted to the BPW for approval. Specifically, our test of four
contract awards, totaling $34 million and approved by the BPW, disclosed that SHA could
not adequately support the amount of funds that had been requested. In this regard, two
employees involved in developing the contract amounts provided a differing basis for
determining contract amounts. One employee advised us that construction inspection
services generally represented five percent of the related estimated construction costs. The
second employee advised us that these amounts represented “guestimates” based on the
amount expended in the prior contract, adjusted upward for an increase in firm labor costs.
If this second process were used, the improper use of contract funds noted previously in
Finding 1 would result in inaccurate estimates since prior contracts were used for
expenditures unrelated to the contracts.
However, our test of these four contracts raised significant questions about the process
used to develop inspection contract award amounts. Specifically, we requested
documentation to support the contract award amounts and were provided with
documentation prepared 18 months prior to the effective date of the inspection contracts.
These documents included estimates of the total related construction costs to be overseen
by each inspection contract. In response to our inquiry seeking support for the total
estimated construction costs on these forms, we were provided an undated handwritten list
and two emails, dated 21 months later listing various construction projects related to three
of the four inspection contracts. In no case did the subsequent support agree with the
10

--- Page 13 ---
original construction cost estimate, and for the fourth construction inspection contract, no
support was provided.
Furthermore, our review of the aforementioned documents disclosed no consistent,
discernible basis for estimating construction inspection contract values. Specifically, as
highlighted in the following table, the percentage of construction inspection contract
values to related construction costs ranged from 3 to 27 percent based on original estimates
and ranged from 5 to 11 percent based on subsequent support.
Selected Construction Inspection Contracts and Related Construction Costs
Percent of Inspection
Construction Costs Contract Award to
Inspection Construction Costs
Contract
Contract Award
Estimate From Contract List
Initial from Subsequent Estimate Support
Documentation Support
1 $10,000,000 $ 54,900,000 $166,957,781 18% 6%
2 $10,000,000 $ 297,300,000 Not Provided 3% n/a
3 $10,000,000 $ 79,900,000 $94,256,524 13% 11%
4 $ 4,000,000 $ 14,900,000 $78,275,749 27% 5%
n/a – not applicable
The lack of adequate support for the funding requests is significant because, when the
construction inspection contracts were submitted to the BPW for approval, there was no
disclosure of the related construction contracts value. In addition, as noted in Finding 1,
SHA used excess contract funds to cover over-expenditures on other contracts.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SHA
a. establish a documented process that justifies the contract values based on
projected construction projects and related costs, and
b. review the funding for the aforementioned contracts to determine the proper
amounts needed and submit change orders reflecting these values to the BPW for
approval.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Accumulating Unspent Funds
Finding 5
SHA procured new construction inspection contracts even though unspent funds
remained on existing contracts.
Analysis
SHA procured new construction inspection contracts when there were unspent funds
remaining on existing contracts. For example, we noted the following conditions:
 In October 2008, SHA requested and received BPW approval for a $16 million
contract for construction inspection services in one district even though $15.4 million
in available contract funds remained on the existing contracts in this district. In
December 2008, SHA requested and received BPW approval for another $16 million
contract in this district although $30 million in available contract funds remained in this
district. In November 2009 SHA requested and received BPW approval for yet another
$10 million contract for the same district although $36.5 million in available contract
funds remained in this district. (See table below). Furthermore, as noted in Finding 2,
during this same period, SHA was entering into agreements with firms to extend the
contract terms to retain unspent funds.
Construction Inspection Contracts for One District
Remaining Balance of Earlier Contracts as
BPW Contract
Contract of
Approval Amount
10/15/08 12/17/08 11/18/09
1 06/21/06 $ 8,000,000 $ 4,440,276 $ 4,067,744 $ 1,734,312
2 07/26/06 $ 8,000,000 $ 5,185,068 $ 4,515,665 $ 2,665,936
3 10/18/06 $ 8,000,000 $ 5,810,564 $ 5,464,158 $ 3,362,342
4 10/15/08 $ 16,000,000 - $ 16,000,000 $ 12,957,848
5 12/17/08 $ 16,000,000 - - $ 15,741,364
6 11/18/09 $ 10,000,000 - - -
Total $ 66,000,000 $15,435,908 $ 30,047,567 $ 36,461,802
 In March 2011, SHA requested and received BPW approval for a $14 million
construction inspection services contract in another district when there was still $3.5
million remaining on an existing contract. In addition, in April 2011, SHA requested
and received BPW approval for another $14 million construction inspection services
12

--- Page 15 ---
contract in the same district. At the time of this request, SHA had $17.4 million
remaining on the two existing contracts for this district.
SHA could not readily justify the need for the new contracts and did not disclose the
existing fund balances to the BPW when requesting approval for the new contracts.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SHA either discontinue the practice of requesting new contracts
when existing funds are available or fully disclose existing contract balances to the
BPW.
13

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review
Construction Inspection Services Contracts
November 2011
Improper Use of Contract Funds
Finding 1
The State Highway Administration (SHA) and 10 architectural and engineering firms
arranged to use unexpended balances of contracts, totaling $11.3 million, to pay for work
that was outside the scope of those contracts without obtaining required Board of Public
Works approval.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SHA
a. develop procedures and controls to ensure contract funds are only used as authorized,
b. obtain BPW approval for significant contract modifications including the
aforementioned $11.3 million that was improperly used on other projects, and
c. evaluate its procurement activities to ensure the processes promote competition and
integrity.
Response 1:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The Office of Construction
has been directed to discontinue the practices cited in the finding.
As we responded in the June 2011 Special Review, a memorandum dated March 9, 2011, was
sent to SHA’s senior managers addressing procurement and management consultant issues.
The memorandum specifically discusses limiting the use of contracts to work authorized in
the contract. SHA is performing a review of all active consultant contracts to determine if
tasks are for work authorized under the terms of the contract. If not authorized, SHA will
seek appropriate approval from the BPW.
As noted in the finding, SHA initiated a survey to identify improperly expended contract
funds. This survey was sent to all senior managers responsible for the management of
architectural and engineering contracts. SHA is currently in the analysis stage of this effort
and has identified contracts with tasks issued for work that were unauthorized under the
terms of the contract. Once complete, SHA has conferred with BPW staff to seek guidance
on required actions.
It should be noted that while the survey did uncover improperly expended contract funds, the
services incurred were not determined to be unrelated to authorized projects. Contract
services, such as construction inspection may fall outside of the geographic area under
contract, but are necessary project costs.
Although the task order process is used in other areas of the Administration, SHA is currently
developing a similar process to issue task orders for construction inspection services. The
new task order process will require review and approval prior to issuance to ensure that the
1

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review
Construction Inspection Services Contracts
November 2011
services requested are authorized under the terms of the contract. This process will be in
place by December 31, 2011.
Additionally, the Administration is developing procedures and processes to enter and track
all task orders in the financial management system (MDOT FMIS). This will further enhance
the control environment over the management of the contract. This new process will be in
place by December 31, 2011.
As mentioned in the response to the June 2011 Special Review, SHA’s Office of Finance
now requires a checklist that documents contract manager’s certification of compliance with
contract terms and conditions when consultant invoices are processed for payment. This
checklist requirement was developed, training was conducted, and the process was
implemented on September 1, 2011. SHA’s Office of Audits began reviewing compliance
with the checklist process in October 2011. Additionally, SHA’s Office of Audits has
developed an audit plan to test for compliance that contract funds are only used as authorized.
The Administration is developing contract management guidance and will provide training to
contract managers and procurement staff across SHA. This guidance will be comprehensive
and deployed in multiple phases. Training is planned to begin in December 2011 and
completed by June 2012. This training will be on-going.
b. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The Administration has
consulted with BPW staff to seek their guidance addressing any improperly used contracts.
There will be follow up meetings with BPW staff to seek the appropriate authorization from
the BPW as required.
c. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The Administration
established the A&E Process Review Team to address issues brought out in the June 2011
Special Review. The Team has focused on many issues, which includes the A&E
procurement process to better support our business needs and ensure that the process
promotes competition and integrity. This process should be completed and final
recommendations implemented by March 31, 2012. Additionally, the Office of Audits will
perform periodic reviews of the Office of Procurements and Contracts testing for compliance
with applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures.
2

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review
Construction Inspection Services Contracts
November 2011
Lack of Task Orders
Finding 2
SHA did not issue task orders to formally assign work and to manage construction
inspection services contracts awarded to the firms.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SHA
a. ensure that task orders are issued for all construction inspection services provided
before the work is initiated, and
b. use the task orders to monitor the work and related invoices.
Response 2:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. As mentioned in the
response to Finding 1, the Administration is currently developing a process to ensure task
orders are issued for all work requested under consultant contracts before the work is
initiated. It should be noted that processes are in place to monitor the activity of the
consultant construction inspectors, including assignment of work and direct oversight by
SHA project managers. However, the new task order process will add additional controls and
enhance the process.
b. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The new task order process
will add a requirement that the consultant invoice is directly related to the work performed
and authorized under the task order scope of services and budget.
Improper Extension of Contract Terms to Retain Funds
Finding 3
SHA extended contract expiration dates without BPW approval, resulting in the
accumulation of approximately $26 million in unspent contract funds.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SHA
a. submit the aforementioned improperly extended contracts to the BPW for approval;
b. refrain from using any contract funds on existing contracts unless BPW approval is
obtained; and
3

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review
Construction Inspection Services Contracts
November 2011
c. ensure that, in the future, BPW approval is obtained for significant contract
modifications, including the extension of contract expiration dates.
Response 3:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. Contracts extended without
required BPW approval will be submitted to the BPW for consideration.
b. SHA acknowledges that certain contract expiration dates were extended without BPW
approval, where required. SHA met with BPW staff to seek guidance to ensure that all
required contract extensions are approved by the BPW. Also, a separation of duties in the
financial management system control environment will be implemented to ensure that only
properly authorized contract extensions are available for use. This change, which will
improve checks and balances between the Office of Finance and Office of Procurement and
Contracts, will be implemented by December 31, 2011.
c. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The Administration will
seek BPW approval, where appropriate, for contract modifications including the extension of
contract expiration dates.
Lack of Support for Funding Requests
Finding 4
SHA could not adequately document the basis for the maximum value of construction
inspection contracts submitted to the BPW for approval.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SHA
a. establish a documented process that justifies the contract values based on projected
construction projects and related costs, and
b. review the funding for the aforementioned contracts to determine the proper amounts
needed and submit change orders reflecting these values to the BPW for approval.
Response 4:
a. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. In July 2011, the
Administration established a documented process to justify contract value for all new
contracts. This justification process documents the consideration and evaluation of
expenditure history, existing contract balances, and projected construction program needs.
b. The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and will review the contracts
cited and consider any appropriate action. Although the contract values are significant,
expenditures are constrained by the budgetary process.
4

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
State Highway Administration
Special Review
Construction Inspection Services Contracts
November 2011
Accumulating Unspent Funds
Finding 5
SHA procured new construction inspection contracts even though unspent funds remained
on existing contracts.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SHA either discontinue the practice of requesting new contracts when
existing funds are available or fully disclose existing contract balances to the BPW.
Response 5:
The Administration concurs with the auditors’ recommendation and advises the BPW of existing
similar contract authority and the intended use of that contract authority with new contract
requests. The Administration is currently reviewing all active consultant contracts to ensure the
appropriate contracts are in place to support our business needs. At this time, the review of
consultant contract requests is based on our current business needs, which includes determining
the proper contract value, number of contracts, and contract terms. However, the Office of
Procurement and Contracts will develop and fully implement written procedures documenting
this process by March 2012.
5