Title: St. Mary's County Public Schools
Date: 04/09/2009
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d38cc9d72404c150a38
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:48:34.581224
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
September 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Federal Funds 9
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 1 – SMCPS Did Not Adequately Restrict User’s Capabilities 11
on Its Automated Procurement and Accounts Payable System
Finding 2 – Contracts Were Not Always Awarded Through 12
Competitive Procurements and Contract Billings Were Not
Always Properly Verified
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 3 – HR and Payroll System User Capabilities Were Not 13
Adequately Monitored and Restricted and Independent
Documented Reviews of Transactions Were Not Performed
Inventory Control and Accountability
* Finding 4 – SMCPS Equipment Policies Were Not Comprehensive 15
and Proper Controls and Recordkeeping Were Not Established
Over Sensitive Equipment Items
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 5 – Controls Over Accounts, Passwords, Database Access and 17
Logging, and Security Monitoring Were Not Sufficient
Finding 6 – The SMCPS Computer Network Was Not Adequately 18
Secured
Finding 7 – Workstations and Servers Were Not Sufficiently Protected 19
Against Malware
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 20
Transportation Services
Finding 8 – SMCPS Did Not Periodically Perform a System-Wide 22
Analysis of Bus Routes and Related Bus Capacities to Maximize
the Efficiency of Its Bus Routes
* Finding 9 – Certain SMCPS Payments to Bus Contractors Did Not 23
Consider Market Conditions, Actual Costs, or Available Discounts
Finding 10 – Internal Controls Over Payments to Bus Contractors 25
Were Not Adequate
Food Services
* Finding 11 – Cash Receipt Duties Were Not Properly Segregated as 26
Transactions Could Be Voided By Cashiers Without Independent
Review or Approval
Finding 12 – SMCPS Did Not Perform Documented Independent 27
Verifications of Validated Deposits
School Board Operations 28
Other Financial Controls
Finding 13 – SMCPS Did Not Competitively Bid Healthcare Contracts 29
For Administrative Services and Stop-Loss Coverage and Did Not
Maintain Copies of the Annual Agreements
* Finding 14 – SMCPS Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Payments for 30
Employee and Retiree Healthcare Costs
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 33
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the St. Mary’s County Public Schools (SMCPS)
September 2015
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
SMCPS ranks 12th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems
in Maryland. In fiscal year 2014 SMCPS had a total full-time regular and
special education pupil population of 17,841 students at its 27 schools.
SMCPS’ operating and capital expenditures totaled $242 million in fiscal year
2014.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of SMCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated April 9, 2009. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for SMCPS to improve internal controls and to enhance policy
direction.
SMCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability
SMCPS needs to improve internal controls in several financial areas. For
example, we noted that SMCPS lacked an independent review and approval to
ensure the propriety of vendor procurements and payments, personnel and
payroll transactions, payments to bus contractors, and food service sales
activity. SMCPS also needs to restrict user access capabilities to record
critical transactions on its automated procurement and human resources and
payroll systems. Additionally, SMCPS needs to implement adequate security
measures and monitoring procedures to protect its network and related
critical devices from security risks. Also, account and password controls to
protect critical systems were not sufficient.
We also found that existing procurement policies were not consistently
followed and certain contract payments were not sufficiently verified. Our test
of 20 procurements totaling $10.2 million disclosed various deficiencies in 11
of the procurements totaling $4 million. For example, contracts with nine
vendors for Special Education services were not competitively bid and were
not approved by the Board as required by its policy.
SMCPS did not verify the propriety of payments to contractors for health care
services, including claims, administrative fees, and stop-loss insurance.
SMCPS is self-insured for employee medical benefits and uses a third-party
administrator to process related claims. SMCPS reimbursed the administrator
for claims paid upon request without sighting support for the amounts actually
5

--- Page 8 ---
paid. Payments to the administrator for health care services during fiscal year
2014 totaled $34.4 million.
SMCPS Should Take Certain Steps to Improve Cost Effectiveness
SMCPS should take steps to ensure the efficiency of its bus operation, which
transported over 17,900 students on approximately 200 buses, primarily
operated by contractors. During fiscal year 2014, transportation costs totaled
$15.5 million, with $12.6 million representing payments for contracted
services. Specifically, SMCPS did not perform a system-wide route analysis to
assist in planning efficient bus routes. Our analysis found that ridership was
lower than SMCPS’ desired bus capacity goals, with almost half the routes
reviewed operating at less than 75 percent of the goal. Also, SMCPS should
establish payment rates to bus contractors in a manner that ensures that the
amounts are reasonable, by considering market conditions and actual costs.
For example, we estimated potential cost savings of $2.3 million over the
estimated 12-year life of 63 buses owned by contractors if a particular
payment component was based on market rates.
SMCPS Needs to Establish or Modify Certain Comprehensive Policies and
Procedures
SMCPS needs to develop formal system-wide policies to control equipment,
including physical inventory and recordkeeping requirements. In addition,
SMCPS needs to reevaluate its policy of reimbursing bus contractors for
federal excise taxes included with fuel purchases when paying contractors for
fuel. According to federal law, the bus contractors are exempt from the
federal excise tax and can recover the taxes paid when filing their federal
income tax return. For fiscal years 2010 to 2013, SMCPS’ fuel
reimbursements to contractors included $479,000 for the federal excise tax.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), St. Mary’s County Public Schools (SMCPS)
ranks 12th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2014 full-time student enrollment was 17,841
students. SMCPS has 27 schools, consisting of 17 elementary, 4 middle
schools, 3 high schools and 3 other types of schools (including vocational,
charter, and alternative).
According to SMCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2014 revenues
were $234 million and expenditures were $241.7 million. The largest
expenditure category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which
accounted for 76.3 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2014.
According to MSDE records, during the 2013-2014 school year, SMCPS had
2,119 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 1,488 instructional
and 631 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
SMCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the St. Mary's
County government provide the vast majority of SMCPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with SMCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. St. Mary's County government exercises authority over the
SMCPS primarily through the review and approval of SMCPS’ annual operating
and capital budgets.
External Audits
SMCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is
referred to as a Single Audit of SMCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audit and
Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2013 and 2014, and examined the related
7

--- Page 10 ---
work papers for fiscal year 2013, which were the latest available at the time
we performed our audit fieldwork.
The fiscal year 2013 Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over
Financial Reporting identified both a material weakness and a significant
deficiency. The weakness cited was due to the omission of certain activity
related to the Fiduciary Fund used by SMCPS to partially fund their Other Post
Employment Benefits liability, as well as certain capital assets and associated
long-term liabilities from the financial statements. As a result, the prior year’s
financial statements had to be re-stated. For example, audit adjustments
were recorded to reflect a change in net position of $6.2 million related to the
Fund and additional audit adjustments were recorded to reflect capital lease
expenditures of $4.5 million. The significant deficiency cited was the failure
of existing supervisory review procedures to detect a $204,000
overstatement of the accrued compensated absences liability. SMCPS agreed
with the auditor’s findings and agreed to implement their recommended
corrective actions. These conditions affected financial reporting requirements
and did not impact our audit scope or objectives. The above conditions were
not cited for the fiscal year 2014 audited financial statements.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the SMCPS’ financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we
relied on the results of the independent audits to reduce the scope of our
audit work related to revenues, federal grant activity, and food service
inventory.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 20 of the 29 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated April 9, 2009 (the 29 findings
resulted in 20 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed up on
these 20 findings based on our current assessment of significance and risk
relative to the audit objectives. We determined that SMCPS satisfactorily
addressed 14 of these findings. The remaining 6 findings are repeated in this
report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
SMCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from St. Mary’s County,
the State, and the federal government. According to the SMCPS audited
financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled $234 million during
fiscal year 2014. In addition, schools collect funds for other purposes such as
student activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not
considered school revenue, these school activity funds are accounted for
separately by each school and reported in summary in the audited financial
statements. Although this revenue is raised through student-related activities,
SMCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year 2014
school activity fund collections totaled $4 million and the June 30, 2014
balance was $1.5 million.
External Audits
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the SMCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the
results of the firm’s audit for certain revenues and accounts receivable for
which the auditor’s procedural review and testing disclosed no material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Internal Reviews of School Activity Funds
The SMCPS fiscal office staff conducts reviews of individual high school and
middle school activity funds annually and elementary schools at least every
other year. The fiscal office staff’s review of internal controls and tests of
compliance with SMCPS policies, procedures, and guidelines for school
activity funds at SMCPS schools identified some control weaknesses at
certain schools. The fiscal office staff reports we reviewed disclosed that
internal control weaknesses identified were not prevalent.
Federal Funds
Background
SMCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted in use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2014 expenditures totaled $16.8
9

--- Page 12 ---
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of SMCPS’ federal grants and the objectives
of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results. Besides
expressing an opinion on SMCPS’ compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control structure's
impact on compliance and audited the required Schedule of Federal Awards
(which includes claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years
2013 and 2014. The related reports stated that SMCPS complied, in all
material respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal
programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the
operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did not identify any
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds Were Requested for Eligible Services
SMCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services. Medicaid is an entitlement program for which certain
service costs can be reimbursed to SMCPS. Medicaid activity is not covered
by the Single Audit of federal grants. Our tests disclosed that reimbursement
was requested for all tested Medicaid-subsidized services. According to
agency records, fiscal year 2014 reimbursement for Medicaid-subsidized
services totaled approximately $1.6 million.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and SMCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $57.3 million during fiscal year 2014. Requisitions are
computer generated by the requesting department and must be approved by
supervisory personnel (such as a respective department head). Approved
requisitions are then converted to purchase orders and approved by a
supervisor in the fiscal office. The SMCPS procurement policy provides that
procurements valued at $25,000 or higher be approved by the Board and be
competitively bid, with the exception of textbook purchases, emergency
repairs, sole-source procurements (the basis for which must be justified), and
the use of intergovernmental purchasing agreements. The policy also
requires solicitation of written quotes for purchases of $1,000 or greater.
Payments are processed by the finance department through an automated
10

--- Page 13 ---
system that prints vendor checks and posts the payment to the financial
records.
Finding 1
SMCPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system.
Analysis
SMCPS did not adequately restrict users’ capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system. Five employees were assigned
capabilities that allowed them to perform incompatible functions and reviews
of the transactions processed by these employees were either insufficient or
non-existent.
Three accounts payable employees could add vendors, initiate and approve
invoices, and print and obtain checks. Further, SMCPS had not established
independent electronic approval requirements for critical documents,
including invoices, although the system had this capability. Also, although
manual disbursement review procedures had been established, they did not
adequately compensate for the incompatible capabilities. These manual
reviews did not include a review of appropriate supporting documents and
were not independent, as the reviews were performed by one of the three
employees with incompatible capabilities.
Two information technology employees could add vendors, and initiate and
approve requisitions, purchase orders, and invoices; even though these
capabilities were not required for their job duties. Further, these employees
had system administrator access allowing them to add or change employee
accesses and capabilities, including their own, in the automated system.
Finally, there was no independent approval of changes to user access
capabilities on the automated system.
As a result, unauthorized purchases and disbursements could be processed
without detection. We commented on the failure to segregate incompatible
functions and restrict system access to critical system functions, including
procurement and accounts payable, in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SMCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes. Specifically, we
recommend that SMCPS
11

--- Page 14 ---
a. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform
incompatible duties (repeat);
b. restrict access to the automated procurement and accounts payable
system to individuals whose job duties require such access;
c. establish independent electronic approval requirements for critical
purchasing and accounts payable transactions, and changes to user
capabilities; and
d. require that both electronic and manual approvals be based upon an
independent supervisory review of applicable supporting documents.
Finding 2
Contracts were not always awarded through competitive procurements and
contract billings were not always properly verified prior to payment.
Analysis
SMCPS did not always use competitive procurements and obtain Board
approval for contract awards as required or verify the propriety of certain
billings prior to payment. Our test of 20 contractors who received payments
totaling $10.2 million for goods or services in fiscal year 2014 disclosed the
following conditions:
 Nine contracts for special education services, each of which were over
$25,000, with payments totaling $1.2 million were not competitively bid or
supported by sole-source justifications and were not approved by the
Board, as required by SMCPS policy.
 The propriety of vendor billings for two contracts for various hourly services
with payments totaling $2.8 million was not properly monitored.
Specifically, one contractor’s employees prepared time sheets that were
approved by SMCPS supervisory personnel; however, the approved time
sheets were not compared to the hours charged per the related vendor
invoices. We noted that for the second contractor who provided special
education services, no time sheets were on file to support the charges
billed. As a result, there was a lack of assurance that the amounts billed
were proper. Our review of approved time sheets that were available for
the one contractor supported the charges on the related invoices we
tested.
Recommendation 2
We recommend SMCPS
a. in accordance with Board policies, procure contracts of over $25,000 in
value through a competitive process, document the justification for any
12

--- Page 15 ---
sole-source procurements, and submit all contracts to the Board for
approval; and
b. verify the propriety of vendor invoices, which should include the
submission and review of approved supporting time sheets as
appropriate, prior to payment.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the SMCPS
budget. According to SMCPS records, fiscal year 2014 salary, wage, and
benefit costs totaled $184.4 million, or 76.3 percent of the $241.7 million
total operating expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of
Education reports, during the 2013 – 2014 school year, SMCPS had 2,119
full-time positions, which consisted of 1,488 instructional positions and 631
non-instructional positions.
SMCPS uses an automated system to maintain human resources (HR)
information, record employee time, track leave usage, and to process and
record payroll transactions. The system automatically generates semi-
monthly time records, and any adjustments are processed by central payroll
personnel. The system also generates payroll checks and direct deposit
advices. Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as
compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as
data entry of new employee information).
Finding 3
HR and payroll system user capabilities were not adequately monitored and
restricted. In addition, independent documented reviews of personnel and
payroll transactions were not performed.
Analysis
Capabilities assigned to users that allowed them to perform critical HR and
payroll system functions were not adequately monitored and restricted. In
addition, certain employees were assigned capabilities that allowed them to
perform incompatible functions and independent documented reviews of
personnel and payroll transactions were not performed.
 Procedures for granting user access to the HR and payroll system and for
the periodic verification of the propriety of existing user’s access
capabilities were inadequate. Specifically, the same employee was
13

--- Page 16 ---
responsible for submitting requests to the Information Technology
Services Department (ITS) to establish user access capabilities and
periodically monitoring the continued need for existing employee system
access capabilities, without independent supervisory review.
 Certain critical HR and payroll system access capabilities, such as those
allowing the changing of employee salary and direct deposit information,
were not adequately restricted. Our review of the 16 users with these
critical access capabilities, disclosed that 2 users could perform
unnecessary or incompatible functions. Specifically, we noted that one ITS
employee had unnecessary access and could perform all personnel and
payroll functions, and an employee responsible for performing supervisory
functions had payroll transaction processing capabilities. A similar
condition regarding inappropriate access to critical system functions was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 There was no independent review to ensure that processed employee
personnel and payroll transactions were correct and appropriate.
Available transaction reports of new employees added to the system or
changes to employee data, including salary changes, were not generated
for verification to source documentation by an independent employee. A
similar condition regarding the lack of an independent review of personnel
and payroll transactions was commented upon in our preceding audit
report. Our test of human resources and payroll changes and adjustments
did not disclose any inappropriate transactions.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SMCPS
a. ensure requests to establish user access capabilities are subject to
independent supervisory review and documented approval,
b. limit access of critical functions to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their assigned job duties (repeat),
c. eliminate access to incompatible system functions (repeat), and
d. perform a periodic documented independent review of critical personnel
and payroll transactions processed (repeat).
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to SMCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $16.3 million as of June 30, 2014.
SMCPS uses automated records maintained by its central fiscal office to track
14

--- Page 17 ---
equipment inventory with a cost of $2,500 or more, and capitalizes inventory
with a cost of $5,000 or more for financial statement purposes. Sensitive
equipment, defined as equipment items valued under $2,500 that are subject
to theft (such as computers), is recorded separately on a spreadsheet on a
personal computer.
Finding 4
SMCPS equipment policies were not comprehensive and proper controls and
recordkeeping were not established over sensitive equipment.
Analysis
SMCPS had not established a comprehensive equipment policy that specifies
the related procedures and recordkeeping requirements to ensure uniform
accountability and control over its schools’ equipment inventory. SMCPS’
current written policy did not provide a detailed description of the annual
equipment inventory process to be performed by the schools, including the
related recordkeeping requirements. Furthermore, the policy lacked specific
requirements pertaining to tagging equipment, reporting of lost and stolen
items, approving disposals, and separating the duties of equipment custody,
inventorying, and recordkeeping.
Additionally, while the existing policy stated that items considered sensitive in
nature that cost less than $2,500 should be tracked and inventoried, the
policy did not explicitly state how this was to be done. As a result, adequate
controls were not established over SMCPS’ sensitive equipment inventory
records, which as of March 2014 listed 16,500 items totaling approximately
$10.6 million.
 An employee recorded sensitive inventory additions, disposals, and
adjustments on a spreadsheet on a personal computer without
independent verification of the transactions to supporting documents by
supervisory personnel.
 At the time of our review, the inventory listed approximately 5,000
sensitive items (primarily information technology equipment) as disposed
of during fiscal years 2009 to 2014, for which there was no recorded cost
and no documentation of the disposals being approved.
 Numerous items on the sensitive inventory records had no value recorded
and the recorded values of other items were significantly overstated. For
example, our test of 15 sensitive items with a recorded value totaling
15

--- Page 18 ---
$35,500 disclosed that 3 items with a listed value of $18,900 had
actually cost $1,900 based on procurement records, and were overstated
by $17,000.
 As of July 2014, a documented physical inventory of sensitive equipment
items had never been conducted.
Because of these deficiencies, equipment could be misappropriated without
detection. Similar conditions regarding the lack of a comprehensive policy for
disposals of equipment and physical inventories not being performed for
sensitive equipment were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SMCPS
a. establish and follow a comprehensive equipment policy for maintaining
inventory records, tagging equipment, conducting physical inventories,
reporting lost and stolen items, disposing of equipment (repeat), and
separating key equipment functions;
b. conduct periodic physical inventories of sensitive items and reconcile
results to the detail records, with differences investigated, and lost and
stolen items properly reported (repeat); and
c. maintain complete and accurate inventory records for sensitive equipment
items by recording the value of each item, and ensuring that additions,
disposals, and adjustments are independently verified to approved
supporting documents.
Information Technology
Background
The SMCPS Information Technology Services Department (ITS) maintains and
administers the SMCPS’ computer network, computer operations, and
instructional information systems applications. SMCPS operates a wide area
network, with Internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’
local networks to the SMCPS centralized computer resources. ITS also
supports the student information and the financial management systems,
which include critical applications pertaining to student grades, student
attendance, budgeting, accounts payable, and purchasing.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 5
Controls over accounts, passwords, database access and logging, and
monitoring of database security and audit events were not sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over accounts, passwords, database access and logging, and
monitoring of database security and audit events were not sufficient.
 We reviewed the SMCPS’ network domain that had approximately 3,400
active accounts as of August 2014. We identified 259 active domain
accounts that belonged to terminated employees. We also noted 336
active (non-student) domain accounts with passwords that had not been
changed in over a year and 30 of these accounts’ passwords were set to
never expire. Finally, we identified 13 accounts on the student
information database with passwords not subject to length and complexity
requirements. Best practices included in the State of Maryland
Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Information Security Policy
stipulate that changes in employee status should be reflected immediately
upon user exit from employment, and that passwords should be changed
at least annually, be a minimum of eight characters, and meet specific
complexity requirements.
 Two accounts had been granted excessive access and privileges to the
student information database beyond what was required to perform their
job duties. Specifically, these two accounts had been inappropriately
given the ability to perform all configuration and maintenance activities
(including deletion) on this database.
 Virtually no security and audit events for the student information database
were being logged. As a result, significant database security and audit
events could occur and go undetected, thus permitting unauthorized or
inappropriate activities to adversely affect the integrity of the production
data files.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that SMCPS
a. implement strong account and password requirements in accordance with
the best practices identified in the DoIT Information Security Policy;
b. limit the assignment of access and privileges to the student information
database to only those accounts requiring such access and privileges; and
17

--- Page 20 ---
c. log all critical security and audit events, review these logs on a regular
basis with appropriate investigation of unusual activity, document these
reviews, and retain the documentation for subsequent verification.
Finding 6
The SMCPS computer network was not adequately secured.
Analysis
The SMCPS computer network was not adequately secured.
 Thirty-one publicly accessible servers were located in the SMCPS internal
network rather than isolating these servers in a separate protected
network zone. These 31 servers, if compromised, could expose the
internal network to attack from external sources. Recommended security
procedures, per the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s
Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy, include placing publicly
accessible servers in an external protected zone to protect those servers
as well as the entity’s internal network.
 SMCPS did not use host-based intrusion protection systems (HIPS) on the
27 critical web servers that processed encrypted traffic. The absence of
HIPS coverage for such traffic created a network security risk in that
SMCPS’ network-based intrusion detection prevention system cannot read
encrypted traffic flowing into its network, whereas HIPS can read and
analyze such traffic and protect critical web servers from malicious traffic.
 At 10 of SMCPS’ 31 locations with wireless network connectivity, a
wireless network connection to the SMCPS network could be obtained
without authentication. As a result, anyone in the vicinity of these 10
locations could gain network level access to the entire SMCPS wired wide
area network, including SMCPS critical systems.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that SMCPS
a. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate protected network
zone to limit security exposures to the internal network segment;
b. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how HIPS coverage should be best applied to its
network, and based on this review and assessment, implement HIPS
coverage as necessary; and
18

--- Page 21 ---
c. secure its internal network by only allowing properly authenticated users
to access the internal network through its wireless connection network.
Finding 7
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
Analysis
SMCPS workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
 Anti-malware software was not installed on SMCPS servers and
workstations that used certain operating systems. In this regard, we were
advised by SMCPS network personnel that 229 workstations and 8 servers
did not have anti-malware software installed.
 Although SMCPS used an enterprise-wide management tool to provide
malware protection for the majority of its workstations and servers
(excluding the aforementioned 229 workstations and 8 servers), SMCPS
did not use the management capabilities of this tool (or manual
procedures) to verify that the anti-malware software and related signature
files were current for covered SMCPS workstations and servers. As a
result of this condition, SMCPS lacked assurance that its covered
workstations and servers were properly protected from malware.
 Certain workstations were configured with users having administrator
rights. Administrator rights should be provided only to network
administrators since these rights are the highest permission level that can
be granted to users and it allows users to install software and change
configuration settings. Our testing of eight employees’ workstations
disclosed that six of the related eight employees’ user accounts were
defined with administrator rights, rather than with user rights, and did not
need these administrative rights. As a result, if these workstations were
infected with malware, the malware would run with administrative rights
and expose these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts were restricted to only user rights. In
addition, users with administrative rights could disable their workstation’s
anti-malware software.
 Over 600 of the SMCPS’ computers were running an operating system that
was no longer supported by the software vendor. As a result of this
condition, vulnerabilities associated with this operating system discovered
19

--- Page 22 ---
after the end-of-support date are no longer patched by the vendor, thereby
exposing these computers to additional security risk.
 Seven of the eight workstations tested had not been updated with the
latest releases for software products that are known to have significant
security software related vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these
software products frequently provide software patches to address these
vulnerabilities, SMCPS had not updated its workstations for these patches.
For example, eight workstations tested for one of these software products
noted that seven workstations were running older versions of this
software, some of which dated back to March 2009.
Best practices specified by the DoIT Information Security Policy state that
entities should configure security settings of information technology products
to the most restrictive mode consistent with operational requirements and
protect against malicious code by implementing protections that, to the extent
possible, include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that SMCPS
a. use its enterprise-wide management tool to ensure that anti-malware
software is installed on all computers and that the related signatures are
kept up-to-date,
b. restrict administrative privileges on workstations to network
administrators,
c. only operate computers with vendor supported and fully patched operating
systems, and
d. ensure that all computers are kept up-to-date for all critical security
related updates to potentially vulnerable installed software.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
SMCPS employs a staff of 162 employees to maintain its 27 schools and
other administrative and support facilities. According to the fiscal year 2014
Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and
systemic improvements to SMCPS facilities over the next six years were
estimated to cost $98.8 million.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
SMCPS has developed a comprehensive Energy Conservation Plan and has
established goals, strategies and processes to minimize energy costs. For
example, SMCPS utilizes an energy management system to monitor energy
usage and employs an energy management program manager to monitor
energy practices. In addition, SMCPS has installed certain higher efficiency
replacement equipment (such as heating, ventilation and air conditioning) at a
number of schools and has obtained available energy rebates. According to
documents prepared by SMCPS (which were not audited), SMCPS has avoided
over $3 million in energy costs from fiscal year 2008 to fiscal year 2014.
SMCPS Contracts and Expenditures for Capital Projects Were Proper
Our review of nine construction-related procurements totaling $25 million
disclosed that SMCPS had used appropriate processes to procure all nine
contracts, including obtaining Board approval. In addition, our test of invoices
totaling $3.7 million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were
properly reviewed and approved and the amounts invoiced were in
accordance with the related contract terms.
Transportation Services
Background
SMCPS has approximately 17,900 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on 198 buses of
which 184 were owned and operated by contractors. According to SMCPS
audited financial statements, fiscal year 2014 transportation costs totaled
$15.5 million, with $12.6 million (81 percent) representing payments for
contracted services. Of the 4.1 million reported route miles for the 2013-
2014 school year 28 percent represented miles traveled to transport disabled
students. Payments to bus contractors consist of amounts for the purchase
of a bus (known as a per vehicle allotment or PVA, which consists of a
reimbursement for the cost of the bus and a flat rate of return on investment),
operation costs (covering contractor overhead costs, such as taxes, utilities,
insurance, and management), hourly reimbursements for drivers and
attendants, a per mile maintenance fee, and fuel costs.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 8
SMCPS did not periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and
use of related bus capacities to maximize the efficiency of its bus routes.
Analysis
SMCPS did not periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and
use of related bus capacities to maximize the efficiency of its bus routes.
Specifically, although SMCPS used routing software to develop its bus routes,
it did not use the software to evaluate the efficiency of ridership on the buses
on those routes to determine if any of those routes should be combined to
increase per route student ridership. SMCPS did consider relevant factors,
such as target capacities and student ride times in developing bus routes, but
such factors alone do not ensure the efficiency of bus routes on a system-
wide basis.
Our analysis of student ridership disclosed that ridership was significantly less
than SMCPS’ desired bus capacity. Specifically, our review of 340 regular
routes’ bus manifests (related to 156 buses) for the 2012-2013 school year
disclosed that 157 routes (46 percent) were operated below 75 percent of
SMCPS’ desired capacity,1 with 31 of those 157 routes operating at less than
50 percent of desired capacity. Further, 25 buses (representing 16 percent of
the 156 buses reviewed) had no routes that were above 75 percent of the
desired capacity. We recognize that St. Mary’s County includes large rural
areas, which can make it difficult to meet target capacities in all cases.
However, as our analysis included all regular routes, the buses cited were not
isolated to only rural regions of the county.
Recommendation 8
We recommend SMCPS periodically perform a system-wide analysis of all bus
routes using the routing software to determine how per route ridership can be
increased and the overall number of routes decreased to improve bus
transportation efficiency.
1SMCPS school bus capacities are lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ
depending on the school level. For example, the capacity for high school and elementary
school routes is 48 and 59 students, respectively, based on 72-passenger buses
(manufacturer stated capacity).
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 9
Certain SMCPS payments to bus contractors did not consider market
conditions, actual costs, or available discounts.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did
not reflect market conditions, actual costs, or available discounts. SMCPS’
bus contracts are for an initial six years with annual renewals generally
granted over the 12-year useful life of the bus. Our review of the contract
payments disclosed the following conditions:
 SMCPS pays contractors an annual PVA for each bus. The PVA reimburses
the bus contractor for the cost of the bus with depreciation payments
spread over the 12-year life of the bus, and provides an annual return on
investment (ROI) for using the bus contractor’s funds to buy the bus. Prior
to fiscal year 2012, SMCPS had not developed a formal methodology to
substantiate how the PVA was determined, which had previously included
a ROI rate of 12 percent (a rate apparently in effect since 1981).
Beginning in fiscal year 2012, SMCPS established a formula to calculate
their PVA that included an average borrowing rate (established by
obtaining rates from bus vendors and a local bank) for the ROI rate, which
for fiscal year 2014 was 6 percent. The implementation of this new
formula coincided with the creation of a separate reimbursement paid on
a per vehicle basis for operation costs (see next bullet for comment on the
operation cost reimbursement component). Consequently, any savings
from the reduction in PVA due to the lowered ROI was offset by the
additional reimbursement for operation costs. Adding an operations cost
component on a per vehicle basis is a unique approach to the historical
PVA formula that has been used by LEAs since 1981.
To estimate the financial impact to SMCPS of using their ROI rates over
the life of a bus, we calculated the PVA for each of the 63 new buses
placed into service from July 2009 through December 2013 using the
prime interest rate2 and SMCPS’ 12-year estimated useful life in the PVA
formula, and compared our PVA results to the SMCPS’ PVA payments.3
This comparison showed that the SMCPS annual PVA payments per bus
2The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study
commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a
lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment rate: therefore, it is
deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation.
3Since SMCPS began using its revised formula in fiscal year 2012, the fiscal year 2014 rate
of 6 percent has been the lowest rate used by SCMPS. Consequently, for conservatism, in
our calculation we used 6 percent for the comparison to the prime interest rate.
23

--- Page 26 ---
were $2,500 to $4,300 higher than the payments would have been had
the prevailing prime rate been used in the calculation. The effect is that,
over the 12-year life of these 63 new buses, SMCPS will pay out
approximately $2.3 million more than if the prime rate was used for ROI to
determine the PVA payments. This analysis does not include the effect of
the new operation cost component, which was applied to all buses
retroactively, or the effects for any new bus purchases that were made
after December 2013 and the lost interest income that could have been
earned by SMCPS on the aforementioned $2.3 million. A similar condition
regarding the appropriateness of the ROI used in the PVA calculation was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Beginning in fiscal year 2012, SMCPS included in their payments to bus
contractors an amount for the reimbursement of certain costs of operation
including overhead, such as taxes, rent, utilities, insurance, substitutes,
and management. For fiscal year 2013, this amount was $4,590 per bus;
however, SMCPS could not substantiate the reasonableness of this
amount. We were advised by SMCPS transportation officials that in prior
years bus contractors had been paid a negotiated amount per bus, but in
an effort to establish a supportable basis for these amounts SMCPS
attempted to utilize its new PVA formula to calculate an amount, but that
methodology did not provide the desired results; hence the creation of the
new payment component. Furthermore, the per bus operations cost
component has been increased each year since adoption; this effectively
resulted in increasing the PVA total each year whereas the prior method
retained the same PVA total for each year of the 12-year life of the bus.
For fiscal year 2013, these payments totaled approximately $835,000.
 SMCPS could not show that payments to reimburse bus contractors for
maintenance costs were reasonable. For example, for fiscal year 2014,
SMCPS agreed to pay a $0.73 per-mile fee to reimburse the contractors
for bus maintenance costs, without determining the appropriateness of
the rate based on independently derived estimates.
 SMCPS did not exclude federal excise taxes when paying bus contractors
for fuel. SMCPS pays contractors for fuel usage based on the average for
diesel fuel prices, including taxes, (based on SMCPS surveys of local gas
stations), divided by a miles per gallon rate established by SMCPS.
However, according to federal law, SMCPS contractors are exempt from
the $0.244 per gallon excise tax on diesel fuel and are able to receive a
credit for federal fuel taxes paid when they file their income tax returns.
As a result, SMCPS’ total fuel payments to bus contractors were $479,000
higher than necessary for fiscal years 2010 through 2013.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that SMCPS
a. use market investment rates as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for the annual PVA (repeat),
b. develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for establishing
reasonable contractor rates for operation costs and per mile maintenance
costs, and
c. exclude federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
Finding 10
Internal controls over payments to bus contractors were not adequate.
Analysis
Payments to bus contractors were not reviewed to ensure propriety.
Specifically, one employee was responsible for entering data, including route
miles, times, PVA, and fuel information, for each of the 184 contractor-owned
buses into a system used to calculate the monthly payments. A summary
report is generated of the monthly payments to each contractor and approved
for payment in the Transportation Department. However, the summary report
was not subject to review or comparison to supporting documents by an
independent employee, even on a test basis. Further, the summary report
was forwarded to the Finance Department for final processing and
disbursement, however, no supporting documentation was included.
Although, there was a lack of assurance that payments are accurate, our tests
of these payments did not disclose any errors.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that SMCPS ensure that an employee independent of the
payment processing verifies the accuracy and propriety of contractor
payments, by comparison to supporting documentation, and documents the
verification process.
Food Services
Background
SMCPS has 27 cooking cafeterias and 1 satellite kitchen at its 27 schools (1
school has multiple cafeterias due to housing students in multiple buildings).
Food and related supplies are received and stored at each school. In fiscal
year 2014 SMCPS had 141 food service positions (consisting of 133 cafeteria
positions and 8 administrative positions). According to the audited financial
25

--- Page 28 ---
statements, food service revenues ($7,047,646) exceeded operating
expenditures ($6,955,892) for fiscal year 2014, and for four of the last five
years.
Finding 11
Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated as transactions could be
voided by cashiers without independent review or approval.
Analysis
Cashiers in school cafeterias could void transactions on their automated
point-of-sale cash register system without independent review or approval.
SMCPS advised that it had previously instituted certain practices for direct
supervisory oversight of voids, but the processes resulted in unacceptable
delays in processing food sales in serving lines and were abandoned. The
system is capable of generating output reports of voided transactions for
subsequent review; however, SMCPS did not generate or analyze these
reports for unusual activity, such as cashiers with high volumes of voids that
may warrant further investigation or corrective actions.
A similar condition regarding the ability of school cafeteria cashiers to process
voids without independent review or approval was commented upon in our
preceding audit report. According to SMCPS records, over 63,000 void
transactions were processed during fiscal year 2013 (we could not readily
determine the related dollar value). According to SMCPS audited financial
statements, food service revenues generated from charges for services
totaled approximately $3.1 million in fiscal year 2013.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that independent supervisory personnel review and approve
voids at least on test basis, and that the reviews be documented (repeat). For
example, SMCPS could generate periodic reports of all void transactions and
document the analysis of this information for unusual trends that should be
investigated, such as cashiers with abnormally high numbers of voids.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 12
SMCPS did not perform documented independent verifications of validated
deposits. In addition, electronic on-line student food services payments per
bank statements were not reconciled to related student accounts.
Analysis
SMCPS procedures related to the deposit of cash collections and accounting
for on-line payments posted to student food service accounts were not
comprehensive.
 Although we were advised that SMCPS performed independent
verifications of cafeteria sales to subsequent deposit, these verifications
were not documented. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that
all collections per the automated cash register system had been properly
deposited. We were able to confirm during our test of 20 days of
collections received in March 2013 totaling $22,400 that all funds tested
were properly deposited. However, there was no evidence of an
independent deposit verification being performed for any of the days
tested. Cash collections for fiscal year 2013 totaled approximately $2.1
million.
 No reconciliations were performed of on-line payments made (for example,
by parents) to purchase student meals with the amounts credited to
students’ food services accounts. Although SMCPS was generating
reports of student accounts from their electronic student food services
system, they were not used to verify that all amounts credited to the
accounts agreed with the funds received in SMCPS’ bank account. As a
result of the aforementioned condition, errors or irregularities in the
processing of these deposits and the crediting of student accounts could
occur and not be readily detected. During fiscal year 2013, on-line
payments for student food services per related bank statements totaled
approximately $1,018,800, while only $961,400 was credited to students’
accounts per the electronic student food services system, a difference of
$57,400. While certain bank fees were charged for processing these
payments and timing differences in recording the activity may have
existed, SMCPS was not aware of this difference nor could they explain it.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that SMCPS
a. perform documented independent verifications of cafeteria sales deposits;
b. perform periodic reconciliations of on-line payments received as recorded
on the bank statements and the amounts credited to students’ accounts;
and
27

--- Page 30 ---
c. investigate discrepancies identified, including the aforementioned
difference, and take appropriate corrective actions, as warranted.
School Board Operations
Background
The Board of Education of St. Mary’s County (the Board) is composed of five
elected members and one non-voting student representative. In its oversight
responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the SMCPS financial statements and federal
programs. The Board has not established any special committees.
SMCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In December 2011 the Board adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms
to State Law and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial
disclosure and was approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of
this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all SMCPS employees.
SMCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members who are
nominated by the Superintendent and appointed by the Board to interpret
ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and a
number of other administrators (such as the Chief of Fiscal Services and
Human Resources and school principals) by April 30th of each year. Our
review of the 65 employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2012 disclosed that forms were submitted as required.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
SMCPS self-insures its employee and retiree healthcare costs. SMCPS
contracts with a third party administrator (TPA) firm for health care claims
processing services for employee medical (including vision), dental, and
prescription costs. SMCPS also contracts with the TPA carrier for stop-loss
coverage to protect against the risk of large claims each year. SMCPS verifies
the eligibility of employee dependents prior to enrollment in the health care
plans. Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf
of SMCPS. SMCPS subsequently reimburses the TPA for the paid claims and
pays the TPA an administrative fee for these services. SMCPS healthcare
expenditures totaled approximately $34.4 million during fiscal year 2014
28

--- Page 31 ---
including $1.6 million for administrative fees and $1.2 million for stop-loss
fees.
Finding 13
SMCPS did not competitively bid healthcare contracts for administrative
services and stop-loss coverage and did not maintain copies of the annual
agreements on file.
Analysis
SMCPS had not competitively bid the third party healthcare administrator and
stop-loss insurance contracts for seven years and the Board had not approved
the annual agreements. Furthermore, SMCPS did not have copies of the
annual administrator agreements and stop-loss agreements on file for most of
the seven-year period. As of August 2014, the only healthcare contracts on
file were for fiscal years 2013 and 2014; those agreements were signed by
SMCPS, but were not approved by the Board. Subsequently, certain prior
years’ contracts were obtained at our request from the heath plan services
vendor.
The SMCPS’ TPA and stop-loss insurer contracts have been annually renewed
since being awarded for plan year 2008. In 2006, SMCPS, in collaboration
with the St. Mary’s County Government (SMCG) issued a request for proposals
for administrative claims processing and stop-loss insurance services. For
each service, a one-year contract for the fiscal year 2008 plan year was
awarded to an entity that had been its incumbent healthcare provider since
1982.
The original TPA contract, which was signed by a SMCG representative,
provided for automatic renewal and an annual administrative fee increase of
one percent plus the annual percentage change in the consumer price index.
However, the resultant annual renewal agreements for each subsequent year,
while including an increased fee amount, were silent on the issue of how the
fee increases were determined by the TPA (it was not documented that they
were calculated in accordance with the 2008 contract renewal terms).
We were advised that SMCG and SMCPS executed a separate stop-loss
insurance coverage contract with the vendor for plan year 2008, but SMCPS
was unable to locate a copy of the contract. When we eventually obtained the
2013 to 2015 stop-loss contracts, we noted that the insurer presented
SMCPS with a premium amount in the contract, which SMCPS paid without
evidence of negotiation or review to evaluate for reasonableness.
29

--- Page 32 ---
We determined that the administrative fees for medical, dental, and
prescription claim processing increased by between 20 to 25.88 percent from
2008 to 2015. From 2013 to 2015, the premiums for stop-loss coverage
increased by 10 percent (the amounts paid for previous years was not readily
available since the related contracts were not on file).
Recommendation 13
We recommend that SMCPS
a. periodically select healthcare services vendors (third-party administrator
and stop-loss coverage) through competitive procurement processes;
b. ensure that all healthcare contracts include provisions that specify how
future year fees and rates will be determined, if the contract is to be
subject to renewal;
c. ensure fees billed are in accordance with the contract provisions:
d. ensure all healthcare contracts are approved by the Board; and
e. maintain copies of healthcare contracts and other related key records for
at least 6 years or until audited.
Finding 14
SMCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and retiree
healthcare costs.
Analysis
SMCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that amounts paid to the
TPA were proper. Our review of SMCPS’ procedures and controls over the
contract and related payments for medical claims and administrative fees
disclosed the following conditions:
 SMCPS paid for claim reimbursements invoiced by the TPA without any
verification that the amounts invoiced were proper. SMCPS did not
receive detailed claims data and therefore could not verify that the billed
amounts agreed to the amounts of reported claims. Furthermore, SMCPS
did not audit the propriety of the claims paid on its behalf by the TPA to
ensure that the services were actually provided, were covered by the
health plans, and were appropriately priced.
 SMCPS did not ensure that administrative fees for processing medical
claims and stop-loss insurance premiums (which are based on the number
of plan participants) paid to the TPA were proper. Although SMCPS
compared the number of participants being billed on the monthly TPA
invoice for the largest health care coverage category (medical) to its
payroll medical coverage deduction count for reasonableness, SMCPS did
30

--- Page 33 ---
not verify the rates for the various fee categories (medical, vision, and
dental) and stop-loss insurance premiums invoiced were in accordance
with contract provisions.
 SMCPS did not verify the amount of claims that exceeded the stop-loss
limit were proper. SMCPS relies on the TPA to notify it of any payments
above the stop-loss limit. The amount computed by the TPA to be in excess
of the stop-loss amount reduces the expenditure amount that SMCPS is
responsible for. Since SMCPS did not receive detailed documentation of
all claims paid and any stop-loss reductions made, SMCPS lacks
assurance that it did not pay claims that should have been covered by the
stop-loss insurance.
A similar condition regarding the need to ensure the propriety of healthcare
costs was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that SMCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid
for health insurance and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend that
SMCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments;
b. ensure that all amounts billed for claims, service fees and premiums are
proper (repeat); and
c. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer (in this case the TPA).
31

--- Page 34 ---
32

--- Page 35 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the St. Mary’s County
Public Schools (SMCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the SMCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the SMCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of SMCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on SMCPS dated April 9, 2009, was limited to those findings that
were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the SMCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by SMCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at SMCPS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
appropriate). Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
33

--- Page 36 ---
records, and observations of SMCPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2010 through
June 30, 2013. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on
auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits SMCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the SMCPS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
SMCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to SMCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from January 2014 to August 2014. The SMCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an Appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SMCPS regarding the results
of our review of its response.
34

--- Page 38 ---
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
Management Response
Recommendation 1: We recommend that SMCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes. Specifically, we recommend that SMCPS: a)
restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform incompatible duties; b) restrict
access to the automated procurement and accounts payable system to individuals whose job duties
require such access; c) establish independent electronic approval requirements for critical purchasing
and accounts payable transactions, and changes to user capabilities; and d) require that both electronic
and manual approvals be based upon an independent supervisory review of applicable supporting
documents.
Management’s Response: There have been a number of changes to both staff and their associated
duties within this past year, a thorough review of their access will be performed in FY 2016. A process
set up in FY2015 includes the communication of all accounting software access changes to both the
Assistant Superintendent of Fiscal Services and Human Resources and the Director of Information
Technology.
To allow for an increased level of internal review, an independent level of approval will be instituted
with accounts payable. Additionally, SMCPS is in the process of implementing a work flow solution for
procurement processing, with the upgrade of our accounting software in FY2016.
Recommendation 2: We recommend SMCPS: a) in accordance with Board policies, procure contracts
of over $25,000 in value through a competitive process, document the justification for any sole‐source
procurements, and submit all contracts to the Board for approval; and b) verify the propriety of vendor
invoices, which should include the submission and review of approved supporting time sheets as
appropriate, prior to payment.
Management’s Response: The existing Board procurement policies and regulations require board
approval of contracts over $25,000. The existing policies and regulations will be reviewed and modified
to allow for greater clarity to staff. Once updated, training will be provided to all departments and
schools.
SMCPS has a process in place for the hourly services contract, which was instituted in FY2015. Purchase
orders must be generated for all temporary, contracted workers. Additional internal review will be
provided by a Fiscal/Compliance Records Specialist for confirmation of the accuracy of the invoice to
supporting timesheets.
Recommendation 3: We recommend that SMCPS: a) ensure requests to establish user access
capabilities are subject to independent supervisory review and documented approval, b) limit access of

--- Page 39 ---
critical functions to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their assigned job duties
(repeat), c) eliminate access to incompatible system functions (repeat), and d) perform a periodic
documented independent review of critical personnel and payroll transactions processed (repeat).
Management’s Response: As mentioned in the answer to #1, there have been a number of changes to
both staff and their associated duties within this past year, a thorough review of their access will be
performed in FY 2016. A process set up in FY2015 includes the communication of all accounting
software access changes to both the Assistant Superintendent of Fiscal Services and Human Resources
and the Director of Information Technology. At the time of the legislative audit, SMCPS did not have the
staffing to segregate the necessary duties due to turnover. All payroll vacancies have since been filled.
The Coordinator of Fiscal Services reviews the system generated audit reports of Pay Table and Payroll
Activity.
Recommendation 4: We recommend that SMCPS: a) establish and follow a comprehensive equipment
policy for maintaining inventory records, tagging equipment, conducting physical inventories, reporting
lost and stolen items, disposing of equipment (repeat), and separating key equipment functions; b)
conduct periodic physical inventories of sensitive items and reconcile results to the detail records, with
differences investigated, and lost and stolen items properly reported (repeat); and c) maintain complete
and accurate inventory records for sensitive equipment items by recording the value of each item, and
ensuring that additions, disposals, and adjustments are independently verified to approved supporting
documents.
Management’s Response: Procedures are established in the fiscal services department for an annual
update of inventory for all items over $2,500 with required forms. We concur that a detailed process
should be developed governing the fiscal records relating to the disposal of equipment, addressing
physical inventories, reconciliation of inventories to financial records. This will improve accountability
for our equipment resulting in the safeguarding of our property.
Recommendation 5: We recommend that SMCPS: a) implement strong account and password
requirements in accordance with the best practices identified in the DoIT Information Security Policy; b)
limit the assignment of access and privileges to the student information database to only those accounts
requiring such access and privileges; and c) log all critical security and audit events, review these logs on
a regular basis with appropriate investigation of unusual activity, document these reviews, and retain
the documentation for subsequent verification.
Management’s Response: All accounts will be reviewed, with necessary changes made so that all
passwords are changed annually. We will develop a standard operating procedure that would review
password expiration dates, restricted access for terminated employees, and modification of active
directory settings. Access to the student information database has been thoroughly reviewed, with
access limited now to only those employees requiring such access and privileges.
Recommendation 6: We recommend that SMCPS: a) relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate
protected network zone to limit security exposures to the internal network segment; b) perform a
documented review and assessment of its network security risks and identify how HIPS coverage should

--- Page 40 ---
be best applied to its network, and based on this review and assessment, implement HIPS coverage as
necessary; and c) secure its internal network by only allowing properly authenticated users to access the
internal network through its wireless connection network.
Management’s Response: We concur with this recommendation. The 31 servers will be placed onto a
Demilitarized Zone (DMZ). A host based IDPS will be implemented as appropriate.
Recommendation 7: We recommend that SMCPS: a) use its enterprise‐wide management tool to
ensure that anti‐malware software is installed on all computers and that the related signatures are kept
up‐to‐date, b) restrict administrative privileges on workstations to network administrators, c) only
operate computers with vendor supported and fully patched operating systems, and d) ensure that all
computers are kept up‐to‐date for all critical security related updates to potentially vulnerable installed
software.
Management’s Response: We concur with the recommendations. However, due to budgetary
constraints, we are challenged in implementing all of the recommendations at this time. We are close
to removing the remaining Windows XP workstations. Removing the Administrative rights from the
local workstations is underway and will continue over the current school year. We will use the A/V
management dashboard and continue to improve the application and updates to the workstations.
Recommendation 8: We recommend that SMCPS periodically perform a system‐wide analysis of all bus
routes using the routing software to determine how per route ridership can be increased and the overall
number of routes decreased to improve bus transportation efficiency.
Management’s Response: SMCPS currently reviews bus routes and bus capacities to maximize
efficiencies where possible. However, SMCPS Department of Transportation will review its procedure
related to desired bus capacity to ensure it accurately reflects desired average student and desired
maximum student capacities.
Recommendation 9: We recommend that SMCPS: a) use market investment rates as a basis for
establishing contractor rates for the annual PVA (repeat), b) develop supportable cost estimates as the
basis for establishing reasonable contractor rates for operation costs and per mile maintenance costs,
and c) exclude federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
Management’s Response: SMCPS will review its payment amounts to school bus contractors, and
ensure that supportable cost estimates and documentation is maintained. SMCPS believes its current
rates are appropriate and reasonable. SMCPS payment rates to school bus contractors are among the
lowest compared to other Maryland school systems. SMCPS will review the current fuel rates used for
payments to school bus contractors. SMCPS already has the lowest fuel rate among school systems in
the state of Maryland.
Recommendation 10: We recommend that SMCPS ensure that an employee independent of the
payment process verifies the accuracy and propriety of contractor payments, by comparison to
supporting documentation, and documents the verification process.

--- Page 41 ---
Management’s Response: There are currently several employees involved in the payment calculation
and approval process within the Department of Transportation. Additional internal review will be
provided by a Fiscal/Compliance Records Specialist for confirmation of the accuracy of the invoice.
Recommendation 11: We recommend that independent supervisory personnel review and approve
voids at least on test basis, and that the reviews be documented (repeat). For example, SMCPS could
generate periodic reports of all void transactions and document the analysis of this information for
unusual trends that should be investigated, such as cashiers with abnormally high numbers of voids.
Management’s Response: We concur with this recommendation. A new process has been developed
for recording of all voids and recapping them daily for the cafeteria manager’s review. The daily voids
will then be sent to the Food Service Coordinator along with the daily sales report for review and action.
This new process is was implemented August 2015.
Recommendation 12: We recommend that SMCPS: a) perform documented independent verifications
of cafeteria sales deposits; b) perform periodic reconciliations of on‐line payments received as recorded
on the bank statements and the amounts credited to students’ accounts; and c) investigate
discrepancies identified, including the aforementioned difference, and take appropriate corrective
actions, as warranted.
Management’s Response: We concur with the recommendation of documented independent
verifications of cafeteria sales deposits. This began in August 2015. Reconciliations of electronic on‐line
payments to the bank statements were implemented in December 2014. Following a detailed internal
review conducted in the spring, the Department of Food Services will continue to work with the
Department of Fiscal Services into the new school year to implement additional verification and
reconciliation processes.
We disagree that that there are discrepancies in funds. The difference in funds were a result of the
vendor on‐line payment processing fees being collected from parents for using the prepay website
services.
Auditor’s Comment: SMCPS has not been able to substantiate its assertion that the identified differences were
attributable to online vendor processing fees.
Recommendation 13: We recommend that SMCPS: a) periodically select healthcare services vendors
(third‐party administrator and stop‐loss coverage) through competitive procurement processes; b)
ensure that all healthcare contracts include provisions that specify how future year fees and rates will be
determined, if the contract is to be subject to renewal; c) ensure fees billed are in accordance with the
contract provisions; d) ensure all healthcare contracts are approved by the Board; and e) maintain
copies of healthcare contracts and other related key records for at least 6 years or until audited.
Management’s Response: SMCPS had acknowledged the need for the competitive procurement of
health care related benefit plans, administrative services, and stop‐loss coverage. Prior to the issuance
of these discussion notes, SMCPS began this process by initiating and completing a request for proposal
for prescription drug benefits with the assistance of an independent contractor. SMCPS will take into

--- Page 42 ---
consideration the need to include provisions in health care related contracts for the governance of fee
and rate increases. The Department of Human Resources will ensure that all health care contracts are
approved by the Board and will maintain related documentation for a minimum of 6 years or until
audited.
Recommendation 14: We recommend that SMCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for
health insurance and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend that SMCPS: a) obtain
documentation to support actual claim payments; b) ensure that all amounts billed for claims, service
fees and premiums are proper (repeat); and c) use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims
paid above the stop‐loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer (in this case the TPA.
Management’s Response: SMCPS does recognize the need to ensure the propriety of payments for
employee and retiree health care benefit costs. This is an undertaking that cannot be fully implemented
as an in‐house solution. SMCPS will be addressing this limitation by proposing the securing of the
services of a third party vendor for the verification and audit of health care insurance claims to include
the reconciliation of claims paid above the stop‐loss limit.

--- Page 43 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, CPA, CFE
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Managers
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
John C. Venturella, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Jaime A. DeWitt, CPA
Isatta B. Mead
Staff Auditors
J. Gregory Busch
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditors