Title: Department of General Services - Office of Procurement and Logistics - Potential Violation of State Ethics Laws
Date: 12/10/2007
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509e8
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:02:44.020323
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of General Services
Office of Procurement and Logistics
A Senior Official Was Involved in Certain Activities That Potentially
Violated State Ethics Laws and a Governor’s Executive Order
December 2007
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
December 10, 2007
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Nathaniel J. McFadden, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a review of an allegation received through our fraud hotline related to
a senior Department of General Services (DGS) official’s activities with a nonprofit
association. The senior official oversees centralized purchasing for most State
agencies and the association’s mission, in part, is to establish and maintain increased
professionalism in the field of public sector procurement.
Our review disclosed that the DGS official also served as President of the
association. In addition, the association recently held a trade show for which it
solicited and received monetary sponsorships from vendors doing business with the
State or that sought to do business with the State. Moreover, certain actions of the
association gave the appearance that its activities were State-affiliated. For example,
contact information on the association’s website listed the State business addresses,
phone numbers, and email addresses for the DGS official, as well as for certain
employees from other State agencies who were active in the association.
Based on our review, as well as discussions with senior management personnel at the
State Ethics Commission, the aforementioned conditions (and certain others
identified in this report) potentially violated State Ethics Laws. Any final decision
related to violations of the State Ethics laws would ultimately be determined by the
five-member State Ethics Commission. In addition, these conditions appear to have
violated several provisions of the Governor’s Executive Order, issued in February
2007, related to standards of conduct for Executive Branch employees.
Based on our findings, we have recommended that DGS refer these matters to the
State Ethics Commission for review and that DGS, in the future, take appropriate
action to ensure compliance with the Governor’s Executive Order.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Scope, Objective, and Methodology
We conducted a review of an allegation related to the Department of General
Services (DGS) – Office of Procurement and Logistics (OPL) that was received
through our fraud hotline. The allegation related to a senior DGS official with
oversight responsibility for OPL and that official’s affiliation with a nonprofit
association that was reportedly soliciting monetary sponsorships from vendors
doing business with the State or seeking to do business with the State. OPL
manages the centralized procurement of goods and services for most State
agencies.
The purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegation we received
was valid and to determine if the related activities violated State law and policies.
This review was performed in accordance with State Government Article, Section
2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with DGS
personnel and others, as we deemed necessary, to determine the validity of the
aforementioned allegation. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Had we
conducted an audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. Our review was conducted during September and October 2007.
DGS’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix
to this report. As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DGS regarding the results of our
review of its response.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
As previously noted, the Department of General Services (DGS) – Office of
Procurement and Logistics (OPL) manages the centralized procurement of goods
and services for most State agencies. According to the State’s records, OPL
awarded contracts totaling approximately $349 million during fiscal year 2006
related to the procurement of goods and services.
The mission of the association referenced in the allegation is, in part, to establish
and maintain increased professionalism in the field of public sector procurement.
The association also provides and promotes education and training for
procurement personnel employed by government agencies. Its members primarily
include various State and local government procurement personnel.
On October 16, 2007, the association held its first “reverse” trade show.
According to its literature, the show was an association fundraiser and an
opportunity for vendors to network with procurement personnel, including State
employees, who are responsible for procurement decisions at their respective
agencies. At the show, State agencies, as well as other governmental agencies,
were exhibitors and the attendees were primarily vendors seeking to do business
with the State.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Potential Violation of State Ethics Laws and a Governor’s
Executive Order
Finding 1
A senior Department of General Services (DGS) official with Statewide
procurement responsibility for OPL also served as President of an
association and was involved in activities that potentially violated State
Ethics Laws and a Governor’s Executive Order. For example, the
association sponsored a trade show, and solicited and received monetary
sponsorships from current and prospective State vendors.
Analysis
A DGS senior official, responsible for oversight of the centralized procurement of
goods and services for most State agencies, also served as the President of a
nonprofit association that solicited and received monetary sponsorships from
current and prospective State vendors for a trade show held on October 16, 2007.
The aforementioned condition, and certain others that came to our attention, could
violate State Ethics laws. In addition, in our opinion, the conditions identified, at
a minimum, gave the appearance that certain vendors (for example, those that
made payments to sponsor the trade show) could receive preferential treatment in
dealing with State procurements. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
• The association’s website, as well as communications issued by the
association, encouraged its members (many of whom are State agency
personnel) to ensure that their agencies contributed monetarily to the trade
show and to solicit sponsorships from vendors. For example, on the
association’s website, the DGS official stated, in part, “I expect all the
agencies and departments represented by [the association] to have signed up
for booths by now.…You are encouraged to continue to market this event to
your vendors.” According to information provided by the association, there
were 70 sponsorships for the trade show (consisting of 66 vendors and 4 State
agencies). In addition, approximately 350 other vendors paid registration fees
to the association to attend the show, and exhibitors, including State agencies,
paid exhibitor fees. The association estimated that it collected sponsorship,
registration, and exhibitor fees related to the show totaling approximately
$94,000. Sponsorships ranged from $100 to $3,000, and exhibitor/registration
fees ranged from $125 to $200. Those who signed up as sponsors for the
show had their logos displayed on the association’s website.
5

--- Page 8 ---
On September 17, 2007, we met with the DGS Secretary and legal counsel
regarding the aforementioned relationship and the related activities.
Subsequent to that meeting, we noted that the vendor logos were removed
from the association’s website.
• Actions taken by the official and the association, gave the appearance that the
association’s activities were State-affiliated. For example, sponsorship and
registration information related to the association’s trade show was displayed
by DGS adjacent to its vendor bid board located at its offices in the State
Office Building and was also posted on eMaryland Marketplace, which is the
DGS official website accessed by prospective vendors seeking to bid on State
contracts. Furthermore, contact information on the association’s website
listed the State business addresses, phone numbers, and email accounts for the
DGS official, as well as for certain employees from other State agencies who
were active in the association. In addition, the association’s logo was a
picture of the State House and a map of Maryland in miniature.
• Various State employees who were members of the association, including the
DGS official, used their State email accounts to send advertisements for the
trade show, as well as to solicit sponsorships from vendors.
• The association’s literature identified numerous benefits that were available to
sponsors, such as increased name recognition among Maryland government
purchasers, and increased visibility of the vendor’s presence, products, and
services in the minds of key decision makers. In spite of these comments, we
noted that the association’s website included the following disclaimer:
“Sponsors of the reverse trade show, hosted by the association, will receive no
special access, treatment or fiscal benefits from the association or any
governmental entity.” In our opinion, the inclusion of such a disclaimer on its
website reflects the fact that the association recognized that the trade show, as
constructed, could give the appearance that vendors who participated in the
trade show could receive preferential treatment from government procurement
employees.
• All vendors who attended the trade show received a directory that included the
names, telephone numbers, and agency affiliations of association members,
many of whom are State employees responsible for procurement decisions.
The association advised vendors that the directory would be a valuable tool
for their sales forces.
6

--- Page 9 ---
While not publicly advertised by the association (such as on its website), we
were advised by the association that vendors who had not attended the trade
show could purchase the directory from the association.
Senior management personnel at the State Ethics Commission advised us that the
aforementioned conditions could violate a number of State Ethics Laws, such as
Sections 15-502, 15-505, and 15-506 of the State Government Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. For example, Section 15-505 states that an official
or employee may not knowingly accept anything of economic value, regardless of
form, directly or indirectly, from an entity that the official or employee knows, or
has reason to know, does or seeks to do any business of any kind, regardless of
the amount, with the official’s or employee’s governmental unit. Any final
decision related to violations of the State Ethics laws would ultimately be
determined by the five-member State Ethics Commission.
In addition, these conditions appear to violate several provisions of the
Governor’s Executive Order, issued in February 2007, related to standards of
conduct for Executive Branch employees. Specifically, the Executive Order
states, in part, that an employee shall not solicit or accept any gift or other item of
monetary value from any person or entity seeking official action from, doing
business with, or conducting activities regulated by the employee’s agency, or
whose interests may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the employee’s duties. The Order further states that
employees shall avoid any actions creating the appearance that they are violating
applicable law or the ethical standards.
Finally, State Procurement Regulations provide that it is the intent of the
Regulations to provide for increased public confidence in public procurement, to
ensure the fair and equitable treatment in both fact and appearance of all persons
who deal with the State procurement system, and to foster effective broad-based
competition.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DGS take immediate action to refer the above
information to the State Ethics Commission. We also recommend that DGS,
in the future, take appropriate action to ensure compliance with the
aforementioned Governor’s Executive Order.
7