Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Department of Human Resources - Medical Assistance Program - Using the Federal Death Master File to Detect and Prevent Medicaid Payments Attributable to Deceased Individuals
Date: 12/02/2011
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a7d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:56:37.235656
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Department of Human Resources
Medical Assistance Program
Using the Federal Death Master File to Detect and
Prevent Medicaid Payments Attributable to
Deceased Individuals
The Death Master File Should Be Periodically Matched to the Medicaid
Eligibility Files with the Results Being Compared to Payment Files to Help
Detect and Prevent Improper Payments
December 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternative formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Medicaid Program 4
Memorandum of Understanding 4
Death Master File 5
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 7
Scope and Objective 7
Methodology 7
Conclusions 9
Findings and Recommendations 10
Results of Individual Case Reviews
Finding 1 – Maryland’s Medicaid Eligibility File Should Be 10
Periodically Matched to a Nationwide Death Database to
Identify Payments Made Attributable to Deceased Individuals
Results of Matches
Finding 2 – Other Cases Identified by the Match Should Be 12
Investigated to Identify Any Data Inaccuracies and Overpayments
Finding 3 – DHR and DHMH Should Evaluate the Factors That 13
Contributed to the Overpayments Detected and Make Any
Necessary System or Process Changes
Agencies Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
Medicaid Program
The Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) of the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) operates the State’s Medical Assistance Program
(Medicaid). The Program operates under both Title XIX of the Federal Social
Security Act and State Law and provides low-income Maryland residents with
access to a broad range of health care benefits. Both State and Federal funds are
used to pay for these benefits. According to MCPA records, the Medical
Assistance Program serviced approximately 959,000 individuals during fiscal
year 2011 through more than 48,400 health care providers.
Individuals qualify for the Medicaid Program as either categorically needy or
medically needy. A categorically needy person is one who receives public
assistance payments, including individuals approved by the U.S. Social Security
Administration (SSA) to receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI), while a
medically needy person is one who cannot meet the cost of needed medical care,
but is generally self-supporting in other respects.
According to MCPA records, during fiscal year 2011, Medicaid expenditures
totaled approximately $7.7 billion (at least 50 percent of which was funded by the
federal government). These expenditures included approximately $3 billion in
capitation payments to managed care organizations, approximately $1.1 billion in
long-term care expenditures, and approximately $3.6 billion in fee-for-service
expenditures.
MCPA requires most Medicaid recipients to enroll in a managed care
organization (MCO). The MCOs receive a monthly capitation payment from
MCPA for each enrolled recipient regardless of whether any services were
provided to the recipient during any particular month. In return for the capitation
payments, the MCOs are generally expected to pay the recipients’ medical costs
regardless of the number or nature of services provided. The MCOs contract with
health care professionals and other entities (such as hospitals) to provide the
necessary medical services to enrollees.
Memorandum of Understanding
Medical Assistance applicant eligibility is primarily determined by the various
local departments of social services (LDSS), which are under the supervision of
the Department of Human Resources (DHR). Applicants are recorded on DHR’s
4

--- Page 7 ---
Client’s Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES), and those deemed
eligible for Medicaid are subsequently interfaced into the Medicaid Management
Information System.
DHMH and DHR coordinate their responsibilities for Medicaid under a
memorandum of understanding (MOU) that has been in effect since 1985. Under
the MOU, DHR is primarily responsible for determining recipient eligibility and
providing MCPA with accurate and timely eligibility data. DHMH is responsible
for establishing regulations, guidelines, and procedures to be used by DHR. The
Departments have been working to update the MOU based on the long-standing
deficiencies in implementing and monitoring the eligibility determination
processes as cited in our December 6, 2010 audit report on the Medical Care
Programs Administration. As of October 24, 2011, a revised MOU had not been
executed although we were advised by the Departments that they were close to
finalizing an updated MOU.
Death Master File
The Death Master File (DMF) is maintained by SSA. It contains information on
over 89 million decedents, such as their social security number, name, date of
birth, date of death, and location of last known residence. SSA updates the DMF
from reports of death received from a variety of sources, including friends and
relatives of deceased individuals, funeral homes, postal authorities, financial
institutions, and federal and state agencies, including state vital records directors
and registrars.
SSA authorizes the use of the DMF as a death verification tool. However, SSA’s
policies and procedures openly acknowledge the occurrence of death reporting
errors and state, “Occasionally, living individuals are erroneously included in the
DMF (e.g., due to inaccurate death reports or inaccurate data input).”1 For
example, from May 2007 through April 2010, SSA erroneously added 36,657
living individuals to the DMF. Nevertheless, because these errors involve a small
number of individuals relative to the total number of death entries added to the
DMF (an error rate of less than one-quarter of one percent), the DMF is still
widely used by many federal and state agencies and private entities to assist in
detecting improper payments.
1
SSA, POMS GN 03316.095.A, Disclosure Without Consent to Recipients of the Death Master
File (DMF) When Erroneous Death is Included on the DMF.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Because SSA realizes it cannot guarantee the accuracy of information published
in the DMF, it formally disclaims the accuracy of the DMF contents and advises
DMF users that not all information contained within the DMF is verified.
Accordingly, it would be prudent for DMF users to investigate and verify any
deaths listed before taking an adverse action against any individual.
In August 2011 when our fieldwork was nearly concluded, the SSA issued a
public notice that, effective November 1, 2011, the public DMF would no longer
contain protected state death records citing a provision in the Social Security Act
that prohibits SSA from disclosing state death records it receives through its
contracts with the states. SSA estimated that on November 1, 2011 it will remove
approximately 4.2 million records from the file of 89 million decedents and add
about 1 million fewer records annually. SSA noted, however, that the law allows
SSA to share all death records, including state records, with agencies that pay
federally funded benefits (in Maryland, Medicaid benefits are approximately 50
percent federally funded). SSA advised that this change will not affect the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and certain other federal agencies.
SSA also advised that agencies may contact SSA to determine whether they may
qualify under the law to get all of SSA’s death records.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope and Objective
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate whether the Social Security
Administration’s Death Master File (DMF) was an efficient and effective tool for
detecting and preventing Medicaid payments made to service providers for
deceased persons. In conducting the audit, we performed a match of the February
2011 DMF to Medical Care Programs Administration’s (MCPA) file of eligible
Medicaid recipients as of March 2011. We then identified inappropriate Medicaid
payments made from January 1, 2008 to August 31, 2011 attributable to persons
after their date of death. We also reviewed the case files for certain matched
cases to identify factors that suggest system or process changes that may be
needed to prevent or detect improper payments.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
Methodology
To accomplish our objective, we first compared MCPA’s file of eligible Medicaid
recipients as of March 1, 2011 to the February 2011 DMF. The match was
performed using two different sets of criteria: (1) using only social security
numbers and (2) using social security numbers, date of birth, and the first three
characters of the last name.
The data match we performed using social security numbers contained 1,582
matches. For all of the individuals matched on social security numbers only, we
obtained a file of all Medicaid payments made between January 1, 2008 and
March 10, 2011 for services rendered after their reported dates of death per the
DMF. The extraction of Medicaid payment information disclosed payments
totaling $7.5 million attributable to 532 individuals after their reported dates of
death.
The data match we performed using three data fields resulted in 1,289 matches.
We then determined, using Medicaid payment information, whether any payments
were made for these 1,289 individuals after their reported dates of death. The
extraction of this payment information disclosed payments totaling $2.5 million
attributable to 323 individuals after their reported dates of death. From the 323
7

--- Page 10 ---
individuals, we selected the 20 individuals for whom the largest amount of
payments were made after their reported date of death for our detailed review.
For these 20 individuals, we determined whether the DMF data were accurate and
if so, using Medicaid Management Information System records, the total amount
of payments attributable to them after their date of death through August 31,
2011.
To determine if dates of death in the DMF were accurate, we contacted the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) Vital Records
Administration and reviewed electronic records of deaths and death certificates.
We reviewed case files maintained by the local departments of social services to
confirm identity and obtain residency information, and used the DMF to
determine the states where the individuals may have resided prior to their death.
We also conducted internet and telephone research to determine when and where
people died and to confirm their identities. For those individuals determined to
have died in other states, we contacted the vital records agencies in those states to
corroborate the death information and obtain certified death certificates. During
our verification of the DMF information for matched individuals, we identified
trends that could be useful for improving selection and efficiency of future match
reviews. We also identified circumstances of individual cases that would suggest
other potential problems may exist and brought these to the attention of the
Departments’ managements for their investigation.
In addition, we interviewed employees of Department of Human Resources and
DHMH to determine what information the Departments had gathered on the
individuals and what processes were used to identify or prevent Medicaid
payments attributable to the deceased individuals selected for review. Our
procedural reviews were only done to the extent necessary to understand the
circumstances surrounding the 20 match cases selected for review. Our audit did
not include an evaluation of all routine and special procedures employed by the
Departments for operating and managing the Medicaid programs; such procedures
are subject to review during our regularly scheduled audits of the programs.
Our fieldwork was completed during the period from March to September 2011.
The Departments’ response to our findings and recommendations is included as
an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Departments regarding the results of our review of their response.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Conclusions
We concluded that computerized matches of the Medicaid eligibility file against
the Death Master File (DMF) are an efficient and effective tool to help detect and
prevent Medicaid payments attributable to deceased individuals. It is an efficient
tool because each computer match can screen all of the individuals in the
eligibility file, and it can detect instances where the Department of Human
Resources (DHR) and Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH)
eligibility determination processes may not have obtained certain death
information or obtained the information, but did not act on it timely. It is an
effective tool because it is a comprehensive listing of deaths that occurred in all
states and is updated monthly. Currently, neither DHMH nor DHR have
sufficiently comprehensive processes to identify Maryland Medicaid beneficiaries
who die in other states, and the processes for identifying beneficiaries who died in
Maryland were also not effective in all cases.
While the Social Security Administration acknowledges that the DMF contains
some errors and our audit confirmed this, we nevertheless found that the DMF
was useful to identify material Medicaid payments attributable to deceased
individuals. Denial of benefits should never be based solely on an individual
appearing on the DMF. For those individuals identified as deceased based on the
DMF match, DHMH and/or DHR should evaluate and investigate the results to
determine whether the individuals are in fact deceased. If so, their eligibility
should be canceled and any improper payments should be recovered. For
example, our match identified 323 individuals with Medicaid payments totaling
$2.5 million after their reported dates of death. Based on our review of 20 of
these cases, we determined that 10 individuals were deceased and payments
totaling $426,403 were made after their actual dates of death. The matches we
performed also indicate that the Medicaid eligibility file could contain certain data
inaccuracies involving the names of Medicaid eligible persons, their social
security numbers, and their dates of birth that need to be investigated.
Based on our detail review of files for the ten cases in which the match identified
Medicaid payments attributable to deceased individuals, we noted certain issues
that suggest other factors contributed to the failure to detect these payments.
DHMH and DHR should evaluate these situations to determine whether system or
procedural changes are necessary.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Results of Individual Case Reviews
Finding 1
Maryland’s Medicaid eligibility file should be periodically matched to a
nationwide death database to identify payments made attributable to
deceased individuals.
Analysis
Our review of the 20 individuals for whom the largest amount of payments were
made after the Death Master File (DMF) recorded date of death disclosed
improper payments were made for 10 individuals. We determined that no
improper payments were attributable to the other 10 individuals for various
reasons such as the DMF was inaccurate (for example, the individual was not
actually deceased). Based on the results and certain limitations with the
Department of Human Resources’ (DHR) and Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene’s (DHMH) existing procedures to identify deceased individuals, we
believe the Medicaid eligibility file should be periodically matched against the
DMF.
We determined that improper capitation payments totaling $279,405 were made
for nine of the individuals and long-term care payments of $146,998 were made
for one individual for services after their actual dates of death. Thus, the
improper payments made from their respective dates of death (see below) through
August 2011 attributable to these ten individuals totaled $426,403. The location
and dates of death for the 10 individuals, which were verified to certified copies
of state death certificates, were:
North Carolina August 18, 2007
Maryland October 9, 2007
Washington, D.C. October 16, 2007
Washington, D.C. November 4, 2007
Florida July 1, 2008
Maryland June 25, 2009
Mississippi October 08, 2009
Maryland October 13, 2009
Virginia December 13, 2009
Maryland June 15, 2010
10

--- Page 13 ---
After the computerized matches were performed and these cases were brought to
the attention of the Departments, through August 31, 2011 DHMH had recovered
$115,170 of the overpayments.
We noted that neither DHMH nor DHR used any nationwide listing of deaths to
prevent and/or detect benefit payments made for individuals who died in states
other than Maryland. Although DHR and DHMH sometimes performed
computer matches to Maryland’s Vital Statistics Administration death records to
detect deceased individuals still categorized as eligible for various benefit
programs, the results of our match suggest that the Departments’ existing
processes are not always effective. Four of the 10 deceased individuals for whom
improper payments were made died in Maryland. In addition, in our previous
audit report on the Family Investment Administration, the unit of DHR that is
responsible for the oversight of a number of public assistance programs, we
commented that the results of computer matches were not always investigated
adequately or completely.
As previously mentioned, 9 of the 10 instances in which improper payments were
made were for monthly capitation payments to managed care organizations
(MCOs). Payments to MCOs are particularly susceptible to being made for
deceased individuals. Once the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA)
enrolls an eligible individual with an MCO, the MCO will automatically continue
to receive monthly capitation payments until eligibility has expired or MCPA
learns that the patient is deceased and disenrolls the recipient from the MCO.
Since the 20 individuals tested were selected from the group of 323 individuals
identified with Medicaid payments totaling $2.5 million after their reported dates
of death, DHMH needs to review the other 303 cases to determine whether the
individuals are in fact deceased. If so, DHMH should terminate their eligibility
and recover improper payments that were made.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that
a. DHMH and DHR cooperatively develop a process for using the Social
Security Administration’s DMF to detect deceased individuals who are
improperly identified in the Medicaid Management Information System
(MMIS) as eligible to receive Medicaid benefits and for identifying the
amounts that may have been improperly paid attributable to deceased
individuals. The processes developed should address the frequency with
which the DMF should be matched to recipient files, which agency should
perform the match, and which agency is responsible for pursuing
potential improper payments detected and processing appropriate
terminations of benefits eligibility. These matters should be fully
11

--- Page 14 ---
addressed in an addendum to the Medicaid Memorandum of
Understanding between the Departments; and
b. DHMH recover the remaining improper payments from providers for the
10 individuals we identified, and investigate the remaining 303 cases to
determine whether the individuals are deceased. If so, DHMH should
terminate their Medicaid eligibility and pursue for recovery any
improper payments.
Results of Matches
Finding 2
Other cases identified by the match should be investigated to identify any
data inaccuracies and overpayments.
Analysis
The match results indicate that the Medicaid eligibility file could contain certain
data inaccuracies. As previously mentioned, our match, based on social security
number only, disclosed 1,582 individuals reflected as eligible for Medicaid
services that were listed as deceased on the DMF. Medicaid payments totaling
$7.5 million were attributable to 532 of these individuals from January, 1, 2008 to
March 10, 2011 for services rendered after their dates of death reported on the
DMF. (This result includes the 323 individuals totaling $2.5 million commented
upon in Finding 1.) No payments were identified during this period for the
remaining 1,050 (1,582 minus 532) matched social security numbers but the
individuals are still active on the Medicaid eligibility file. To help prevent
additional erroneous payments, all of these individuals should be investigated and
either data errors should be corrected or ineligible individuals should be removed
from the eligibility file.
Although some of these matched individuals are not deceased and there are errors
in the DMF as previously mentioned, these results seem to indicate that the
Departments may be unaware of many deaths of persons who are still designated
as Medicaid eligible (including those cases with or without Medicaid payments).
Even if the individuals are not deceased, the results suggests there could be other
data inaccuracies involving social security numbers, birth dates, and names within
DHR and DHMH computer systems. For example, in some cases, the social
security numbers and names match, but not the birth dates. Furthermore, it may
suggest that individuals could have used the identity of others (such as the social
security number) to inappropriately obtain Medicaid benefits since 184 of the
matched social security numbers did not agree for both date of birth and last
name.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHMH and DHR investigate the instances in which the
recipients’ identifying information recorded in their systems do not agree to
the related information in the DMF and take appropriate action (such as
correcting data errors, and/or canceling Medicaid eligibility, when
warranted). Any instances of improper payments detected during this
process should be pursued for recovery.
Finding 3
DHR and DHMH should evaluate the factors that contributed to the
overpayments detected during our audit and make any necessary system or
process changes.
Analysis
Our review of the ten cases for which payments were improperly made
attributable to deceased individuals identified certain contributing factors that
help to explain how these overpayments occurred and why they were not detected
for extended periods. We provided the Departments with the specific details
uncovered by our review for their investigation. Specific conditions found that
highlight some of the problems the Departments need to address are as follows:
 Appropriate action was not always taken when an event occurred that should
have changed a recipient’s eligibility status. In one case, the Client’s
Automated Resource and Eligibility System (CARES) case notes indicated
that the recipient was deceased, but on MMIS, the recipient’s eligibility for
Medicaid benefits was not canceled. In another case, the CARES case notes
indicated that the recipient did not appear for a Food Stamp eligibility
redetermination appointment, but their eligibility for benefits was not canceled
on CARES. In both cases the recipient’s eligibility did not change until years
later; the related payments improperly made totaled $205,451. These
circumstances indicate that DHR procedures were not adequate to ensure
proper and timely action was taken in response to changes in the recipient’s
circumstances, that entry of pertinent information was not made in the proper
locations in CARES, and/or CARES does not fully update MMIS on
eligibility matters.
 For one of the cases discussed in the bullet above, payments to a nursing
home began in September 2008 (eleven months after the individual’s death)
and continued until December 2010 (that is, for 28 months) when the
payments stopped without any explanation in either CARES or MMIS. The
local department of social services (LDSS) could not find a related case file to
13

--- Page 16 ---
substantiate the identity of the individual. These circumstances raise
questions regarding the billings and the adequacy of related verification
procedures. As a result, a full investigation of the circumstances is warranted.
 Under certain circumstances, MCPA deleted eligibility and payment
transaction records from MMIS. MCPA provided a listing of 33 individuals
whose eligibility and transaction records were removed from MMIS between
May 12, 2010 and July 19, 2011. MCPA explained that they sometimes delete
records at the request of DHR when ineligible individuals are discovered who
should never have been added to the system and for whom no legitimate
transactions had been processed. However, we noted one deleted case in
which an MCO had received capitation payments attributable to a deceased
individual over a 22-month period totaling $25,651. MCPA has recovered
these payments. A record of this activity should be retained in MMIS so that
all billings and actions taken can be properly reconciled for disbursements and
recoveries.
 DHR did not verify the continued eligibility of individuals who initially
obtained their Medicaid eligibility because they received federal Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) payments (DHMH regulations specify that individuals
receiving SSI payments are categorically eligible for Medicaid benefits).
Unlike other Medicaid recipients, periodic redeterminations of eligibility are
not performed for those who are SSI eligible. However, if individuals no
longer qualify for SSI, there is no mechanism to readily identify them so that
DHR can determine whether Medicaid eligibility should be canceled. This is
significant because during fiscal year 2011, MCPA’s records indicated that
medical providers were paid $1.7 billion attributable to 115,000 individuals
who received Medicaid eligibility because of their eligibility for SSI
payments. Also, the Social Security Administration – Office of the Inspector
General conducted audits2 in 2009 and 2011 that disclosed significant
numbers of SSI applicants failed to report vehicle and real property assets that
would have disqualified them for SSI.
Eight of the individuals tested for whom improper payments were made
received their Medicaid eligibility because they were receiving SSI payments.
One individual, who was approved in April 2007 for Medicaid benefits due to
receiving SSI, became ineligible for SSI benefits in May 2007 (therefore the
individual was no longer categorically eligible for Medicaid benefits). DHR
did not learn of this until March 2011 (nearly 4 years later) and the individual
2 Supplemental Security Income Recipients with Unreported Real Property dated June 1, 2011
(http://oig.ssa.gov/sites/default/files/audit/full/pdf/A-02-09-29025.pdf); and,
Supplemental Security Income Recipients with Unreported Vehicles dated July 15, 2009
(http://oig.ssa.gov/sites/default/files/audit/full/pdf/A-02-08-28038_7.pdf).
14

--- Page 17 ---
improperly retained their Medicaid eligibility, resulting in improper MCO
capitation payments totaling $31,946. Additionally, based on our research, we
determined that this individual had died on November 4, 2007.
 DHR did not always verify that individuals approved for Medicaid benefits
were Maryland residents. Monthly capitation payments totaling $28,083 were
made to an MCO between December 2009 and May 2011 (18 months) for an
individual who died in Virginia on December 13, 2009. The individual was a
resident of Virginia and applied for Medicaid benefits from Maryland because
the individual planned to move to Maryland. The individual was approved for
Medicaid benefits on November 22, 2009, due to receiving SSI, and died 21
days later. The LDSS subsequently canceled her eligibility, effective May 31,
2011 (1½ years later), due to her having an out of state address. There was no
documentation in the DHR case file to indicate that the individual ever
established Maryland residency.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that
a. DHMH and DHR evaluate the factors contributing to the overpayments,
such as those described above, and institute necessary process and system
changes or other actions to prevent recurrence and to detect improper
payments sooner; and
b. DHR periodically verify the continued eligibility of individuals who were
approved for Medicaid benefits because of their approval for SSI
benefits.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Medical Assistance Program Responses
Performance Audit on the Use of the Death Master File
Finding 1
Maryland’s Medicaid eligibility file should be periodically matched to a nationwide death
database to identify payments made attributable to deceased individuals.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that
a. DHMH and DHR cooperatively develop a process for using the Social Security
Administration’s DMF to detect deceased individuals who are improperly identified in
the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) as eligible to receive Medicaid
benefits and for identifying the amounts that may have been improperly paid
attributable to deceased individuals. The processes developed should address the
frequency with which the DMF should be matched to recipient files, which agency
should perform the match, and which agency is responsible for pursuing potential
improper payments detected and processing appropriate terminations of benefits
eligibility. These matters should be fully addressed in an addendum to the Medicaid
Memorandum of Understanding between the Departments; and
b. DHMH recover the remaining improper payments from providers for the 10
individuals we identified, and investigate the remaining 303 cases to determine whether
the individuals are deceased. If so, DHMH should terminate their Medicaid eligibility
and pursue for recovery any improper payments.
Department Response
a. DHMH and DHR concur with the recommendation. DHMH has business processes in place
to initiate recoveries when a death is identified. In FY2010 and FY2011, the Department
recovered payments for 3,495 deceased recipients totaling approximately $7 million. For
example, when DHR receives notice of the date of death and closes the case in the CARES
system, MMIS automatically closes the case and the system is programmed to recover
capitation paid after the date of death so that delay in closing cases results in no loss to the
state.
DHMH and DHR will work cooperatively to develop a process for using the Social Security
Administration’s DMF as a tool to identify deceased individuals. However, as the auditors
noted, the file is error prone and, due to the volume of matches, an investigation of all
recipients may not be feasible or cost effective. Additionally, as noted by SSA itself, users
of the DMF are urged not to take adverse action against any individual without a complete
investigation since it was determined that over 36,000 living individuals had been
erroneously added to the file. DHMH and DHR will provide the DLS a copy of the MOU
once it has been signed.

--- Page 20 ---
b. DHMH concurs with this recommendation. DHMH had already initiated recovery in 3 of the
10 cases prior to the audit and recovered $113,228. For the remaining seven cases, DHMH
investigated and as of 11/1/11 has recovered $163,631 of program funds for six of the cases
and for the remaining one case, DHMH determined claims paid in the amount of $146,998
were paid correctly, however the monies were recorded under an incorrect medical assistance
number. To date, the monies have been reconciled and applied to the correct account.
DHMH and DHR will investigate the remaining 303 cases to determine whether the
individuals are deceased. If so, DHMH will work with DHR to terminate their Medicaid
eligibility and pursue recovery of any improper payments.
Finding 2
Other cases identified by the match should be investigated to identify any data inaccuracies
and overpayments.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DHMH and DHR investigate the instances in which the recipients’
identifying information recorded in their systems do not agree to the related information in
the DMF and take appropriate action (such as correcting data errors, and/or canceling
Medicaid eligibility, when warranted). Any instances of improper payments detected
during this process should be pursued for recovery.
Department Response
DHMH concurs with this recommendation. DHMH and DHR will investigate the cases in which
the recipients’ identifying information recorded in CARES and/or MMIS do not agree with the
related information in the DMF and will take appropriate action including terminating Medicaid
eligibility when warranted.
Although the auditors have pointed out areas for improvement, DHMH pursues overpayments
related to recipient deaths as part of the day to day operations of the Program. For example in
fiscal year 2010, DHMH recovered payments for 1,131 deceased recipients totaling
approximately $2,028,235. Additionally, in fiscal year 2011, DHMH recovered payments for
2,364 deceased recipients totaling approximately $4,989,123. The Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) Data Analysis Unit performs an additional cross check with a semi-annual match
of MMIS eligibility data and Vital Statistics data to identify Medicaid payments made on behalf
of recipients to providers after dates of death. The results of these matches are forwarded to the
Medicaid Program for recovery. As a result of this process, the OIG has identified the following
recoveries in FY2010: $106,266 and in FY2011: $203,597.

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 3
DHR and DHMH should evaluate the factors that contributed to the overpayments
detected during our audit and make any necessary system or process changes.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that
a. DHMH and DHR evaluate the factors contributing to the overpayments, such as those
described above, and institute necessary process and system changes or other actions to
prevent recurrence and to detect improper payments sooner; and
b. DHR periodically verify the continued eligibility of individuals who were approved for
Medicaid benefits because of their approval for SSI benefits.
Department Response
a. DHMH and DHR concur with the recommendation and will review the cases in the sample,
review processes, and implement necessary changes or other actions to prevent recurrence
and to detect improper payments more timely. However, there will be a cost to
implementing these changes.
b. DHR will periodically verify that individuals who receive Medicaid eligibility because of SSI
eligibility remain eligible for the program.

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Raymond G. Burton, CPA
Amber M. Schon, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditors
Alexander F. Soutar
Staff Auditor