Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2011
Date: 01/18/2012
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b4d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:03:15.925759
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2011
January 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 7
Findings 9
Closeout Transactions
Revenue Transactions
* Finding 1 – Accrued Federal Fund Revenues Totaling $25.5 Million 10
for Three Agencies Did Not Have Federal Funds Available
Finding 2 – Accrued Special Fund Revenues Totaling $7.0 Million 11
Could Not Be Substantiated by One Agency
* Finding 3 – A $5.2 Million General Fund Deficiency Appropriation May 12
Be Needed to Eliminate a Special Fund Deficit Balance
Expenditure Transactions
 Finding 4 – Unfunded Year-End Liabilities Totaling $7.5 Million Were 12
Not Reported to GAD as Required
Other Issues
Finding 5 – Two DHMH Agencies Could Not Demonstrate the 13
Appropriateness of Transactions Processed to Retain Funds That
Otherwise Would Have Been Reverted to the General Fund
Finding 6 – Excess Revenues Totaling $1.5 Million Were Not Reverted 14
to the General Fund
Finding 7 – One Agency Could Not Demonstrate That Its Use of Health 15
Insurance Appropriations Was Consistent With Budget Law
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2011 Closeout Review Findings by 17
State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables According 18
to the General Accounting Division
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closing transactions that have not been previously recorded in the State’s
accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR).
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the CAFR. In its
audit report dated December 15, 2011, applicable to the fiscal year ended June 30,
2011, the firm stated that the State’s basic financial statements presented fairly, in
all material respects, the respective financial position of the State of Maryland as
of June 30, 2011, and the respective changes in the financial position and cash
flows, for the year then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (referred to as GAAP).
The State’s CAFR states that, on a budgetary basis, the General Fund had an
unencumbered balance of approximately $990.1 million as of June 30, 2011. This
represents an increase of approximately $646.1 million from the balance reported
at the preceding fiscal year-end ($344.0 million). The CAFR also states that the
State Reserve (Revenue Stabilization Account) balance totaled $629.2 million as
of June 30, 2011.
The budgetary General Fund balance does not reflect the effect of year-end
GAAP adjustments made to the State’s financial statements that were prepared on
a modified accrual basis of accounting. The net effect of the GAAP adjustments
recorded for fiscal year 2011, if they had been recognized on a budgetary basis,
would have been to reduce the aforementioned unencumbered budgetary General
Fund balance of $990.1 million. For example, year-end GAAP adjustments
included $166.1 million recorded for liabilities incurred by State agencies during
fiscal year 2011 for which general fund appropriations were not available to
finance the expenditures (see Exhibit 2). Other GAAP adjustments that would
have reduced the budgetary General Fund balance included an estimated $144.5
million additional liability for the State’s share of Medicaid costs for services
rendered during fiscal year 2011 and a $228.3 million reduction for State and
local income tax collections that were recorded as revenue for fiscal 2011 but
were applicable to future fiscal years.
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2011. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 21
Departments and independent agencies to ascertain if the transactions were
properly supported and made in accordance with State budgetary laws,
regulations, and accounting policies. We also reviewed, on a limited basis,
transactions processed subsequent to June 30, 2011 to determine if the
transactions were properly recorded (such as charged or credited to the proper
fiscal year). Also, we assessed the status of the findings identified during our
review of the budget closeout transactions for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010,
which were reported to the Joint Audit Committee in a special report dated
January 24, 2011. As part of our current review, we contacted various officials of
State agencies, as well as the independent accounting firm under contract with the
State to express an opinion on its financial statements. Our review excluded
public colleges and universities and transactions processed through the
Transportation Trust Fund because the related financial activity does not involve
the State’s General Fund and/or because agencies have the authority to retain
unspent funds at year-end.
Our conclusions for the aforementioned objective are contained on page 9 of this
report. Our follow-up review of the four findings from the Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2010 determined that none of these
findings have been satisfactorily resolved. These findings are presented in three
findings in this report.
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. Our fieldwork was conducted during the period from August 2011 to
January 2012.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings
Closeout Transactions
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that six departments or units thereof were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions were not properly recorded, could not be
substantiated, or did not comply with budget law requirements or intent.
Revenue Transactions
Three State agencies recorded accrued federal fund revenues totaling $25.5
million even though related federal funds were not available. In addition, accrued
special fund revenues for one State agency, totaling approximately $7.0 million,
had been recorded although collection of this revenue appears questionable.
Finally, one State agency maintained a special fund deficit balance of $5.2 million
as a result of an improper closing transaction recorded in a prior year. The use of
general funds will likely be required to eliminate the deficits resulting from these
transactions.
Expenditure Transactions
One State agency did not properly report unfunded liabilities totaling $7.5 million
to GAD as required.
Other Issues
Two agencies could not support year-end entries that enabled them to retain funds
totaling $16.5 million that otherwise would have been reverted to the General
Fund. Another State agency did not revert approximately $1.5 million in excess
revenues to the General Fund in accordance with budgetary intent. Finally, one
State agency could not demonstrate that its use of health insurance appropriations
was consistent with budgetary law provisions, which resulted in $700,000 being
used for purposes other than health insurance.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1 on page 17 of this
report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
Accrued federal fund revenues totaling approximately $25.5 million were
recorded even though related federal funds were not available.
Analysis
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), the Department of
Human Resources (DHR), and the Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA)
recorded federal fund revenues of approximately $12.9 million, $9.6 million, and
$3.0 million, respectively, even though federal funds were not available. These
revenues related to unreimbursed federal fund expenditures for several federal
programs. Since revenues are not available for these accruals, which were
recorded to cover federal fund expenditures that had previously been incurred,
general fund appropriations in subsequent years (or deficiency appropriations)
will be needed to eliminate the resulting deficit.
MSDE
MSDE accrued revenue for a federal fund receivable totaling approximately $12.9
million for which MSDE failed to recover expenditures incurred during fiscal
years 2002 and 2003 in relation to the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF) grant. DHR, which processes the federal fund recoveries, advised us that
the TANF federal fund grants for those years have already been fully used and are
no longer available to reimburse the MSDE expenditures. MSDE personnel
informed us that a deficiency appropriation has been requested to cover the
outstanding $12.9 million deficit. This issue has been commented upon in our
five preceding annual budget closeout reports.
DHR
DHR accrued revenue for a federal fund receivable totaling approximately $9.6
million related to disallowances by the United States Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS), which DHR was informed of in fiscal year 2009. The
disallowances, related to certain Title IV-E grant expenditures from the quarters
ended September 30, 2008 and December 31, 2008, were principally based on a
lack of a Title IV-E foster care pre-placement provision in DHR’s cost allocation
plan. DHR appealed the disallowances and, effective October 10, 2010, entered
into a settlement agreement with DHHS to resolve all outstanding appeals related
to these disallowances. Under the agreement, DHR will not be reimbursed by the
federal government for the $9.6 million of disallowances, which will therefore
need to be paid with State general funds. This issue has been commented upon in
our two preceding annual budget closeout reports.
10

--- Page 13 ---
DVA
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) accrued
federal fund revenues, on behalf of DVA, totaling approximately $3.0 million.
According to GAD, these revenues were recorded to eliminate deficit balances at
June 30, 2011 that existed in several federal programs due to unreimbursed
federal fund expenditures that had been incurred. Officials at DVA and GAD
could not provide any documentation supporting that the respective accrued
revenues would be received. Furthermore, we were advised by DVA that the $3.0
million would not be collected; therefore, a deficiency appropriation will be
needed to eliminate these deficits.
GAD was aware of these unavailable federal fund receivables totaling $25.5
million, which were recorded as a decrease to general fund revenue by GAD in
the State’s fiscal year 2011 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.
Nevertheless, general funds are needed to offset the expenditures incurred.
Finding 2
Accrued special fund revenues totaling approximately $7.0 million could not
be substantiated.
Analysis
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) – Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA) accrued special fund revenues totaling
approximately $7.0 million which could not be substantiated. These special funds
are generated from quality assessment fees collected from nursing home facilities.
If revenues are not available for these accruals, which were recorded to cover
expenditures that had been previously incurred, general fund appropriations (or
deficiency appropriations) will be needed to eliminate the resulting deficits.
According to DHMH, any resulting deficits are generally covered using special
fund revenues generated during future years.
Our review of State records disclosed that, as of the 2011 fiscal year-end, MCPA
had special fund revenues and expenditures totaling approximately $57.9 million
and $89.8 million, respectively. During the fiscal year-end closing, MCPA
recorded $31.9 million in accrued special fund revenue, which represented the
remaining revenue required to cover the related expenditures that had been
incurred. However, DHMH was unable to provide us with adequate supporting
documentation to indicate that this amount of revenues would be received. As of
December 2011, MCPA had only received approximately $82.8 million in special
fund revenues related to the fiscal year 2011 nursing home facility quality
assessments, resulting in a deficit of approximately $7.0 million for this program.
GAD requires that detailed documentation be maintained to identify the specific
sources for all accrued revenues recorded as part of the year-end closing process.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Subsequently, DHMH advised us that it had identified a total of $3.6 million that
may be assessed to specific facilities, but indicated that collection of the
assessments may be an issue.
Finding 3
A general fund deficiency appropriation may be required to eliminate a
special fund deficit balance of $5.2 million.
Analysis
The Department of State Police (DSP) may require a general fund deficiency
appropriation to eliminate a special fund deficit balance totaling $5.2 million that
existed as of June 30, 2011. Specifically, DSP mistakenly recorded certain
transactions as both accrued revenue and actual revenue during fiscal year 2005.
This resulted in a special fund surplus of $5.6 million being reflected in the
records. DSP then transferred what appeared to be excess funds to the general
fund during the fiscal year 2005 closeout since it did not have legal authority to
retain any remaining balance in this special fund. When this mistake was
discovered during fiscal year 2006, DSP was left with a special fund deficit
balance of $5.6 million at the end of fiscal year 2006 due to the transfer of the
apparent surplus to the general fund and the subsequent automatic reversal of the
previously recorded accrued revenue transaction at the beginning of fiscal year
2006. Since fiscal year 2006, excess revenues of $400,000 were retained in the
fund, which reduced the negative balance to the current $5.2 million. DSP
attempted to obtain a deficiency appropriation in 2011; however, the deficiency
appropriation has not been approved. This issue has been commented upon in our
five preceding annual budget closeout reports.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 4
Unfunded year-end liabilities totaling approximately $7.5 million were not
reported to the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division
(GAD).
Analysis
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) did not report
unfunded year-end general fund liabilities of approximately $7.5 million to GAD,
as required. General fund appropriations in subsequent years (or deficiency
appropriations) may be needed to eliminate these liabilities.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Of the $7.5 million in unfunded liabilities, $3.1 million related to amounts due to
the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) for certain expenditures
incurred by DHMH on MSDE’s behalf. Specifically, at the end of fiscal year
2011, MSDE had not reimbursed DHMH for payments to medical providers made
by DHMH during fiscal year 2011. MSDE did not have sufficient appropriations
to fund the entire amount due. In this regard, there were outstanding invoices for
$6.2 million, but MSDE’s remaining appropriation balance, which it applied
towards these expenditures, was only $3.1 million MSDE failed to estimate and
report the remaining unfunded liabilities to GAD during the fiscal year 2011
budget closeout process, which totaled approximately $3.1 million ($6.2 million
less $3.1 million in accrued expenditures). According to MSDE, this has been a
recurring issue and, historically, appropriations from the subsequent fiscal year
are used to fund the expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. This issue was also
commented upon in our preceding budget closeout report.
The remaining unfunded liabilities totaling $4.4 million related to contractual
expenditures for assessment testing performed during fiscal year 2011. Our
testing of expenditures recorded during July and August 2011 disclosed six
instances where expenditures incurred during fiscal year 2011 were charged
against fiscal year 2012 appropriations. According to MSDE, we were informed
that sufficient appropriations from fiscal year 2011 were not available to pay for
these remaining expenditures. MSDE also failed to report these unfunded
liabilities to GAD during the fiscal year 2011 budget closeout process.
Other Issues
Finding 5
Two DHMH agencies could not demonstrate the appropriateness of certain
transactions processed at year-end to retain funds that otherwise would have
been reverted to the General Fund.
Analysis
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene – Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA) and Alcohol and Drug Abuse Administration (ADAA)
could not demonstrate the appropriateness of certain journal entries recorded at
the 2011 fiscal year-end, which charged their general fund appropriations for
expenditures previously charged to their federal fund appropriations.
Furthermore, during the subsequent fiscal year, both agencies processed entries to
reverse the initial journal entries, thereby reinstating the amounts as federal fund
expenditures. It appears the year-end entries were processed to allow the agencies
to retain fiscal year 2011 funds totaling $16.5 million that would have otherwise
been reverted at June 30, 2011 as unexpended general fund appropriations.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 During the 2011 fiscal year-end closing, DDA recorded a journal entry to
charge approximately $12.6 million, which had originally been charged as
federal fund expenditures, to its general fund appropriations. The propriety of
this transaction could not be substantiated in that documentation was not
available to support, for example, that the original charges against DDA’s
federal fund appropriation were improper. As a result of these entries, federal
fund expenditures on the State’s accounting records would not correspond
with the amount of federal funds actually received. Our review also disclosed
a number of other transfers performed near year-end that reallocated
expenditures between federal funds and general funds for which DDA and
DHMH were unable to provide adequate supporting documentation to
substantiate their propriety.
DHMH and DDA believe that Chapter 482, 2010 Laws of Maryland, allowed
DDA to charge general funds first in cases where federal funds could be
carried forward for the purpose of reducing the waiting list for community
services for individuals with developmental disabilities. However, DDA had
not established a plan as to how the $12.6 million would be used to reduce the
waiting list when the transfer was recorded. Furthermore, federal
requirements typically require federal expenditures to be recognized to
support reimbursements received.
 During the 2011 fiscal year-end closing, ADAA transferred approximately
$3.9 million, which had originally been charged as federal fund expenditures
to its general funds appropriations. ADAA advised us that since it had not
expended all appropriated general funds at fiscal year-end, the entry was
recorded to eliminate the remaining general fund appropriation by shifting
certain federal fund expenditures to general funds. Chapter 482, 2010 Laws
of Maryland generally requires that, when expenditures can be charged to
either general or federal fund sources, federal funds should be charged first.
Finding 6
The Department of State Police did not revert $1.5 million in excess revenues
generated from work zone speed camera citations to the General Fund in
accordance with budgetary law intent.
Analysis
The Department of State Police (DSP) did not revert approximately $1.5 million
in excess revenues generated from work zone speed camera citations as directed
in the budget law. The collected revenues that were not reverted were being held
at June 30, 2011 by the agency that initially receives the revenues, the Department
14

--- Page 17 ---
of Transportation – State Highway Administration (SHA). The interagency
responsibilities for this program may have contributed to the revenues not being
fully reverted. Chapter 482, 2010 Laws of Maryland, directed that an equivalent
amount of general funds be reverted from DSP for any special fund revenues
earned from work zone speed camera citations in excess of $5 million. As of June
30, 2011, since the start of the speed camera program, revenues ($19,620,355)
have exceeded expenditures ($6,073,228) by $13,547,127. Accordingly, DSP
should have reverted $8,547,127 ($13,547,127 less $5 million allowance) to the
General Fund. However, DSP had only reverted $7,086,746 to the General Fund
for excess revenues from the program. DSP management advised us that the
amount reverted was based on DSP’s working appropriation at fiscal year-end
closing and not actual revenues.
Work zone speed camera revenues are initially collected by SHA. After
reimbursement of program costs for all involved State agencies and payments to
the vendor that administers the speed cameras, any remaining revenues are
distributed to DSP. Under a memorandum of understanding between SHA, DSP,
and other related agencies, SHA is required to transfer any remaining balance of
revenue under this program to DSP on an annual basis (until October 1, 2012).
Finding 7
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services appears to have
used health insurance appropriations for other than intended purposes,
contrary to budgetary law.
Analysis
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) appears
to have used health insurance appropriations for other than intended purposes,
contrary to budgetary law. Chapter 482, 2010 Laws of Maryland, requires that
funds appropriated to various State agency programs and subprograms for State
employee and retiree health insurance premiums be used for their intended
purposes only and that any unused health insurance appropriations be transferred
to the State Employees and Retirees Health and Welfare Benefits Fund
(SERHWBF). Furthermore, the law specifies that the use of these appropriations
for any purpose other than their intended purpose requires the prior approval of
the Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and a budget
amendment approved by the Governor, neither of which was obtained.
According to State records, DPSCS as a department had unexpended health
insurance appropriations totaling approximately $8.4 million and transferred this
amount to the SERHWBF. However, we determined that certain DPSCS units
used health insurance appropriations for other purposes. For example, DPSCS’
Division of Parole and Probation and Information Technology and
15

--- Page 18 ---
Communications Division had unexpended health insurance appropriations
totaling $2.1 million, yet only $1.4 million were transferred to the SERHWBF,
indicating that $700,000 was used for something other than health insurance.
Other DPSCS agencies transferred additional funds to the SERHWBF to
compensate for these agencies not transferring all unexpended health insurance
appropriations.
DPSCS management advised us that, according to guidance from DBM and the
Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD), DPSCS was
allowed to reallocate unexpended appropriations to eliminate deficits in its other
programs as long as it transferred the cumulative amount of unexpended general
fund health insurance appropriations for the Department as a whole. However,
without a budget amendment, this practice appears contrary to budgetary law
intent since it allows DPSCS to use health insurance appropriations for other
purposes and use unexpended general fund appropriations that may have
otherwise been subject to reversion to the General Fund.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2011 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Agency Finding Finding Description
Number
1 $12.9 million in unsubstantiated federal fund
accrued revenues were recorded.
Maryland State Department
of Education 4 $7.5 million of unfunded year-end liabilities were
not reported to GAD as required.
2 $7.0 million in unsubstantiated special fund
Department of Health and accrued revenues were recorded.
Mental Hygiene 5
$16.5 million charged to general funds instead
of available federal funds.
Department of Human 1 $9.6 million in unsubstantiated federal fund
Resources accrued revenues were recorded.
7 $700,000 of health insurance appropriations
Department of Public Safety
appear to have been used for purposes other
and Correctional Services
than intended under budgetary law.
3 $5.2 million special fund deficit balance exists.
Department of State Police
6 $1.5 million in revenues were not reverted as
intended under budget law.
Department of Veterans 1 $3.0 million in unsubstantiated federal fund
Affairs revenues were recorded.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables
According to the General Accounting Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Unprovided for Payables
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene $137,349,919
Department of Human Resources 19,452,625
Maryland Higher Education Commission 9,248,945
Total $166,051,489
18

--- Page 21 ---
Audit Team
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Roger E. Jaynes, III, CFE
J. Alexander Twigg
Robert A. Wells, CPA
Edward J. Welsh
Senior Auditors
Jason M. Goldstein
Carey L. Harper
Kevin J. Mercer
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
Nicholas J. Caronna
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA