Title: Maryland Health Care Commission
Date: 09/05/2017
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150abb
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:03:10.183925
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Maryland Health Care Commission
Security Monitoring of Patient Information Maintained by the
State-Designated Health Information Exchange
September 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or
disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of the Maryland Health Care Commission’s (MHCC)
efforts to provide assurance as to the security and confidentiality of data collected
and retained by the State-Designated Health Information Exchange.
Effective October 29, 2009, MHCC entered into a memorandum of understanding
with the Chesapeake Regional Information System for our Patients, Incorporated
(CRISP) to become the State-Designated Health Information Exchange (HIE).
CRISP is an independent 501(3)(c) corporation per the Federal Internal Revenue
Code. As the State-Designated HIE, CRISP is responsible for building and
maintaining a technical infrastructure to enable the Maryland health care
community to appropriately and securely share electronic health information.
The purpose of our review was to determine if MHCC was ensuring that the
sensitive protected health information and personally identifiable information
received, retained, and transmitted by HIE was properly secured at all times. This
review was performed in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-
1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Our review consisted of discussions with MHCC personnel, a review of the latest
performance audit issued for the period covering April 1, 2015 to March 31, 2016,
and other procedures as we deemed necessary to achieve our objectives. The
results of our review are identified in Finding 1. Our review did not constitute an
audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Our review was conducted during the period from February 2017
through April 2017.
MDH’s response to this audit, on behalf of MHCC, is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise MDH regarding the results of our
review of its response.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
The Health–General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland includes the
provision for the creation of a State-designated health information exchange as
per direction of the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) and the Health
Services Cost Review Commission.
Effective October 29, 2009, the MHCC entered into a memorandum of
understanding with the Chesapeake Regional Information System for our Patients,
Incorporated (CRISP) to become the State-Designated Health Information
Exchange (HIE). CRISP is an independent 501(3)(c) corporation per the Federal
Internal Revenue Code. As the State-Designated HIE, CRISP is responsible for
building and maintaining a technical infrastructure to enable the Maryland health
care community to appropriately and securely share electronic health information.
The Health-General Article further specifies that MHCC shall adopt regulations
for the privacy and security of protected health information (PHI) obtained or
released through an HIE. Furthermore, the Code of Maryland Regulations
(COMAR) specifies that an HIE shall conduct an annual privacy and security
audit to detect patterns of inappropriate access, use, maintenance, and disclosure
of information that are in violation of COMAR and provide the findings of these
audits to MHCC. In addition, COMAR also states that, at the request of MHCC,
the HIE shall utilize a qualified third party to conduct an audit on the access, use,
and disclosure of information through and the maintenance of information by the
HIE.
The CRISP system database holds information on patients registered at Maryland
health care organizations. We were advised that the CRISP Master Patient Index
contained information related to approximately 9.2 million unique individuals as
of March 2, 2017. We were advised that the CRISP query portal was accessed
approximately 102,000 times each month and the notification system (which
provides almost immediate notifications to primary care physicians and care
coordinators when medical practices' patients are admitted to an emergency room,
or are admitted to / discharged from a hospital) sends approximately 24,000
messages each day.
Six different contractors provided material information technology (IT) support
services to CRISP. These support services include hosting and infrastructure,
offsite data backup and management of CRISP application servers, network
devices and a virtual production environment. CRISP was directly responsible for
application and database security controls over its critical systems and for
4

--- Page 7 ---
ensuring that operating systems for servers supporting these systems were
properly secured and hardened.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
MHCC lacked assurance that sensitive information (including protected
health information and personally identifiable information) obtained and
maintained by the Chesapeake Regional Information System for our
Patients (CRISP) was properly secured.
Analysis
MHCC lacked assurance that sensitive information (including protected health
information and personally identifiable information) obtained and maintained by
CRISP was properly secured.
Data Security Controls Directly Attributable to CRISP
The most recent performance audit report obtained by MHCC did not provide
detailed descriptions of the specific procedures and tests performed and related
results to ensure that the CRISP participants’ patient data were properly secured.
MHCC procured and obtained performance audits to ensure that CRISP
participants’ patient data were processed, transmitted, and stored by CRISP and
its contractors in a secure manner in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations. While the performance audit was conducted in accordance with the
terms of the agreement between MHCC and an independent certified public
accounting (CPA) firm and contained a number of findings and recommendations
for improvements to controls, the auditor’s work was not required to be conducted
in accordance with certain industry-recognized authoritative guidance. MHCC
advised us that, at the time of our review, CRISP had not been subject to any
additional independent reviews.
At the time of our review, the most recent MHCC procured performance audit
was conducted by a CPA firm covering the period from April 1, 2015 through
March 31, 2016 and the related report was dated May 11, 2016. Our review
disclosed that the report stated that the methodology of the performance audit
included:
 tests and observations of system and process controls designed to ensure that
CRISP participants’ patient data were processed, transmitted, and stored in a
secure manner;
 reviews of CRISP policies and procedures and its contractors’ policies and
System and Organization Controls for Service Organizations reports; and
 vulnerability scans of CRISP servers and network devices at hosted data
centers.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Neither a System and Organization Controls for Service Organizations (SOC)
independent review nor a Health Information Trust Alliance (HITRUST)
independent review was conducted to address security, confidentiality and
availability controls over CRISP. Instead, MHCC contracted for the
aforementioned performance audit to assess controls implemented by CRISP.
However, unlike in a SOC or HITRUST review, the description of the scope of
the performance audit and the related test work performed was not detailed
enough to allow MHCC to fully determine the extent to which patient data was
secured. We noted that the performance audit report did not address database
controls, such as access to critical database tables, as well as certain operating
system security controls applicable to critical CRISP systems. A SOC review and
report, for example, would have included a description of the database and
operating system controls that existed at CRISP, a description of the testing
performed, and the results of that testing.
Thus, these other types of independent reviews, which are conducted using
industry-recognized authoritative guidance, would provide MHCC with greater
assurance of data security. Specifically, both SOC reviews and HITRUST
reviews are specifically designed to address security, confidentiality, and
availability concerns for various entities including health information exchanges.
These reviews and their associated standard type reports utilize a defined
framework, which provides sufficient detail for certain trust principles (for
example, security) over which controls should be reviewed and tested. Therefore,
SOC or HITRUST reports should provide MHCC sufficient documentation and
evidence of exactly what was reviewed, tested, and found. This information
would allow MHCC to determine if the reviews performed properly addressed
their concerns over the security and confidentiality of the CRISP participants’
patient data.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has issued guidance for
auditing and reporting on reviews of service providers. This guidance
encompasses several types of reviews and related SOC reports. A SOC 2 Type 2
review, which includes reviews of controls placed in operation and tests of
operating effectiveness of these controls for the periods under review, could be
tailored to include an evaluation of security, confidentiality, and availability over
the CRISP system. The HITRUST common security framework (CSF), which
was developed in collaboration with security professionals, is a widely adopted
framework in the healthcare industry. The HITRUST CSF assurance program
provides guidance for a common approach to managing security assessments.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Audits of CRISP Information Technology Support Services Contractors
Appendix A of the aforementioned performance audit report includes a statement
that the performance audit encompassed a review of the CRISP contractors’ SOC
reports. However, the remainder of the report did not address the scope of these
reviews, the testing performed, and the related results.
In addition, we determined that MHCC did not request, obtain, or review the SOC
reports for the aforementioned contractors because MHCC personnel did not
believe that they had the technical expertise to perform an effective review of
these reports. As a result of these conditions, MHCC has no assurance that:
 there were SOC 2 Type 2 reports (or other independent type reports) for each
of the aforementioned contractors for all recent periods,
 the scope of the SOC reviews were appropriate and included all relevant
controls, and
 the extent of any deficiencies identified in these reports that could
significantly and adversely impact the security and confidentiality over CRISP
participants’ patient data.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHCC
a. require, as allowed by COMAR, that CRISP obtain an independent
annual review (such as a SOC 2 Type 2 or HITRUST review) for at least
the security and confidentiality trust principles over CRISP applications,
databases and operating systems that support critical CRISP systems;
b. obtain a copy of the related report, assess the report to ensure that its
scope is sufficient, ensure that all critical deficiencies identified in the
report are promptly corrected, document these assessments, and retain
the documentation for future reference; and
c. obtain copies of the SOC reports (or other independent audit reports) for
the aforementioned contractors, review these reports to ensure that the
scope of the independent reviews were sufficient and ensure, via CRISP,
that all critical deficiencies identified in these reports are promptly
corrected, document these reviews and retain the documentation for
future reference.
8

--- Page 12 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Finding 1
MHCC lacked assurance that sensitive information (including protected
health information and personally identifiable information) obtained and
maintained by the Chesapeake Regional Information System for our
Patients (CRISP) was properly secured.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MHCC
a. require, as allowed by COMAR, that CRISP obtain an independent
annual review (such as a SOC 2 Type 2 or HITRUST review) for at least
the security and confidentiality trust principles over CRISP applications,
databases and operating systems that support critical CRISP systems;
b. obtain a copy of the related report, assess the report to ensure that its
scope is sufficient, ensure that all critical deficiencies identified in the
report are promptly corrected, document these assessments, and retain
the documentation for future reference; and
c. obtain copies of the SOC reports (or other independent audit reports) for
the aforementioned contractors, review these reports to ensure that the
scope of the independent reviews were sufficient and ensure, via CRISP,
that all critical deficiencies identified in these reports are promptly
corrected, document these reviews and retain the documentation for
future reference.
Commission’s Response
a The MHCC concurs with the recommendation. In future audits of the CRISP
systems MHCC will conform with the recommendation to include in the
scope of the audits the SOC 2 or HITRUST reviews. However, MHCC
believes that ceding the direction of the review to CRISP in FY 2018 is
premature. The MHCC will decide after completing the FY 2018 CRISP
Privacy and Security Audit as a SOC 2 Type 2 review, whether
responsibility for obtaining subsequent audits consistent with the
recommendation will be delegated to CRISP or continue under the direction
of MHCC.
b, c The MHCC concurs with these recommendations. Starting with the 2018
Privacy and Security Audit we will conduct a SOC 2 Type 2 review of
1

--- Page 13 ---
CRISP and obtain copies of CRISP vendors’ SOC 2 Type 2 reports, assess
the reports to ensure that its scope is sufficient, ensure – via CRISP - that all
critical deficiencies identified in the report are corrected as soon as
reasonably practicable based upon industry standards and best practices.
MHCC will document these assessments and CRISP’s remediation and
documentation for future reference. Completion date for receiving the first
CRISP SOC 2 Type 2 report is May 2018.
2

--- Page 14 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor