Title: Worcester County Public Schools

NOTE: In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, this system has obtained an exemption from one audit which extends the time until the next audit from 6 years to 12 years.
Date: 06/06/2017
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d39cc9d72404c150a46
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:50:50.292100
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Worcester County Public Schools
June 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 6
External Audits 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Revenue and Billing Cycle
∗ Finding 1 – Adequate accountability and control over cash receipts 9
had not been established. For example, collections were not
recorded upon receipt and there was no independent
verification that certain collections were deposited.
Federal Funds 10
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
∗ Finding 2 – WCPS did not restrict users’ capabilities on its automated 11
procurement and accounts payable system to prevent
unnecessary or incompatible capabilities.
∗ Finding 3 – WCPS’ procurement policy did not require certain non- 12
competitive procurements to be submitted to or approved by
the Board.
∗ Finding 4 – WCPS did not always publish notifications of contract 13
awards on eMaryland Marketplace or comply with State
procurement laws.
Finding 5 – WCPS had not established formal comprehensive 15
corporate purchasing card policies and procedures and internal
controls were inadequate.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
∗ Finding 6 – Human resources and payroll system user capabilities 17
were not adequately monitored and restricted. In addition,
independent documented reviews of personnel and payroll
transactions were not performed including other payments of
$4.6 million for fiscal year 2015.
Inventory Control and Accountability
∗ Finding 7 – WCPS had not established comprehensive equipment 19
policies, and appropriate controls and recordkeeping
requirements.
Information Technology
∗ Finding 8 – Controls over disaster recovery, backup of critical 20
data and monitoring the security of critical database were
not sufficient.
Finding 9 – Firewall rules allowed unnecessary connections to 22
numerous WCPS network devices and nine publicly accessible
servers were improperly located in the internal network.
Finding 10 – The WCPS network was not secured against improper 23
access from un-trusted parties using its wireless connections.
Finding 11 – Monitoring and controls over WCPS computers were 23
not sufficient to ensure that these computers were properly
protected from malware.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 24
Transportation Services
∗ Finding 12 – WCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing 26
procedures and did not periodically perform a system-wide
analysis of bus routes to maximize efficiency.
∗ Finding 13 – WCPS had not established a formal methodology to 27
calculate its PVA rate, and payments to bus contractors
included elements that did not consider market conditions,
actual costs, or available discounts.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 14 – WCPS did not ensure the accuracy of contractor 30
reported manifest mileage, which was used to compute certain
payments to bus contractors.
Finding 15 – Internal controls over payments to bus contractors were 31
not adequate, as there was no independent review and approval
of payment calculations.
Food Services
Finding 16 – WCPS had not established adequate accountability and 32
control over school cafeteria cash receipts.
School Board Operations
Finding 17 – Financial disclosure statements were not always filed 34
or filed timely, as required.
Other Financial Controls
Finding 18 – WCPS had not pursued the competitive procurement of 35
its healthcare contracts for administrative services and stop-loss
coverage since 1967 and did not receive copies or obtain Board
approval of the annual agreements.
Finding 19 – WCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and 36
retiree health care claims paid, and did not verify that stop-loss
insurance was correctly applied and plan administrative fees
were properly charged.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 38
Agency Response Appendix
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Worcester County Public Schools (WCPS)
ranks 18th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2015 full-time student enrollment was 6,654 students.
WCPS has 14 schools, consisting of 5 elementary, 1 intermediate, 3 middle
schools, 3 high schools, and 2 other types of schools (including vocational
and special).
According to WCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2015 revenues
were $135 million and expenditures were $135 million. The largest
expenditure category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which
accounted for 70 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2015.
According to MSDE records, during the 2014-2015 school year, WCPS had
1,154 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 866 instructional and
288 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
WCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and three non-voting student members. The State and the
Worcester County government provide the vast majority of WCPS funding. In
addition, MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment
and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with WCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Worcester County government exercises authority over the WCPS
primarily through the review and approval of WCPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
External Audits
WCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is
referred to as a Single Audit of WCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audit and
Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2011 through 2015, and examined the
related work papers for fiscal year 2015, which were the latest available at
the time we performed our audit field work.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the WCPS’ financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit of federal grants, and the risks and scope of our audit in
certain areas, we relied on the results of the independent audits to reduce the
scope of our audit work related to certain revenues, accounts receivable, and
federal grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 21 of the 28
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated November 1, 2010.
We determined that WCPS satisfactorily addressed 10 of these findings. The
remaining 11 findings are repeated as 9 findings in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Worcester County Public Schools (WCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Worcester County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the WCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $135.2 million during fiscal year 2015. In addition, schools
collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and school
publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these student
activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. Although this revenue is raised
through student related activities, WCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard
these funds. For fiscal year 2015, student activity fund collections totaled
$2.7 million and the June 30, 2015 balance was $1.1 million.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the WCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we reduced
the scope of our audit work related to State and local government revenues
received via wire transfer and accounts receivable for which the auditor’s
procedural review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Reviews of School Activity Funds
The independent certified public accounting firm contracted by WCPS to
perform its annual financial statement audit also conducts a limited review of
the student activity funds (SAF). These reviews consist primarily of tests of
SAF bank reconciliations, and receipt and disbursement transactions at
selected schools. Our review of the firm’s findings for fiscal year 2015
disclosed that internal control weaknesses identified were not prevalent. In
addition, the firm’s testing did not identify any improprieties.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 1
Adequate accountability and control over cash receipts had not been
established. For example, collections were not recorded upon receipt and
there was no independent verification that certain collections were deposited.
Analysis
WCPS had not established adequate accountability and control over cash
receipts that, according to its records, totaled $1.3 million from July 2015
through February 2016 consisting of checks primarily received through the
mail. Checks received represent reimbursements of teacher pension costs
from the county and worker compensation claims from the Maryland
Association of Boards of Education, and federal E-rate payments, among other
sources. As a result, assurance was lacking that all collections received were
deposited.
Employees who initially received collections in the Finance Department, and
several other departments (such as Human Resources) that transferred
collections to the Finance Department, generally did not immediately record
or restrictively endorse checks to establish initial accountability and control.
Rather, in the Finance Department, collections were recorded in the financial
records by another employee, and then forwarded to a third employee, who
restrictively endorsed the checks and prepared the deposit. Consequently,
there was no record of initial accountability. Furthermore, these collections
were not safeguarded prior to deposit, as they were kept in an unsecured,
accessible location in the Department prior to deposit. Finally, an
independent verification was not performed, using the validated bank
deposits, to ensure all collections were properly deposited.
Similar situations regarding the failure to immediately record collections,
restrictively endorse checks, and independently verify deposits were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that WCPS
a. immediately record and restrictively endorse all checks (repeat),
b. adequately secure checks prior to deposit, and
c. independently verify that all collections were subsequently deposited
(repeat).
9

--- Page 12 ---
Federal Funds
Background
WCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2015 expenditures totaled $8.5
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of WCPS’ federal grants and the objectives of
our audit in this area, we reduced the scope of our audit work related to
federal grants. Besides expressing an opinion on WCPS’ compliance with the
terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure's impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant
expenditures) for fiscal years 2012 to 2015. The related reports stated that
WCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements applicable to
its major federal programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance
with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did not
identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds Were Requested for Eligible Services
WCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services. Medicaid is an entitlement program for which certain
service costs can be reimbursed to WCPS. Medicaid activity is not covered by
the Single Audit of federal grants. Our test of 10 students disclosed that
reimbursement was requested for all tested Medicaid-subsidized services.
According to agency records, fiscal year 2015 reimbursement for Medicaid-
subsidized services totaled approximately $1.2 million.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and WCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $40.5 million during fiscal year 2015. Purchase
orders are manually prepared by the requesting department and must be
manually approved by supervisory personnel (such as a respective
department head) and one of the Assistant Superintendents before the
10

--- Page 13 ---
related purchase orders can be issued and recorded in the WCPS automated
payment system.
WCPS written procurement policies require that procurements over $25,000
be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The policies also require that these
procurements be approved by the Board with the exception of textbook
purchases and other materials of instruction; emergency items; sole-source
procurements; and the use of intergovernmental agreements and purchasing
cooperatives. Although not included in its written policies, it is WCPS practice
to also require the solicitation of written or oral quotes for purchases of
$5,000 or greater. Payments are processed by the finance department
through an automated system that prints vendor checks and posts the
payment to the financial records.
Finding 2
WCPS did not restrict users’ capabilities on its automated procurement and
accounts payable system to prevent unnecessary or incompatible capabilities.
Analysis
WCPS did not adequately restrict users' capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system, and certain automated approval
functions were not used. Additionally, there were no independent approvals
of changes to users’ capabilities on the automated system and WCPS did not
periodically reevaluate the system capabilities needed by employees to
perform their duties, assess the compatibility of employees’ duties, and make
appropriate changes to restrict inappropriate or unneeded capabilities.
Seven employees were assigned system capabilities that allowed them to
perform unnecessary and/or incompatible functions. These seven employees
(two information technology, one human resources, and four finance
department employees) could perform all procurement and accounts payable
system functions including entering purchase orders, adding a vendor and
entering invoices for payment into the system, and printing vendor checks.
Three of these employees had system administrator access that would allow
them to perform all system functions, including adding or changing employee
accesses, including their own, in the automated system. One of the
employees also had unnecessary access to two administrative user accounts
that are used by the system vendor to perform software maintenance and
updates.
WCPS did not use existing system capabilities that would enable online
(electronic) independent approval of critical documents, including invoices,
11

--- Page 14 ---
prior to payment processing. Furthermore, although an independent review
was performed of the lists of checks printed, this review did not include a
review of appropriate supporting documents for any of the applicable vendor
payments.
As a result, unauthorized purchases and disbursements could be processed
without detection, although our review did not disclose any inappropriate
transactions that were processed by the employees that had unnecessary or
incompatible access. We commented on the failure to segregate
incompatible functions and restrict system access to critical system functions
in our preceding audit report where we cited four of the same employees as
we did this audit.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that WCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes. Specifically, we
recommend that WCPS take appropriate action to
a. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform
incompatible duties (repeat);
b. restrict access to the automated procurement and accounts payable
system to individuals whose job duties require such access (repeat);
c. establish independent approval requirements for critical purchasing and
accounts payable transactions, and changes to user capabilities; and
d. ensure that the independent supervisory approval of critical transactions
includes the review applicable supporting documents, as appropriate.
Finding 3
WCPS’ procurement policy did not require certain non-competitive
procurements to be submitted to or approved by the Board.
Analysis
WCPS’ policies did not require Board approval for certain high-value
purchases. While WCPS had developed formal procurement policies to
address the acquisition and approval of certain procurements over $25,000,
it did not require Board approval of all purchases above this level.
Specifically, Board approval was not required for certain contracts procured
without a competitive bidding process, such as those procured using
12

--- Page 15 ---
intergovernmental cooperative agreements (ICPA),1 by piggybacking on other
agencies’ agreements, or that were sole-source awards. We also noted that
WCPS procurement policy does not require a documented sole-source
justification, which we commonly find required by other school systems and
State government. Additionally, the policy does not require that contracts (at
least those over a certain monetary threshold, such as $25,000) be a formal
written document executed between the parties.
Consequently, significant procurement activity was not subject to specific
Board oversight. Our test of 27 procurements with fiscal year 2015
disbursements totaling $38.6 million disclosed 14 contracts, each over
$25,000, (with cumulative fiscal year 2015 disbursements of approximately
$2.7 million) had not been competitively bid and were not submitted to the
Board for approval. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report where we cited the lack of procurement policies that
addressed all categories of goods and services purchased, including required
Board approval and the need for sole-source justifications.
Recommendation 3
We recommend WCPS amend its existing procurement policies to require
that:
a. contract awards resulting from the use of non-competitive procurement
methods be reported and approved by the Board when the awards exceed
$25,000 (repeat),
b. documented justifications be prepared for all sole-source awards (repeat),
and
c. formal written documents be executed between the parties for contracts
over a stated monetary value.
Finding 4
WCPS did not always publish required notifications of contract bids and
awards on eMaryland Marketplace or comply with State procurement laws.
Analysis
Our test of 27 procurements for goods and services with fiscal year 2015
disbursements totaling $38.6 million disclosed that contract bid solicitations
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, in part, defines an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement as a contract that is entered into by at
least one governmental entity in a manner consistent with the purposes set forth in Section
11-201 of the Article, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing.
13

--- Page 16 ---
and awards were not always published on eMaryland Marketplace, as
required, or did not comply with State procurement laws.
• WCPS did not use eMaryland Marketplace to publish bids or awards for 13
procurements tested where the competitive procurement processes
resulted in Board approved contract awards of greater than $25,000. The
awards/payments to these vendors in fiscal year 2015 totaled $36
million. State law requires a local school system to publish a procurement
solicitation or notice of award that is greater than $25,000 on eMaryland
Marketplace.
• WCPS procured and awarded a contract for construction management
(CM) services totaling $3.3 million without considering price in making the
selection, as required by State law. In this case, WCPS issued a request
for proposal (RFP) and the RFP required that proposals include the
proposed cost categories and method of charging fees, but stipulated that
the amount of the costs and fees be excluded. After the CM was selected,
WCPS then negotiated the amount they were to be paid under the
contract, even though State law requires that contracts for school building
and improvements be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. Counsel
to the Maryland General Assembly had previously advised us that the cited
law applies to local school system contracts for CM services. From 2012
to 2016, WCPS only had one active major construction project and only
hired one CM.
• For six contracts totaling $1.4 million that were based on
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA), WCPS had
not prepared written documentation of the benefits of utilizing an ICPA, as
required by State law.
• For four vendors, each paid over $25,000 with fiscal year 2015 payments
totaling $663,950, the services were not competitively bid or supported by
sole source justification documentation. In addition, for two of these
vendors, who received fiscal year 2015 payments of $336,000, no written
contracts had been executed between the parties that would establish
terms and responsibilities of the parties. Consequently, WCPS was lacking
assurance that the costs were reasonable and that the quality of services
received were appropriate. We commented on the failure to competitively
bid goods or services in our preceding audit report.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend WCPS
a. use eMaryland Marketplace for contract procurement solicitations or
awards as required by State law;
b. revise its procurement process for contracts for construction management
services to require that awards be made to the lowest responsible bidder;
c. before deciding to participate in an ICPA, prepare written documentation
of the benefits of utilizing the ICPA for Board review;
d. procure contracts/purchases of over $25,000 through a competitive
bidding process, or document the justification of any sole source
procurements (repeat); and
e. execute written contracts for services procured expected to exceed
$25,000 that includes sufficient terms to evaluate the quality of services
and appropriateness of the rates billed.
Finding 5
WCPS had not established formal comprehensive corporate purchasing card
policies, and procedures and internal controls were inadequate.
Analysis
WCPS had not established formal comprehensive corporate purchasing card
(CPC) policies, and existing procedures and internal controls were inadequate.
• A comprehensive CPC manual had not been developed and approved by
the Board. Consequently, certain common CPC policies and procedures
were not formalized, and certain key controls were not addressed over the
issuance, use, and supervisory review of monthly card activity. For
example, although WCPS had cardholders sign a credit card use
agreement and attend annual training seminars, which stipulated that
purchases were to be for school system purposes and not for personal
items, the related card use terms and conditions were somewhat general
and actual prohibited card uses were not identified.
• There was a lack of separation of duties over critical CPC functions.
Specifically, the same WCPS employee, who was a cardholder, processed
CPC applications on the issuing bank’s web site, received new cards in the
mail, distributed the new cards, reviewed and approved all monthly card
holder bank statements, and cancelled cards for terminated and retiring
employees through the bank’s web site. Consequently, the
aforementioned employee could be able to improperly obtain cards and
process unauthorized transactions, although our review did not disclose
any such improper card activity.
15

--- Page 18 ---
• WCPS’ monitoring procedures did not include the use of available Level-3
purchasing data to help determine the propriety of CPC transactions. This
level of data, when reported by the merchants, provides detailed
purchasing information, including, invoice-level line item details (such as
item descriptions and item quantities). Our review of Level-3 data did
disclose several purchases of gift cards that were not accompanied by the
required accountability form, which explains the reason for the purchase.
As of November 2015, WCPS had approximately 100 CPC cardholders and
during fiscal year 2015, related expenditures totaled approximately $2.2
million.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that WCPS enhance its CPC program. Specifically, we
recommend that WCPS
a. develop a comprehensive CPC manual subject to Board approval, which
includes acceptable uses of the card;
b. properly segregate the CPC functions of card issuance, card holding, card
activity review, and cancellation; and
c. incorporate the use of Level-3 data as part of the monthly review by
supervisors, when available, and ensure all card transactions are properly
supported.
We advised WCPS how to accomplish the necessary segregation of duties
using existing personnel.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the WCPS
budget. According to WCPS records, fiscal year 2015 salary, wage, and
benefit costs totaled $94.4 million, or 70 percent of the $135 million total
operating expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of
Education reports, during the 2014 – 2015 school year WCPS had 1,154 full-
time positions, which consisted of 842 instructional positions and 312 non-
instructional positions.
WCPS uses an automated system to maintain human resources (HR)
information, record employee time, track leave usage, and process and record
payroll transactions. Attendance reports are submitted by employees semi-
monthly and leave is recorded and adjustments processed on the system by
16

--- Page 19 ---
central payroll personnel. The system also generates payroll checks and
direct deposit advices. Payroll processing involves both automated processes
(such as compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual processes
(such as data entry of new employee information).
Finding 6
Human resources and payroll system user capabilities were not adequately
monitored and restricted. In addition, independent documented reviews of
personnel and payroll transactions were not performed including certain
payments of $4.6 million for fiscal year 2015.
Analysis
Adequate internal controls had not been established over the capabilities
assigned to users on the automated human resources (HR) and payroll
system and the review and approval of certain payroll transactions.
• WCPS had not established a formal process for granting or modifying
payroll system user access capabilities that required documented
supervisory approval. Furthermore, WCPS did not generate periodic
system reports of employee capabilities for supervisory review to ensure
adequate separation of duties and to confirm the need for assigned
capabilities. Consequently, we identified individuals who were assigned
capabilities that were not needed to perform their job duties or were
assigned incompatible HR and payroll system access capabilities.
For example, our review of the nine WCPS users we deemed as having
critical access capabilities disclosed that as of March 10, 2016, five users
could perform incompatible functions or had unnecessary access,
including two information technology employees with unlimited system
administrator access that allowed them to perform all HR and payroll
functions. Two payroll employees and one HR employee had incompatible
access that allowed them to add employees, change salary and direct
deposit information, process payroll (such as final payout amounts), and
print checks without any independent supervisory review to supporting
documentation.
• Critical HR and payroll transactions were not subject to independent
review and available reports of transactions processed that could be used
for that purpose were not generated. For example, there was no review of
payment amounts calculated and entered into the system by one
employee for other earnings in fiscal year 2015 totaling $4.6 million
(including, for example, substitute teacher pay of $1.1 million, teacher
17

--- Page 20 ---
education workshop reimbursements of $665,000 and final leave payouts
of $433,000).
As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all HR and payroll transactions
were authorized and appropriate. Our test of HR and payroll transactions and
adjustments did not disclose any inappropriate transactions. Similar
conditions regarding inappropriate access to critical system functions and the
lack of an independent review of HR and payroll transactions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that WCPS
a. perform a periodic documented independent review of user capabilities to
ensure access is properly granted,
b. limit access of critical functions to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their assigned job duties,
c. eliminate access to and segregate incompatible system functions (repeat),
and
d. perform a documented independent review of critical personnel and
payroll transactions processed using supporting documentation (repeat).
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to WCPS inventory records, as of June 2015, there were 10,845
equipment items totaling $12.5 million, which included capital and non-
capital items. WCPS uses a spreadsheet maintained by its central fiscal
office to capitalize inventory with a cost of $5,000 or more for financial
statement purposes. However, all equipment items costing over $1,000 and
computers (desktops, laptops, tablets) are recorded on the same spreadsheet
located on a shared drive for tracking purposes, which describes an item’s
location within the school system. Annual physical inventories of equipment
items recorded on the spreadsheet are required by WCPS policies.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 7
WCPS had not established comprehensive equipment policies, and
appropriate controls and recordkeeping requirements.
Analysis
WCPS had not established comprehensive written equipment policies and
procedures, and proper controls and recordkeeping requirements that would
ensure adequate accountability over its schools’ equipment inventory.
• WCPS’ equipment policies did not include requirements for tagging
equipment, reporting lost or stolen items, approving disposals, and
separating the duties of equipment custody, inventorying, and
recordkeeping. Also, while current policy requires that computers and
other items costing more than $1,000 be inventoried, sensitive items
(such as items being subject theft) were not specifically defined.
• Entries to the centrally maintained equipment records, additions,
disposals, and adjustments, were not independently approved and/or
verified to supporting documents. Our test of 10 technology items
removed from the equipment records during fiscal years 2014 and 2015,
disclosed 9 items, totaling $37,204, which did not have a required
disposal form submitted with proper approvals in accordance with current
practices.
• WCPS does not adequately reconcile physical inventory counts with the
detail inventory records and investigate the differences to determine the
disposition of any missing equipment. For example, for the June 2014
physical inventory one school reported 18 items totaling $20,940 on the
that school’s inventory sheets as missing, but no investigation was
performed. However, in March 2016, the items were investigated at our
request and found. For the June 2015 physical inventory, 73 items
totaling $62,266 recorded on inventory records were not found nor
investigated.
• WCPS did not always accurately maintain its equipment inventory records.
Our review disclosed that as of June 2015 there were 8,053 items listed
under the technology classification in the inventory records totaling $7.1
million, that either had missing information for cost, tag number, serial
number, and school number, or included duplicate serial numbers. For
example, 792 items did not have a cost associated with them and 2,864
items totaling $2.2 million did not have a tag number. Furthermore, we
19

--- Page 22 ---
noted 770 items without a serial number and 235 items with duplicate
serial numbers.
As a result of the deficiencies cited above, equipment could be lost or
misappropriated without detection. Similar conditions regarding the lack of a
formal policy governing all equipment records including posting of equipment
transactions was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that WCPS
a. establish and enforce comprehensive written policies and procedures to
govern the accounting and safeguarding of equipment (repeat);
b. investigate any differences found when reconciling physical inventory
counts with inventory records;
c. ensure postings to the inventory records (such as, disposals and
adjustments) are properly supported and approved (repeat); and
d. ensure inventory records are properly maintained by recording the cost,
tag number, the serial number, and delete any duplicate items.
Information Technology
Background
The WCPS Department of Technology maintains and administers the WCPS
computer network, computer operations and academic and financial
information system applications. WCPS operates a wide area network, with
Internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to
the computer resources located at the WCPS’ headquarters. The WCPS
network includes a perimeter network firewall to protect the WCPS network.
Finding 8
Controls over disaster recovery, backup of critical data, and monitoring the
security of a critical database were not sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over disaster recovery, backup of critical data, and monitoring the
security of a critical database were not sufficient.
• WCPS did not have a complete information technology Disaster Recovery
Plan (DRP) for recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for
example, a fire). The State of Maryland Information Technology (IT)
Disaster Recovery Guidelines provide best practices on the minimum
required elements needed for a DRP. WCPS’ DRP did not address several
20

--- Page 23 ---
of these minimum requirements. For example, the DRP did not identify an
alternate processing site nor include technical considerations for restoring
network connectivity. In addition, there was no documentation evidencing
that the DRP had been tested. Without a complete and tested DRP, a
disaster could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of
time) in restoring information systems operations above and beyond the
expected delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• Although full backups of the financial system’s database and application
were created daily, these backup were not stored offsite. Instead, these
backups were stored within the same building used to host the production
financial system’s database and application. Accordingly, if the facility
which houses the production system and backup data were destroyed by a
disaster, it is highly uncertain if all critical information could be recreated.
According to the Guidelines, backup media should be created and stored
off-site in a secure, environmentally controlled location.
• The WCPS student information system database, which includes student
demographics, attendance, schedules, and grades, was not configured to
log any database security activity including privileged operations. Best
practices identified in the State of Maryland Information Security Policy
require that information systems generate audit records for all security-
relevant events, including all security and system administrator accesses
and that procedures must be developed to routinely (for example daily or
weekly) review audit records for indications of unusual activities,
suspicious activities or suspected violations, and report findings to
appropriate officials for prompt resolution. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that WCPS
a. update its DRP so that it is in accordance with prescribed practices
identified in the State of Maryland Information Technology (IT) Disaster
Recovery Guidelines; (repeat)
b. periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the
documentation for future reference; (repeat)
c. store backup copies of its financial system database and application at a
secure, environmentally controlled off-site location; and
d. set the student information database to log all critical security related
events, regularly review these logs, document these reviews and retain
this documentation for future reference (repeat).
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 9
Firewall rules allowed unnecessary connections to numerous WCPS network
devices and nine publicly accessible servers were improperly located in the
internal network.
Analysis
Firewall rules allowed unnecessary connections to numerous WCPS network
devices and nine publicly accessible servers were improperly located in the
internal network.
• Firewall rules allowed insecure and unnecessary connections to numerous
network devices. For example, firewall rules allowed unnecessary Internet
access to numerous internal servers and workstations over numerous
ports. Best practices prescribed by the University System of Maryland’s IT
Security Standards state that firewalls should be configured to block all
services not required and disable unused ports, hide and prevent direct
accessing of trusted network addresses from untrusted networks, and
maintain comprehensive audit trails.
• Nine publicly accessible servers were located on the WCPS internal
network rather than isolating these servers in a separate network zone to
minimize security risks. These publicly accessible servers, if
compromised, could expose the internal network to attack from external
sources. Recommended security procedures, per the National Institute of
Standards and Technology Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy,
include placing publicly accessible servers in an external protected zone to
protect those servers as well as the entity’s internal network.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that WCPS
a. configure its firewalls to adequately secure connections from untrusted
third parties (including the Internet), and
b. relocate the nine aforementioned servers to a separate network zone
behind the firewall and configure the firewall to properly protect these
critical servers.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 10
The WCPS network was not secured against improper access from un-trusted
parties using its wireless connections.
Analysis
The WCPS network was not secured against improper access from un-trusted
parties using its wireless connections. Specifically, via the WCPS wireless
connections, guests could access all WCPS network devices over several ports
rather than being routed directly to the Internet and all students could access
all WCPS network devices via all ports. At 1 of 14 wireless locations, guests
could access the WCPS network without any authentication. Finally, because
of the weak wireless authentication method used and the lack of adequate
network level access controls, former faculty, staff and students had network
level access to the entire WCPS network over all ports.
Best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Security Policy
state that wireless networks should authenticate the identity of all users,
where necessary, and maintain restricted access to critical resources.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that WCPS
a. use network based, individual authentication for wireless connections
made by its faculty, staff and students;
b. limit authenticated wireless user access to critical network devices based
on each user’s needs; and
c. send all guest wireless users network traffic directly to the Internet.
Finding 11
Monitoring and controls over WCPS computers were not sufficient to ensure
that these computers were properly protected from malware.
Analysis
Monitoring and controls over WCPS computers were not sufficient to ensure
that these computers were properly protected from malware.
• Various workstations were configured with users having administrator
rights. Administrator rights should be provided only to network
administrators and select others since these rights are the highest
permission level that can be granted to users and it allows users to install
software and change configuration settings. Our test of workstations
assigned to faculty and staff disclosed that the users of 9 of 21
23

--- Page 26 ---
workstations had unnecessarily been provided administrative rights on
their workstations. As a result, if these workstations were infected with
malware, the malware would run with administrative rights and expose
these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights. In addition,
users with administrative rights could disable the malware protection
software on their workstations.
• WCPS did not have enterprise-wide management tools to monitor and
ensure that the malware protection software installed on its 5,260
workstations and servers was operational, up-to-date, and was using the
most current malware prevention signature files. Without the use of
enterprise-wide management tools, WCPS lacked assurance that its
workstations and servers were properly protected with up-to-date,
operational malware protection software. Specifically, 3 of 12 computers
tested had outdated versions of the malware protection software installed,
with 2 computers’ versions going back to 2011.
Best practices as prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Security
Policy state that agencies, at a minimum, must protect against malicious code
(viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by implementing (antivirus, antimalware)
solutions that, to the extent possible, include a capability for automatic
updates.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that WCPS
a. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to network
administrators and other select users requiring such rights; and
b. obtain and use enterprise-wide management tools to ensure that all
workstations and servers are configured with malware protection software
that is operating properly, up-to-date, and has current malware prevention
signature files.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
WCPS employs a staff of 93 employees to maintain its 14 schools and
administrative facility. According to the fiscal year 2017 Capital Improvement
Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic improvements
to WCPS facilities over the next six years were estimated to cost $54.7 million.
24

--- Page 27 ---
WCPS Contracts Were Generally Properly Procured and Expenditures for
Capital Projects Were Properly Supported
Our review of ten construction-related procurements during fiscal year 2013
totaling $35.7 million, for a school to be completed during fiscal year 2016,
disclosed that WCPS had used appropriate processes to procure nine of the
contracts. The remaining contract for Construction Manager services totaling
$3.3 million was commented upon earlier in Finding 4. All ten contracts
tested were approved by the Board. In addition, our test of 30 invoices
totaling $7.7 million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were
properly reviewed and approved and the amounts invoiced were in
accordance with the related contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
WCPS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. For example, WCPS
utilizes an energy management system in a majority of the buildings for facility
management to monitor and control energy usage (such as by using timed
and motion sensor lighting). In addition, WCPS offers an incentive program for
schools to use less energy where schools share in a percentage of the energy
cost savings. Furthermore, WCPS participates in a consortium with other
Eastern Shore entities to purchase energy at the best possible terms for the
members of the consortium. According to documents provided by WCPS from
the consortium (which we did not audit), WCPS saved over $640,000 through
energy cost avoidance from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2015.
Transportation Services
Background
WCPS has approximately 6,100 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. During fiscal year 2015, these students were
transported on 69 buses all of which were owned and operated by
contractors. According to WCPS audited financial statements, fiscal year
2015 transportation costs totaled $6 million, with $5.6 million (93 percent)
representing payments for contracted bus services. WCPS reported that 1.6
million route miles were traveled to transport students for the 2014-2015
school year. Payments to bus contractors consist of amounts for the
purchase of a bus (known as a per vehicle allotment or PVA, intended as
reimbursement for the cost of a bus and a flat rate for return on investment),
hourly reimbursements for drivers, a per mile maintenance fee, fuel costs,
and an administrative fee.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 12
WCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing procedures and did not
periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes to maximize
efficiency.
Analysis
WCPS bus routing procedures were not comprehensive, as they did not
address the planning, reviewing, and changing of existing routes.
Furthermore, they had not adopted formal individual bus capacities, ridership
goals, and student ride times. In addition, WCPS did not periodically perform
a system-wide analysis of its bus routes and related bus capacities to
determine if any existing routes could be modified to increase ridership.
Finally, WCPS purchased automated bus routing software in December 2013,
however as of our audit, WCPS had not finished implementing routing
software and was not yet able to use it to significantly enhance the efficiency
of its bus operations.
In practice, WCPS has had the bus drivers develop the existing routes and
make modifications as needed to accommodate changes in students’ school
assignments. Regarding the routing software, WCPS began entering student
and route information for the 2015-2016 school year. However, they were
not yet able to use it to plan routes or generate system reports, such as
number of students per route and bus capacity, to assess the efficiency of bus
routes. We were advised that WCPS had contracted with the routing software
vendor to help finish entering all the student and route information for the
2016-2017 school year.
Our analysis of student ridership disclosed that there may be opportunities to
increase ridership on individual bus routes. Our review of 86 regular routes
(62 buses) for the 2015-2016 school year disclosed that 29 routes (34
percent) were below 75 percent of computed capacity goals based on bus
sizes2. While we recognize that Worcester County includes large rural areas,
which can make it difficult to meet target capacities in all cases, our analysis
included all regular routes, so the buses cited were not isolated to only rural
regions of the county.
A similar condition regarding the lack of comprehensive bus routing
procedures to help plan more efficient services was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
2 School bus capacities are lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ depending
on the school level. For example, the capacity for high school and elementary school routes
is 48 and 61 students, respectively based on 72-passenger buses (manufacturer stated
capacity).
26

--- Page 29 ---
Recommendation 12
We recommend that WCPS take steps to determine if buses can be used
more efficiently. Specifically, we recommend that WCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written bus routing procedures that
include specific target bus capacities, ridership goals, and student ride
times (repeat); and
b. fully utilize the capabilities of its automated routing software and
periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes to maximize the
ridership on its bus routes.
Finding 13
WCPS had not established a formal methodology to calculate its PVA rate, and
payments to bus contractors included elements that did not consider market
conditions, actual costs, or available discounts.
Analysis
WCPS had not established a formal methodology to calculate its PVA and the
majority of the elements used to determine payment amounts to bus
contractors did not reflect market conditions, actual costs, or available
discounts. WCPS’ bus contracts are for an initial one year with annual
renewals generally granted over the 15-year useful life of a bus. Our review of
the contract payments disclosed the following conditions:
• WCPS pays contractors an annual PVA for each bus. In accordance with
past studies, the PVA is intended to reimburse the bus contractor for the
cost of the bus with depreciation payments spread over the useful life of
the bus, and provide an annual return on investment (ROI) for using the
bus contractor’s funds to buy the bus. However, WCPS did not use the
traditional methodology developed in the studies or any other formal
methodology to calculate its PVA. That methodology would have
considered or included various specific cost elements, such as the cost of
the bus, an allowed depreciation percentage, and ROI.
Instead, during each fiscal year from 2011 to 2016, WCPS either used the
previous year’s PVA (for which WCPS had no documented basis) or
increased the PVA. The determination of the annual PVA was purportedly
based on conversations with a local bus dealer and the local bus
contractor’s association regarding annual percentage bus cost and
desired rate increases, and after considering the PVA rates of neighboring
school systems. The proposed rates were then submitted to and approved
by the Board. The annual PVA for each bus placed in service increased
from $16,000 (fiscal year 2010) to $18,952 (fiscal year 2016).
27

--- Page 30 ---
• Since there was no stated ROI in the PVA rates submitted to the Board, or
any explanation or calculation of the ROI being paid, we calculated, using
the actual purchase prices of the buses, the imputed ROI rate paid for
years 2011 to 2016. We determined the ROI for those years ranged from
9.17 percent to 11.73 percent (9.5 percent was used in 2010, as
identified during our prior audit).
To estimate the financial impact of WCPS using PVA rates that were not
based on actual costs or investment rates over the life of a bus, we
calculated the PVA for the 69 primary buses being used to transport
students during fiscal year 2016, which included buses placed into service
dating back to 2002. Using cost information obtained from local bus
dealers, the prime interest rate3 (which ranged from 3.25 to 8.5 percent)
for the ROI, and WCPS’ 15-year estimated useful life in the traditional PVA
formula, we compared our PVA results to the WCPS PVA payments. This
comparison showed that the WCPS’ annual PVA payments per bus were
$2,633 to $8,758 higher than the payments would have been had actual
costs and the prevailing prime rate been used in the calculation. The
effect is that, over the 15-year life of these 69 buses that were in service
during fiscal year 2016, WCPS would pay out approximately $6.9 million
more than if actual costs and a reasonable ROI had been used ($2.7
million having already been paid and $4.2 million to be paid over the
remaining useful lives). This analysis does not include the effect of any
new bus purchases that were made after the beginning of the fiscal year
2016 school year (September 2015) and the lost interest income that
could have been earned by WCPS on the excess amounts paid.
• WCPS could not show that payments to reimburse bus contractors for
maintenance costs were reasonable. For example, for fiscal year 2015,
WCPS paid a $0.794 per-mile fee to reimburse the contractors for bus
maintenance costs, without determining the appropriateness of the rate
based on independently derived estimates. We determined that in fiscal
year 2015, WCPS paid approximately $1.3 million in maintenance costs to
contractors.
3 The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study
commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a
lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment rate; therefore, it is
deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation. In addition, a May 2010 MSDE PVA
Workgroup commented that the profit (or ROI) to be included in the PVA should reflect what
a reasonable investor or business person would expect on a long-term investment. As of
January 2017, current 10 and 30-year US Treasury Note rates, which could be reflective of a
reasonable long-term investment option, were 2.4 and 3 percent, respectively.
28

--- Page 31 ---
• WCPS could not show that payments to reimburse bus contractors for
administrative costs were reasonable. For example, for fiscal year 2015,
WCPS paid $3,500 per bus to reimburse the contractors for administrative
items such as bookkeeping, physicals, and trainings, without determining
the appropriateness of the rate based on independently derived
estimates. In fiscal year 2015, we estimated that WCPS paid
approximately $245,000 in administrative costs to contractors.
• WCPS did not exclude federal excise taxes when paying bus contractors
for fuel. WCPS pays contractors for fuel usage based on the American
Automobile Association’s average for diesel fuel prices, including taxes,
divided by the 5 miles-per-gallon (mpg) rate used by WCPS. However,
according to federal law, WCPS bus contractors are exempt from the
$0.244 per gallon excise tax on diesel fuel and are able to receive a credit
for federal fuel taxes paid when they file their income tax returns. As a
result, WCPS’ total fuel payments to bus contractors were approximately
$380,000 higher than necessary for fiscal years 2011 through 2015.4
Additionally, the mpg rate used by WCPS to pay bus contractors for fuel
usage was less than industry standards. Specifically, WCPS used a 5 mpg
rate when determining the fuel cost reimbursement paid per mile to WCPS
bus contractors, while the national average per the American School Bus
Council was 7 mpg. WCPS advised that it had used the 5 mpg rate since
2004, but could not provide any reason or support for its current use. If
WCPS had used the 7 mpg industry standard, we estimated that WCPS
payments to bus contractors would have been $1.5 million less during
fiscal years 2011 through 2015.
Similar conditions regarding the appropriateness of PVA and maintenance
amounts paid were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that WCPS
a. use actual costs and market investment rates as a basis for establishing
contractor rates for the annual PVA (repeat),
4 Subsequent to the completion of our audit fieldwork, Chapter 397, Laws of Maryland 2016,
effective July 1, 2016, exempted a county board of education or a school bus operator
under contract with a county board of education, from State motor fuel taxes. In addition,
the law authorized county boards of education and a school bus operator to claim refund of
State motor fuel taxes paid. Consequently, this exemption should be factored into future
payments.
29

--- Page 32 ---
b. develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for establishing
reasonable contractor rates for per mile maintenance costs and
administrative costs,
c. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments, and
d. document the basis for the mpg used in reimbursing bus contractors for
fuel usage and consider adopting the industry standard.
Finding 14
WCPS did not ensure the accuracy of contractor reported manifest mileage,
which was used to compute certain payments to bus contractors.
Analysis
WCPS did verify the accuracy of contractor reported mileage. Specifically, the
mileage reported on the monthly manifests submitted by each bus driver and
used by WCPS to calculate the fuel and maintenance components of the
contractor's monthly pay was not compared to available mileage from
mapping software applications. Payments for mileage reimbursements
totaled approximately $2.3 million in fiscal year 2015.
Our test of September 2015 manifests for 10 bus routes disclosed that for 6
manifests, the amount of miles reported by the contractor exceeded the
actual route miles by a total of 50 miles per day, with 25 of those miles
applicable to 1 manifest. We calculated the actual route miles using a
mapping application available on the internet and determined that since the
reported mileage remained constant throughout the year, WCPS potentially
overpaid for mileage for these 6 routes by a total of $13,300 in fiscal year
2016.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that WCPS
a. independently verify bus contractor’s manifests to ensure that the
payments to the contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services
provided;
b. document the verification process; and
c. review past payments and pursue discrepancies, including those we
identified.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Finding 15
Internal controls over payments to bus contractors were not adequate, as
there was no independent review and approval of payment calculations.
Analysis
Payments to contractors for transportation services were not independently
reviewed to ensure propriety. Specifically, a WCPS transportation
management official was responsible for entering data, including route miles,
time, PVA, and fuel adjustments for each of the contractor-owned buses into a
Transportation Department system used to calculate the monthly payments.
However, the system entries and payment file amounts were not verified to
supporting documentation by independent supervisory personnel. As a result,
there was a lack of assurance that the bus contractor payments that totaled
$5.6 million during fiscal year 2015 were accurate, although our tests did not
disclose any errors.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that WCPS require that an employee independent of the
payment processing verify the accuracy and propriety of contractor payments
by performing a documented comparison of the amounts paid to supporting
documentation.
We advised WCPS how to accomplish the necessary segregation of duties
using existing personnel.
Food Services
Background
WCPS has 12 cooking cafeterias at its 14 schools. Food and related supplies
are received and stored at each school. In fiscal year 2015, WCPS had 62
food service positions (consisting of 59 cafeteria positions and 3
administrative positions). According to the audited financial statements, food
service operating expenditures ($2,637,455) exceeded revenues
($2,560,288) for fiscal year 2015 by $77,167. Food service revenues
exceeded operating expenditures for three of the last five years with an
average net loss of $10,261 over the 5-year period (essentially breaking
even).
31

--- Page 34 ---
Finding 16
WCPS had not established adequate accountability and control over school
cafeteria cash receipts.
Analysis
WCPS had not established adequate accountability and control over school
cafeteria cashiers, the cash register closeout and deposit processes, and
voided transactions.
• WCPS assigned cashiers access to cash registers on the automated cash
register system by location using group login user accounts without
individual passwords. We were advised by WCPS that the system was set
up by the software vendor to enable all the employees working a given day
access to any register, because staff assignments were subject to change.
As a result, responsibility was not affixed to individual employees on the
system for specific registers. During fiscal year 2015, there were as many
as 56 cashiers and food service managers who had access to the
registers.
• The amount of cash counted during the register closeout process at the
end of the business day was not sufficiently documented or subject to
supervisory review. Specifically, only 4 of the 12 schools documented the
closeout process using a closing sheet. Furthermore, the closing sheets
were only signed by the cashier. School food service managers did not
participate in the closeout process (unless they were filling in as a cashier)
or sign the closing sheet to document their approval of the amount of cash
counted, and to be subsequently deposited.
• Cashiers in school cafeterias could void transactions on the automated
cash register system at the time of sale without independent supervisory
review and approval of the transaction on the system or post-basis review
of voided transactions. While the system was capable of generating
reports of voided transactions, these reports were not generated or
analyzed for unusual activity such as cashiers with high volumes of voids
that may warrant further investigation or corrective actions.
• Although we were advised by WCPS that an independent Central Office
employee used cash register system sales activity reports to verify that the
daily collections per school agreed to the amounts deposited per the
validated deposit tickets received from the bank, this verification was not
documented.
32

--- Page 35 ---
According to WCPS records, food service revenues from the sale of meals
totaled approximately $607,000 in fiscal year 2015 and for the same period
over 5,700 voids, totaling $28,000 were processed.
Recommendation 16
We recommend WCPS require
a. cafeteria cashiers be assigned cash register system access using
individual logon IDs and passwords or implement an appropriate process
to establish the necessary accountability,
b. both the cafeteria cashier and manager (or another employee if the
manager is performing as a cashier) sign the closing sheet for each cash
register to document their verification and agreement of the cash receipts
counted,
c. independent supervisory review of voided transactions for propriety, and
d. documented independent deposit verifications.
School Board Operations
Background
The Worcester County Board of Education (the Board) is composed of seven
elected members and three non-voting student representatives. In its
oversight responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public
accounting firm for independent audits of the WCPS financial statements and
federal programs. The Board has not established any special committees.
WCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In July 2012 the Board adopted a revised detailed ethics policy that conforms
to State law and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial
disclosure and was approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of
this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all WCPS employees.
WCPS established an Ethics Panel in 2010 to interpret ethics policies, provide
advice on policy implementation, and review and rule on any reported
complaints of ethics violations. We did note that the terms of the five
members of the panel who were appointed by the Board Chairman in 2010
had expired as of March 2016, but the members have continued to serve.
According to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are
required to be filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the
Superintendent, and a number of other administrators (Assistant
Superintendents, Chief Financial Officer, Facilities Planner, and
Transportation Supervisor) by April 30th of each year and within 60 days after
leaving office.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 17
Financial disclosure statements were not always filed or filed timely, as
required.
Analysis
The financial disclosure reporting requirement of WCPS’ ethics policy was not
always complied with. Our review of the statement submissions during
calendar years 2013 to 2015, disclosed the following conditions:
• Two of 15 employees required to file a statement for calendar year 2014
did not file the required statement. These two employees were Board
members whose terms ended in December 2014, one of whom also did
not file the required form for 2013 and was a bus contractor, to whom
WCPS paid $115,139 and $117,131 in fiscal years 2013 and 2014,
respectively. In our prior report, we also commented on the failure to file a
disclosure statement by the Board member/bus contractor.
• The remaining 13 employees, filed the required calendar year 2014
statements 7.5 months late. Specifically, at the start of our audit field
work in October 2015, no calendar year 2014 statements had been filed,
but subsequently, all 13 employees filed their calendar year 2015
statements in December 2015, indicating that they were also for the
calendar year 2014 period.
WCPS may be unaware of conflicts of interest issues if employees do not file
required disclosure statements timely.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that WCPS enforce its ethics policy to ensure that all required
disclosure statements are filed as required.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
WCPS obtains its healthcare services in collaboration with the Worcester
County Government (WCG) and four other smaller County Government
agencies. WCPS relies on WCG for procuring the services of a third-party
administrator (TPA) for health care claims processing services for employee
and retiree medical (including vision), dental, and prescription coverage, and
for stop-loss insurance coverage. Beginning in fiscal year 2015, WCG
changed from a fully-insured plan to a self-insured plan for its employee and
34

--- Page 37 ---
retiree healthcare up to a certain claim amount, which was $250,000 per
plan participant for plan year 2015. Furthermore, at that time, the stop-loss
insurance claim amount was increased from claims exceeding $100,000 to
$250,000.
In November 2015, WCPS instituted a process in conjunction with open
enrollment for plan year 2016 for its TPA to verify the propriety of all
individuals that were covered or were to be added as a dependent under the
systems’ health care plans. WCPS required all employees and retirees with
dependents to submit documentation (such as birth certificates) to prove that
each individual covered or to be added as a dependent was eligible under the
criteria defined by WCPS’ health care plan. Although no statistics were
maintained, we were advised by WCPS that as of March 2016 the verification
process was mostly complete and that they had removed a number of
ineligible dependents from the plans. WCPS plans to continue this verification
process as part of its enrollment procedures for future plan years.
Since fiscal year 2015, the TPA bills WCPS monthly subscription charges
based on the number of participants and their medical coverage and medical
providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of WCPS. WCPS
pays its TPA administrative fees for these services. In a year-end settlement
process, which aggregates all six participating agencies together, the TPA nets
the amount of medical claims they paid against the monthly subscription
charges billed to and paid by each agency to determine any excess amount
due from or to be reimbursed. According to WCPS’s financial records for the
plan year ended June 30, 2015, WCPS healthcare expenditures totaled $16
million, including administrative fees of $802,000 and stop loss insurance
premiums of $667,000.
Finding 18
WCPS had not pursued the competitive procurement of its healthcare
contracts for administrative services and stop-loss coverage since 1967 and
did not receive copies or obtain Board approval of the annual agreements.
Analysis
The TPA and stop-loss insurance contracts used by WCPS had not been
competitively since 1967 and the Board had not approved the annual
agreements. Furthermore, WCPS had not requested or received copies of the
annual administrator agreements and stop-loss agreements for fiscal years
2012 through 2016. The annual agreements, which were signed by a WCG
representative, were obtained by WCPS at our request from WCG
management. Furthermore, WCPS had not executed a memorandum of
35

--- Page 38 ---
understanding with WCG based on WCPS’ reliance of WCG to negotiate and
procure its health services, which establishes the responsibilities and
authorities of each party.
The WCPS’ TPA and stop-loss insurer contracts have been annually renewed
since being awarded for plan year 1967. Although WCPS employees
represent 67 percent of the combined participants from all six agencies in the
overall plan and WCPS staff attends annual renewal meetings, we were
advised that the WCG makes the final decisions on changes to the plan and
approves the annual agreements.
The WCG decision to change from a fully insured to a self-insured health plan
resulted in an immediate decrease in 2015 administrative fees and stop-loss
premium rates. For example, administrative fees for medical plans decreased
from $85.58 to $52.93 per participant for plan year 2015. However, such
rates were still significantly higher than what a consortium of neighboring
school systems paid the same vender for TPA administrative fees ($32.89) for
the same plan year.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that WCPS
a. work with WCG to competitively procure healthcare services (that is, the
third-party administrator and stop-loss coverage) or consider the cost
benefits of soliciting such services independent from WCG,
b. execute a memorandum of understanding with WCG establishing the
responsibilities and authority of each party regarding health care services,
and
c. ensure all healthcare contracts are approved by the Board and retained.
Finding 19
WCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and retiree health care claims
paid, and did not verify that stop-loss insurance was correctly applied and
plan administrative fees were properly charged.
Analysis
WCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that amounts paid to the TPA
were proper. Our review of WCPS’ procedures and controls over payments for
medical claims and administrative fees disclosed the following conditions:
• WCPS did not audit the propriety of the medical claims paid on its behalf
by the TPA to ensure that the services were actually provided, covered by
the health plans, appropriately priced, and accurately reported on the
36

--- Page 39 ---
year-end settlement. Furthermore, WCPS did not receive detailed claims
data or year-end settlement data from the TPA or WCG to be used to verify
the propriety of the aforementioned items and the correctness of the year-
end settlement.
• WCPS did not verify that claims exceeding the stop-loss limit were
reimbursed by the TPA under the stop-loss coverage. WCPS relies on the
administrator who notifies WCG of any payments above the stop-loss limit.
The amount computed by the administrator to be in excess of the stop loss
amount reduces the expenditure amount for which WCPS is responsible.
Since the TPA only provides WCG with a year-end settlement that
aggregates all six participating agencies and WCPS did not receive
detailed documentation of all claims paid or year-end settlement data,
WCPS lacks assurance that it did not pay claims that should have been
covered by the stop-loss insurance. According to the WCPS records, WCPS
paid $667,000 for stop-loss coverage and all agencies received $112,000
for plan year 2015 claims that exceeded the stop loss limit.
• WCPS did not compare the number of plan participants billed against its
own payroll records to ensure that fees and premiums paid by WCPS were
for enrolled plan participants. Additionally, the monthly rates charged for
the various coverage categories (medical, vision, dental, and prescription
drug) and stop-loss insurance were not verified for agreement with the
related contracts, as copies of the contracts for the related plan years
were not provided to or maintained by WCPS.
The State Office of Personnel Services and Benefits administers self-insured
health plans for state employees, and contracts for comprehensive reviews of
claims paid by plan administrators (TPAs). According to the Office, improper
payments identified from these reviews have consistently exceeded the cost
of the reviews.
Recommendation 19
We recommend that WCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid
for health insurance and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend WCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and ensure
audits of the claims paid by the TPA are conducted;
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer (in this case the TPA); and
c. compare its records of enrolled employees, retirees, and dependents to
invoices from the TPA and determine the propriety of all fees and
premiums billed.
37

--- Page 40 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Worcester County
Public Schools (WCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the WCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the WCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of WCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on WCPS dated November 1, 2010, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the WCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by WCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at WCPS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
appropriate). Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
38

--- Page 41 ---
records, and observations of WCPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2014 through
October 31, 2015. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on
auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits WCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the WCPS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
WCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other findings were
communicated to WCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently,
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
We conducted our fieldwork from October 2015 to June 2016. The WCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an Appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise WCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
39

--- Page 43 ---
Worcester County Public Schools
Response to the
Draft Legislative Audit Report
May 17, 2017
The WCBOE agrees with the background
information included in the audit report.
Recommendation 1 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. immediately record and restrictively a. The Worcester County Board of
endorse all checks (repeat), Education (WCBOE) will restrictively
endorse all checks immediately upon
receipt in the Finance Office. The
Finance Office enters check deposits
into our cash receipts system and
deposits are also recorded on an
EXCEL spreadsheet. WCBOE will
purchase additional endorsement
stamps for other departments routinely
receiving checks to ensure checks can
be immediately endorsed by that
department. Departments receiving
checks are currently documenting
those checks received utilizing various
methods. The Finance Office will
develop a standard cash receipt log for
all departments to use to document
checks received.
b. All checks will be adequately secured
b. adequately secure checks prior to deposit, prior to deposit.
and
c. Cash receipts have always been posted
c. independently verify that all collections daily to both the K12 system and an
were subsequently deposited (repeat). EXCEL spreadsheet when received in
the Finance Office. An employee

--- Page 44 ---
independent of the cash receipts
process will verify that all recorded
receipts are deposited. The Finance
Office will take the additional step of
performing random reviews of the
new cash receipt log to verify all
checks received by other departments
are deposited.
Recommendation 2 Response:
We recommend that WCPS strengthen its
controls over the automated procurement and
accounts payable system and processes.
Specifically, we recommend that WCPS take
appropriate action to
a. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the
a. The WCBOE began implementing a
ability of users to perform incompatible
new finance/payroll and human
duties (repeat); resources system in FY14/15. Full
implementation of all modules is still
ongoing. Part of this ongoing
implementation is the assignment of
differing levels of user access. The
WCBOE will continue to refine the
system in this area. The WCBOE will
consider periodically reviewing user
transaction logs. It should also be
noted that the WCBOE is a smaller
school system with several of our staff
members in the Finance/Payroll office
being required to perform multiple
duties and responsibilities. WCBOE
does have an independent audit of our
annual financial statements performed
each year by an independent public
accounting firm and have always
received an unqualified opinion (the
highest opinion possible) on this audit.
A review of our internal controls is
b. restrict access to the automated included in this annual audit.
procurement and accounts payable system
b. As outlined above, WCBOE will
to individuals whose job duties require
continue to review user access based
such access (repeat);
on system capabilities and the fact that
WCBOE is a smaller school system
with several of our Finance/Payroll

--- Page 45 ---
staff members being required to
perform multiple duties and
responsibilities. The WCBOE will
consider periodically reviewing user
transaction logs.
c. establish independent approval c. The WCBOE has various controls
currently in place over purchasing and
requirements for critical purchasing and
accounts payable. The Chief Financial
accounts payable transactions, and
Officer or Finance Manager’s
changes to user capabilities; and
approval is required prior to the
payment of invoices. The WCBOE
will consider reviewing on a test basis
supporting documentation for items on
the check register. There is a
separation of duties between
employees who print checks and
employees who sign checks. Changes
in user access are currently discussed
prior to implementing any changes.
d. ensure that the independent supervisory
d. Supporting documentation will be
approval of critical transactions includes included and independently reviewed
the review applicable supporting prior to approving check requests and
documents, as appropriate. purchase orders. The WCBOE will
consider reviewing on a test basis
supporting documentation for items on
the check register.
Recommendation 3 Response:
We recommend WCPS amend its existing
procurement policies to require that:
a-c:
a. contract awards resulting from the use of
The WCBOE has a Board adopted purchasing
non-competitive procurement methods be
policy. Staff will review the existing policy
reported and approved by the Board when based on these recommendations. Any
the awards exceed $25,000 (repeat), potential changes identified as a result of this
b. documented justifications be prepared for review (if any) will be submitted to our Board
for their consideration and approval.
all sole-source awards (repeat), and
c. formal written documents be executed
between the parties for contracts over a
stated monetary value.
Recommendation 4 Response:
We recommend WCPS
a. Prior to discussions during this audit,
a. use eMaryland Marketplace for contract

--- Page 46 ---
procurement solicitations or awards as the WCBOE was not aware of this
required by State law; State requirement. The WCBOE is
now posting procurement solicitations
on eMaryland Marketplace.
b. revise its procurement process for
b. The WCBOE has historically utilized
contracts for construction management
COMAR 23.03.03.09 (Quality Based
services to require that awards be made to
Selection) when preparing requests for
the lowest responsible bidder;
Proposals for Architectural
/Engineering Services and
Construction Management Agency
services for school construction
projects. The WCBOE will include
price as a factor when ranking future
proposals for construction
management services.
c. before deciding to participate in an ICPA, c-d:
prepare written documentation of the The WCBOE has a Board adopted
purchasing policy. Staff will review the
benefits of utilizing the ICPA for Board
existing policy based on these
review;
recommendations. Any potential changes
d. procure contracts/purchases of over
identified as a result of this review (if any)
$25,000 through a competitive bidding will be submitted to our Board for their
process, or document the justification of consideration and approval. The WCBOE
will add a procedure requiring the benefits
any sole source procurements (repeat);
of using an ICPA be documented.
and
e. execute written contracts for services e. All future contracts will be written in
procured expected to exceed $25,000 that terms allowing easier evaluation of
service and appropriateness of the rates
includes sufficient terms to evaluate the
billed.
quality of services and appropriateness of
the rates billed.
Recommendation 5 Response:
We recommend that WCPS enhance its CPC
program. Specifically, we recommend that
WCPS
a. The WCBOE currently requires all
a. develop a comprehensive CPC manual
employees receiving a purchase card
subject to Board approval, which includes
to sign a purchase card-holder
acceptable uses of the card;
agreement. This agreement outlines
the responsibilities of the card-holder.
The WCBOE staff will review the

--- Page 47 ---
necessity of expanding the current
agreement and the possibility of
b. properly segregate the CPC functions of developing a manual.
card issuance, card holding, card activity
review, and cancellation; and
b. The WCBOE will further segregate
the purchase card functions.
c. incorporate the use of Level-3 data as part
of the monthly review by supervisors,
c. The WCBOE finance office will
when available, and ensure all card
receive and review the level 3 data
transactions are properly supported. monthly.
We advised WCPS how to accomplish the
necessary segregation of duties using existing
personnel.
Recommendation 6 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. perform a periodic documented a. The WCBOE began implementing a
new finance/payroll and human
independent review of user capabilities to
resources system in FY14/15. Full
ensure access is properly granted,
implementation of all modules is still
ongoing. Part of this ongoing
implementation is the assignment of
differing levels of user access. The
WCBOE will continue to refine the
system in this area and evaluate user
capabilities based on the fact that we
are a smaller school system with
several of our Finance/Payroll staff
members having multiple duties and
responsibilities. The WCBOE will
b. limit access of critical functions to those
consider adding periodic reviews of
employees who require such capabilities
user access reports.
to perform their assigned job duties,
b. As outlined above, WCBOE will
continue to review user access based
on system capabilities and the fact that
WCBOE is a smaller school system
with several of our Finance/Payroll
staff members being required to
perform multiple duties and
c. eliminate access to and segregate
responsibilities. The WCBOE will
incompatible system functions (repeat),
consider adding periodic reviews of
and
user access reports.

--- Page 48 ---
c. As outlined above, WCBOE will
continue to review user access based
on system capabilities and the fact that
WCBOE is a smaller school system
with several of our Finance/Payroll
staff members being required to
d. perform a documented independent
perform multiple duties and
review of critical personnel and payroll
responsibilities. The WCBOE will
transactions processed using supporting
consider adding periodic reviews of
documentation (repeat). user access reports.
d. Payroll transactions will be
independently reviewed using
supporting documentation.
Recommendation 7 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. establish and enforce comprehensive a. WCBOE follows procedures regarding
written policies and procedures to govern equipment as outlined in our
the accounting and safeguarding of Accounting Procedures Manual
section 6. Those procedures include
equipment (repeat);
adding items with a cost of $1,000 or
more to our inventory listing.
Sensitive items costing less than
$1,000 (iPads, laptops, etc.) are also
added to our inventory listing. These
items are tagged. The inventory list is
reviewed and updated regularly. An
auction is held annually or as
necessary to sell obsolete inventory.
b. investigate any differences found when The inventory listing is then updated
to reflect those items sold. The
reconciling physical inventory counts with
WCBOE will add process of tagging
inventory records;
assets, reporting of stolen assets, and
the approval of disposal of assets to
c. ensure postings to the inventory records
existing procedures included in our
(such as, disposals and adjustments) are
accounting manual.
properly supported and approved (repeat);
and b. As staff time is available, periodic
physical inventories will be
d. ensure inventory records are properly performed. Any differences will be
maintained by recording the cost, tag investigated.
number, the serial number, and delete any
c. The WCBOE will ensure inventory
duplicate items.
records are properly supported and
approved.

--- Page 49 ---
d. The WCOBE will work to ensure
inventory records are properly
maintained by recording the cost, tag
number, serial number, and deleting
any duplicate items. The WCBOE will
also research the feasibility of
purchasing and implementing an asset
management system to replace the
current system of maintaining our
inventory on an EXCEL spreadsheet.
Recommendation 8 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. update its DRP so that it is in accordance a. The WCBOE is currently in the
with prescribed practices identified in the process of updating our DRP to be in
State of Maryland Information accordance with prescribed practices
identified in the State of Maryland
Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery
Information Technology (IT) Disaster
Guidelines; (repeat)
Recovery Guidelines.
b. periodically test the DRP, document the
b. The updated DRP will be periodically
testing, and retain the documentation for
tested. This testing will be
future reference; (repeat) documented and the documentation
will be retained for future reference.
c. store backup copies of its financial system c. Backup copies of the financial system
database and application at a secure, database and applications will be
stored at a secure, environmentally
environmentally controlled off-site
controlled off-site location.
location; and
d. set the student information database to log
d. The WCBOE is working with our
all critical security related events, application vendor to explore the
regularly review these logs, document feasibility of implementing these
these reviews and retain this recommended changes.
documentation for future reference
(repeat).
Recommendation 9 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. configure its firewalls to adequately a. The WCBOE is working with a
secure connections from untrusted third vendor to implement these changes as
parties (including the Internet), and recommended.

--- Page 50 ---
b. relocate the nine aforementioned servers b. The WCBOE is working with our
to a separate network zone behind the product vendor to implement these
changes as recommended.
firewall and configure the firewall to
properly protect these critical servers.
Recommendation 10 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. use network based, individual a. The WCBOE continues to implement
authentication for wireless connections improved wireless authentication
made by its faculty, staff and students; methods and captive portal.
b. The WCBOE is working to limit access
b. limit authenticated wireless user access to
to critical network devices by isolating
critical network devices based on each
staff and student network connections.
user’s needs; and
c. The WCBOE has improved wireless
c. send all guest wireless users network security to segment guest wireless and
traffic directly to the Internet. to direct user traffic directly to the
internet.
Recommendation 11 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. ensure that administrative rights on a. The WCBOE has limited
workstations are restricted to network administrative access and rights on a
administrators and other select users local machine to those select users in
the technology area who are required
requiring such rights; and
to manage the machines.
b. obtain and use enterprise-wide
b. The WCBOE is continuing the
management tools to ensure that all
purchase of and rollout of industry
workstations and servers are configured
standard enterprise-wide management
with malware protection software that is tools to verify proper operation and
operating properly, up-to-date, and has system updates including malware
current malware prevention signature protection software.
files.
Recommendation 12 Response:
We recommend that WCPS take steps to
determine if buses can be used more
efficiently. Specifically, we recommend that
WCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written a. The WCBOE is working on a
bus routing procedures that include “best practices” handbook which
specific target bus capacities, ridership will include optimal ride times for
students, target capacities, and

--- Page 51 ---
goals, and student ride times (repeat); and ridership goals.
b. The WCBOE’s transportation staff
is limited to 3 staff members. This
b. fully utilize the capabilities of its
limited staffing has made it
automated routing software and
extremely difficult to input all
periodically perform a system-wide
routes and other related
analysis of bus routes to maximize the
information into the automated
ridership on its bus routes.
routing system. The WCOBE will
continue to work toward full
implementation of the automated
routing system. Once the system is
fully implemented, the WCBOE
will consider doing a periodic
review of all bus routes to
maximize the ridership on its bus
routes.
Recommendation 13 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. use actual costs and market investment a. The WCBOE reviews and approves bus
rates as a basis for establishing contractor contractor rates as part of the annual
rates for the annual PVA (repeat), budget process. Documentation including
proposed rates, approved rates, and
comparison of contractor rates in other
LEA’s is shared with the Board of
Education as part of this process. Once
approved by our Board, final proposed
contractor PVA rates are reviewed and
approved by our County Commissioners,
An increase in PVA rate has not been
requested in the past several years. The
WCBOE will consider using market rates
and actual costs in determining PVA
rates. It should be noted that the MSDE
report “Per Vehicle Allowance
Workgroup Report, 2010” concluded that
how to “fairly and equitably determine
compensation to school bus
contractors…is the choice of the local
jurisdiction as each best knows its own
unique transportation needs.”
b. develop supportable cost estimates as the b. The WCBOE reviews and approves bus
basis for establishing reasonable contractor rates as part of the annual

--- Page 52 ---
contractor rates for per mile maintenance budget process. Documentation including
costs and administrative costs, proposed rates, approved rates, and
comparison of contractor rates in other
LEA’s is shared with the Board of
Education as part of this process. Once
approved by our Board, final proposed
contractor mileage maintenance rates and
administrative costs are reviewed and
approved by our County Commissioners;
The WCBOE will consider using market
c. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor rates and actual costs in determining per
payments, and mile maintenance rates and administrative
fees.
c. The WCBOE will consider this
d. document the basis for the mpg used in
recommendation of excluding the fuel
reimbursing bus contractors for fuel usage
excise taxes from contractor payments
and consider adopting the industry
during the next budget cycle.
standard.
d. The WCBOE reviews and approves bus
contractor rates as part of the annual
budget process. Documentation including
proposed rates, approved rates, and
comparison of contractor rates in other
LEA’s is shared with the Board of
Education as part of this process. Once
approved by our Board, final proposed
contractor fuel usage mileage rates are
reviewed and approved by our County
Commissioners. The WCBOE will
consider using market rates and actual
costs in determining per mile fuel usage
rates and consider adopting the industry
standard.
Recommendation 14 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. independently verify bus contractor’s a. The WCBOE transportation office
manifests to ensure that the payments to does currently verify routes by
the contractors accurately reflect the observation and limited use of the
routing software. As outlined in our
actual bus services provided;
response to recommendation 12, it is
our intent to fully implement the
routing software package as staff and
budget resources allow. Once fully
implemented, the automated routing

--- Page 53 ---
system will be utilized to verify bus
contractor manifests.
b. document the verification process; and
b. The WCBOE Transportation office
intends to develop a “best practices”
document that will include outlining
the verification process.
c. review past payments and pursue
c. The WCBOE will continue to review
discrepancies, including those we past payments and research
identified. discrepancies identified during this
audit. Initial research indicates some
of the additional mileage was related
to the nature of special needs routes
and the requirement for door side
stops.
Recommendation 15 Response:
We recommend that WCPS require that an The WCBOE transportation office will amend
existing processes and reallocate staff
employee independent of the payment
responsibilities to address this
processing verify the accuracy and propriety
recommendation.
of contractor payments by performing a
documented comparison of the amounts paid
to supporting documentation.
We advised WCPS how to accomplish the
necessary segregation of duties using existing
personnel
Recommendation 16 Response:
We recommend WCPS require
a. cafeteria cashiers be assigned cash register a. The WCBOE will research our current
system access using individual logon IDs POS system capabilities and options
and passwords or implement an to assess if this recommendation can
be implemented efficiently and
appropriate process to establish the
effectively.
necessary accountability,
b. A line for verification signature will
b. both the cafeteria cashier and manager (or
be added to the existing closing
another employee if the manager is
document to indicate approval and
performing as a cashier) sign the closing verification of cash receipts counted.
sheet for each cash register to document
their verification and agreement of the
cash receipts counted,
c. Voids will be monitored though the
c. independent supervisory review of voided

--- Page 54 ---
transactions for propriety, and POS system at the Central Office
level.
d. documented independent deposit
d. Verification of deposits by business
verifications.
office staff will be documented.
Recommendation 17 Response:
We recommend that WCPS enforce its ethics The WCBOE agrees to actively enforce its
policy to ensure that all required disclosure ethics policy to ensure all required disclosure
statements are filed as required. statements are filed as required.
Recommendation 18 Response:
We recommend that WCPS
a. work with WCG to competitively procure a-c:
healthcare services (that is, the third-party The WCBOE participates with our County
administrator and stop-loss coverage) or government in providing health insurance for
consider the cost benefits of soliciting our employees. The WCBOE participates in a
County led health benefits committee that
such services independent from WCG,
meets periodically throughout the year. The
b. execute a memorandum of understanding
WCBOE will review these recommendations
with WCG establishing the
with the health benefits committee at our next
responsibilities and authority of each party
meeting. Copies of the health contracts will
regarding health care services, and
be obtained, reviewed and retained by the
c. ensure all healthcare contracts are WCBOE.
approved by the Board and retained.
Recommendation 19 Response:
We recommend that WCPS establish
procedures to verify the amounts paid for a-c:
health insurance and TPA service fees. The WCBOE participates with our County
Specifically, we recommend WCPS government in providing health insurance for
a. obtain documentation to support actual our employees. The WCBOE participates in a
County led health benefits committee that
claim payments, and ensure audits of the
meets periodically throughout the year. The
claims paid by the TPA are conducted;
WCBOE will review these recommendations
b. use detailed claims payment data to
with the health benefits committee at our next
ensure that claims paid above the stop-
meeting scheduled later this year. The
loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer (in
WCBOE will consider comparing invoices to
this case the TPA); and payroll records.
c. compare its records of enrolled
employees, retirees, and dependents to
invoices from the TPA and determine the
propriety of all fees and premiums billed.

--- Page 55 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Senior Auditors
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Walter L. Horan IV
Lauren E. McLain, CPA
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors