Title: Cecil County Public Schools
Date: 09/10/2009
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d35cc9d72404c150a08
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:05:25.583587
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Cecil County Public Schools
July 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 6
External Audits 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Revenue and Billing Cycle
∗ Finding 1 – There was no independent verification that all recorded 9
collections were subsequently deposited.
Federal Funds 9
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
∗ Finding 2 – CCPS had not established adequate internal controls over 11
its automated accounts payable functions.
Finding 3 – CCPS did not use the methodology described in the 12
request for proposal when evaluating the bids for certain
professional services.
Finding 4 – CCPS did not assess the benefits of using 13
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA)
as required by law, nor in most cases did it establish that the
ICPA’s were awarded through a competitive procurement process.
Human Resources and Payroll
∗ Finding 5 – Human resources and payroll system user capabilities 14
were not adequately monitored and restricted. In addition,
independent reviews of personnel and payroll transactions were
not performed.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability
∗ Finding 6 – CCPS had not established adequate controls over its 16
automated equipment inventory records as system entries were
not independently verified and access to the records was not
adequately restricted.
Information Technology
∗ Finding 7 – Database and server controls were not sufficient, 18
as security activity was not logged.
∗ Finding 8 – CCPS did not have a Disaster Recovery Plan 18
for recovering computer operations.
Finding 9 – The CCPS computer network was not adequately secured, 19
as the internal network could be exposed to attack from external
sources and reports of attacks from the CCPS intrusion detection
prevention system were either not generated or when generated
not reviewed.
Finding 10 – Workstations and servers were not adequately protected 20
against malware.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 11 – CCPS executed three 20-year power-purchasing 22
agreements with a solar provider without a competitive process
or a formal financial analysis, and without evidence it had fully
resolved the risk concerns of its legal counsel.
Transportation Services
Finding 12 – CCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing 25
procedures and did not periodically perform a system-wide
analysis of bus routes and related bus capacities to maximize
the efficiency of its bus routes and address bus routes operating
below ridership capacity goals.
∗ Finding 13 – Certain elements used to determine payments to bus 26
contractors did not reflect market conditions, use actual costs, or
consider available fuel credits, resulting in higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
∗ Finding 14 – There was no documented independent review and 28
approval of the monthly payments for contractor bus operating
costs, and user access to the automated system used to calculate
bus payments was not adequately restricted.
Food Services 29
School Board Operations 30
Other Financial Controls 30
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 32
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Cecil County Public Schools (CCPS) ranks
14th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2015 full-time student enrollment was 15,681 students. CCPS
has 30 schools, consisting of 17 elementary, 6 middle schools, 5 high
schools, a vocational school, and alternative school.
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2016 revenues
were $222 million and expenditures were $219 million. The largest
expenditure category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which
accounted for 72 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2016.
According to MSDE records, during the 2014-2015 school year, CCPS had
2,071 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 1,496 instructional
and 575 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Cecil
County government provide the vast majority of CCPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with CCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Cecil County government exercises authority over the CCPS
primarily through the review and approval of CCPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
External Audits
CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is
referred to as a Single Audit of CCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audits and
Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2014, 2015, and 2016, and examined the
related work papers for fiscal year 2015, which were the latest available at
the time we performed our audit field work.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the CCPS’ financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit of federal grants, and the risks and scope of our audit in
certain areas, we relied on the results of the independent audits to reduce the
scope of our audit work related to certain revenues, accounts receivable,
federal grant activity, and food service inventory.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 14 of the 26
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated September 10, 2009.
We determined that CCPS satisfactorily addressed 6 of those findings, with
the remaining 8 findings repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Cecil County Public Schools (CCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Cecil County, the State, and the federal government. According
to the CCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all sources totaled
$222 million during fiscal year 2016. In addition, schools collect funds for
other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and school publications.
Because they are not considered school revenue, these school activity funds
are accounted for separately by each school and reported in summary in the
audited financial statements. Although this revenue is raised through
student–related activities, CCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard these
funds. For fiscal year 2016, school activity fund collections totaled $2.5
million and the June 30, 2016 balance was $1.6 million.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the CCPS financial statements and the objectives
of our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we reduced the scope of
our audit work related to State and local government revenues received via
wire transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Reviews of School Activity Funds
CCPS’ finance staff reviews reconciliations of school activity funds that are
prepared by the schools on a monthly basis. The finance staff also visits each
school annually and performs on-sight review procedures to assess
compliance with CCPS’ policies over school activity funds (SAF). In addition,
the independent certified public accounting firm contracted by CCPS to
perform its annual financial statement audit also conducts an agreed upon
procedures review of the SAF. These reviews consist primarily of tests of SAF
bank reconciliations, and receipt and disbursement transactions at selected
schools. Our review of the firm’s findings for fiscal year 2015 did not disclose
any improprieties or prevalent violations of CCPS policy.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Revenues and Receivables
Finding 1
There was no independent verification that all recorded collections were
subsequently deposited.
Analysis
CCPS did not perform independent verifications that recorded collections per
the daily receipts log were subsequently deposited. According to CCPS
records, collections totaled $13.1 million during fiscal year 2016 and
consisted primarily of checks received through the mail. Checks received
represent bond proceeds for construction projects among other sources. Our
test of collections of $3.9 million received during fiscal year 2016 did not
disclose any receipts that were not subsequently deposited. A similar
condition regarding the failure to perform an independent verification that
recorded collections were subsequently deposited was commented upon in
our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS
a. independently verify that all receipts per the daily receipts log were
subsequently deposited (repeat), and
b. document that the verifications are completed.
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted in use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2016 expenditures totaled $12
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of CCPS’ federal grants and the objectives of
our audit in this area, we reduced the scope of our audit work related to
federal grants. Besides expressing an opinion on CCPS’ compliance with the
terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
9

--- Page 12 ---
internal control structure's impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant
expenditures) for fiscal years 2014, 2015, and 2016. The related reports
stated that CCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements
applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal controls
over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds Were Requested for Eligible Services
CCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services. Medicaid is an entitlement program for which certain
service costs can be reimbursed to CCPS. Medicaid activity is not covered by
the Single Audit of federal grants. Our test of 10 students disclosed that
reimbursements were generally obtained for Medicaid-subsidized services.
According to agency records, fiscal year 2016 reimbursement for Medicaid-
subsidized services totaled approximately $1.6 million.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and CCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $62.1 million during fiscal year 2016. Requisitions
were entered by departments and were subject to departmental and purchasing
office approvals. Purchase orders, contracts, solicitations, and bids were
handled by the purchasing office. Purchase orders are created electronically in
the CCPS procurement and accounts payable system and can require various
levels of electronic approvals, depending on the nature of the order. All
purchase orders require final approval by the Purchasing Manager before the
order is printed and sent to the vendor.
CCPS procurement policies require that purchases over $25,000 be formally bid,
and approved by the Board. The policies also require solicitation of written or
oral quotes for purchases of $5,000 or greater. The receipt of goods and
services are recorded in the automated system by the receiving school or
department, which approves the invoice for payment, and the payments are then
processed by the finance office using the automated system.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
CCPS had not established adequate internal controls over its automated
accounts payable functions.
Analysis
CCPS had not establish adequate internal controls over its automated
purchasing and accounts payable system by restricting users’ capabilities to
prevent unnecessary or incompatible capabilities. Additionally, the system
does not provide a transaction history file that would identify transactions
initiated and processed by users with those capabilities. Finally, certain
payments through the system were authorized without prior verification to
approved supporting documentation.
• Twenty individuals could perform critical system payment functions, such
as adding vendors and general ledger accounts, that were not needed to
perform their assigned job duties. Ten of these individuals (including four
no longer employed by CCPS) could also perform critical incompatible
functions, such as adding new accounts to the general ledger, entering
invoices, and making payments to vendors. Furthermore, CCPS did not
periodically reassess the appropriateness of employee access for
unnecessary or incompatible capabilities. Finally, the system does not
generate a transaction history file, that would identify specific transactions
unilaterally processed by the above individuals.
• CCPS did not perform a comparison of the dollar amounts included on the
accounts payable register of vendor payments to be made by electronic
transfer to supporting approved invoice documentation to ensure that all
amounts on the register represent valid payables prior to authorizing the
bank to release the payments.
As a result, unauthorized disbursements could be processed without
detection, although our testing found no evidence of inappropriate
transactions. Similar conditions regarding the failure to restrict access to
critical system functions, segregate incompatible duties, and perform
independent reviews of payments to supporting documentation were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes by
a. restricting users’ capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties,
and eliminating the ability of users to perform incompatible duties
(repeat);
11

--- Page 14 ---
b. removing users’ access to automated systems immediately upon
separation from service;
c. performing a periodic documented independent review of purchasing and
accounts payable user capabilities to ensure access is properly granted;
and
d. performing independent verifications of payable transactions to
supporting documentation prior to making payments (repeat).
Finding 3
CCPS did not use the methodology described in the request for proposal when
evaluating the bids for certain professional services.
Analysis
CCPS did not use the weighting criteria stated in the request for proposals
(RFP) when evaluating bids for speech-language, occupational, and physical
therapy services contracts for the period July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2013
(with three one-year renewals, which were subsequently exercised).
Specifically, the CCPS employees who evaluated the 25 bids received from
vendors had assigned point values to 4 of the 5 evaluation criterion for all
bids and then if the combined point value exceeded a certain total, assigned a
point value for the fifth criteria, but did not weigh any of those values as
stated in the RFP. The weighting assigned to each criterion ranged from 10
percent to 25 percent. This resulted in 10 vendors who were awarded
contracts valued at approximately $1.1 million annually by virtue of having
received the highest point total based on the equal weighting of the criterion.
The extent to which the failure to use the correct evaluation methodology
impacted the award decisions could not be readily determined.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS adhere to the award criteria specified in the
request for proposals.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 4
CCPS did not assess the benefits of using intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPA) as required by State law, nor in most cases did
it establish that the ICPA’s were awarded through a competitive procurement
process.
Analysis
CCPS advised that it does not document the benefits of using ICPAs, as
required by State law. Based upon a review of Board records, we identified at
least 28 contracts, presented to and approved by the Board during fiscal year
2016 as being based on ICPAs, with estimated values totaling $6.5 million for
which a written determination of the benefits of using an ICPA should have
been prepared, as required by State law. We also noted that CCPS had
developed specific forms to document this requirement, but they were not
present in the records examined. This law, which legal counsel to the
Maryland General Assembly advised us is applicable to local education
agencies, allows the use of cooperative purchasing arrangements only after
the using entity has determined in writing that the use of such arrangements
will provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or promote
intergovernmental cooperation.1 Additionally, for those contracts for goods
and commodities, CCPS did not obtain evidence that the originating agency
awarded the contracts through competitive bidding procedures.
Furthermore, from a further test of 12 additional contracts, one contract was
reported to and approved by the Board in August 2011 as an ICPA for the
leasing of copiers. However, CCPS could not document that the underlying
contract that had been previously awarded by a local jurisdiction in another
state was current at the time CCPS entered into its contract with the
applicable vendor. Based on existing documentation it appears that the ICPA
contract in question had expired in 2006, but had been renewed for several
years by CCPS. CCPS ultimately made payments totaling $1,359,000 during
fiscal years 2012 through 2016 for this leasing contract. Finally, CCPS could
not find an executed copy of its contract with the vendor leasing the copiers.
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement as a
contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a manner consistent with
the purposes set forth in Section 11-201 of the Article, that is available for use by the
governmental entity entering the contract and at least one additional governmental entity,
and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can result from
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to all ICPAs
regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Annotated Code of Maryland provides that local
education agencies do not need to conduct competitive procurements for goods and
commodities if they use a contract awarded by public agencies or intergovernmental
purchasing organizations and the lead procuring agency followed public bidding procedures.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS
a. comply with State law and ensure that a written determination of the
benefits of using ICPA for services is prepared,
b. obtain evidence that the ICPA contract for goods and commodities was
competitively procured by the originating entity,
c. ensure that the underlying contract used for an ICPA is current before
entering into the agreement and presenting it to the Board, and
d. ensure that copies of all contract documents are retained.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS
budget. According to CCPS records, fiscal year 2016 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $157.1 million, or 72 percent of the $219.2 million total
operating expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of
Education reports, during the 2014 – 2015 school year, CCPS had 2,071 full-
time positions, which consisted of 1,496 instructional positions and 575 non-
instructional positions.
CCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources (HR)
information, record employee time, track leave usage, and to process and
record payroll transactions. The systems automatically generate semi-
monthly time records, and any adjustments are processed by central payroll
personnel. The system also generates payroll checks and direct deposit
advices. Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as
compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as
data entry of new employee information).
Finding 5
HR and payroll system user capabilities were not adequately monitored and
restricted. In addition, independent reviews of personnel and payroll
transactions were not performed.
Analysis
Capabilities assigned to users that allowed them to perform critical HR and
payroll system functions were not adequately monitored and restricted. In
addition, independent reviews of certain personnel and payroll transactions
were not performed.
14

--- Page 17 ---
• We identified eight user accounts that had been assigned incompatible HR
and payroll system access capabilities, such as adding employees and
changing employee salary and direct deposit information, or were
assigned capabilities that were not needed to perform their job duties.
Specifically, three payroll department employees could add employees or
change employee salaries (including their own) within the HR position
control system, which in conjunction with their authorized payroll system
access capabilities, would allow them to process unauthorized salary
payments that might go undetected. One information technology (IT)
employee, who performed payroll system administrator functions, and one
Business Services employee, who had no HR or payroll job responsibilities,
had unlimited access capabilities that enabled them to perform all HR and
payroll functions without any independent oversight. Additionally, another
Business Services employee had been granted payroll transaction
processing capabilities not required for their job duties, along with two
former employees (one deceased 8 months, the other retired for 4.5
years) whose user accounts remained active. Furthermore, CCPS did not
periodically reassess the appropriateness of employee access for
unnecessary or incompatible capabilities. Finally, no reports of
transactions processed by employees with incompatible or unnecessary
access were generated for review by independent personnel.
• Personnel data forms (PDF) generated by the HR position control system
to add new hires and salary changes to the payroll system were not always
reviewed and approved by HR management personnel prior to processing
by payroll personnel due to the volume of PDF generated at the beginning
of the school year. When PDF were reviewed, the employee who
performed the reviews was not independent because that individual had
system update access capabilities.
Employee salary changes made to the payroll system based on the PDF
were not subject to independent review. Verifications of salary changes
(such as additional pay and leave payouts), which were manually
calculated and entered into the payroll system based on PDF received
from HR, were performed by a payroll employee who also had system
update access. In addition, overtime or leave adjustments were verified
by the same employee who entered the transaction. During fiscal year
2015, additional pay and leave payouts totaled $5.4 million and overtime
totaled $93,000.
As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all HR and payroll transactions
were authorized and appropriate. Our test of HR and payroll transactions and
adjustments did not disclose any unauthorized transactions. Similar
15

--- Page 18 ---
conditions regarding inappropriate access to critical system functions and the
lack of an independent review of payroll transactions were commented upon
in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCPS
a. perform a periodic documented independent review of HR and payroll user
capabilities to ensure access to critical functions is appropriate and
limited to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their
assigned job duties (repeat),
b. eliminate the aforementioned unnecessary access and incompatible HR
and payroll system functions, and
c. perform documented independent reviews of critical personnel and payroll
transactions processed to supporting documentation (repeat).
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $22 million as of June 30, 2016.
CCPS uses a database system to capitalize inventory with a cost of $5,000 or
more for financial statement purposes. Sensitive equipment, defined as
equipment items subject to theft (such as computers), is also recorded on the
database system. In addition, CCPS had established written policies for the
acquisition, capitalization, physical inventory, and disposal of its capital and
sensitive equipment.
Finding 6
CCPS had not established adequate controls over its automated equipment
inventory records as system entries were not independently verified and
access to the records was not adequately restricted.
Analysis
CCPS had not established adequate controls over its equipment automated
inventory records as system entries were not independently verified and
access to the records was not adequately restricted.
• One employee was primarily responsible for recording additions, disposals,
and adjustments for both capital and sensitive equipment on the
database system, and the entries were not independently verified to
supporting documents by supervisory personnel. Specifically, although
CCPS policies required that specified forms be prepared and approved by
16

--- Page 19 ---
supervisory personnel for each type of equipment transaction (such as
adjustments), available system transaction reports were not periodically
generated and independently verified to those forms.
• Certain critical database access capabilities, such as those allowing the
addition, deletion, or modification of the equipment inventory records,
were not adequately restricted or periodically reviewed for
appropriateness. Our review disclosed that as of June 13, 2016, ten of
the eleven CCPS users that had been assigned certain of these
capabilities even though they were not required to perform their job
responsibilities. Four of these users could be restricted to read only
access, while two user identifications were associated with employees that
had transferred to other departments and two were associated with
former employees. Two IT employees who performed system application
or database functions could process inventory transactions without
supervisory oversight. A similar condition regarding inappropriate access
to system functions was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS establish adequate controls over its equipment
records, and that such controls require
a. that inventory transactions recorded on the system, such as adjustments,
be verified to supporting approved transaction forms by an independent
employee, at least on a test basis; and
b. that critical system access capabilities be periodically assessed for
appropriateness and limited to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their assigned job duties (repeat).
Information Technology
Background
The CCPS Technology Services Office maintains and administers the CCPS
computer network, computer operations and instructional information system
applications. CCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the computer
resources located at the CCPS headquarters. The CCPS network includes a
perimeter firewall to protect the CCPS network and CCPS operates several
significant administrative and academic related applications including the
finance application and the student information application. The finance
application includes modules for payroll, human resources, accounts payable,
and purchasing.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 7
Database and server controls were not sufficient, as security activity was not
logged.
Analysis
Database and server controls were not sufficient, as security activity was not
logged. Specifically, the student information database software did not permit
the logging of any database security activity including privileged operations
and the server hosting the financial application was not configured to log
security events or changes to critical files. A similar situation regarding the
failure to configure the server hosting the financial application to log security
events was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Best practices identified in the State of Maryland Information Security Policy
require that information systems must generate audit records for all security-
relevant events, including all security and system administrator accesses and
that procedures must be developed to routinely (for example, daily or weekly)
review audit records for indications of unusual activities, suspicious activities
or suspected violations, and report findings to appropriate officials for prompt
resolution.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS
a. take appropriate action to ensure that the student information database
logs all critical security related events,
b. set the server hosting the financial application to log all critical security
related events and changes to critical files (repeat), and
c. regularly review these logs and retain review documentation for future
reference.
Finding 8
CCPS did not have a Disaster Recovery Plan for recovering computer
operations.
Analysis
CCPS did not have an information technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Plan
(DRP) for recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for
example, a fire). The State of Maryland IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines
provide best practices on the minimum required elements needed for a DRP,
such as identification of an alternate site for computer operations in the event
of a disaster and applications prioritized for recovery. Without a complete and
tested DRP, a disaster could cause significant delays (for an undetermined
18

--- Page 21 ---
period) in restoring information systems operations above and beyond the
expected delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario. This same
situation was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that
is in accordance with the aforementioned IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines and
periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the documentation
for future reference (repeat).
Finding 9
The CCPS computer network was not adequately secured, as the internal
network could be exposed to attack from external sources and reports of
attacks from the CCPS intrusion detection prevention system were either not
generated or when generated not reviewed.
Analysis
The CCPS computer network was not sufficiently secured.
• Eight publicly accessible servers were located in the CCPS internal network
segment rather than isolating those servers in a separate protected
network zone. These eight servers, if compromised, could expose the
internal network to attack from external sources. Recommended security
procedures, per the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy, include placing publicly
accessible servers in an external protected zone to protect those servers
as well as the entity’s internal network.
• The CCPS’ intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS) was not
configured to properly protect the CCPS network. CCPS used a network
based IDPS to protect its entire network from external traffic; however, the
IDPS was configured to report high priority attacks and to disregard
medium and low priority attacks rather than block high priority attacks and
report medium and low priority attacks identified by the system.
Furthermore, although the system generated reports of high priority
attacks, we were advised by CCPS personnel that these reports were not
reviewed. Therefore, although CCPS had an IDPS, it was ineffectively
employed to aid in the detection/prevention of, and response to, potential
network security breaches and attacks. Best practices contained in the
State of Maryland Information Security Policy specify that intrusion
detection prevention tools and techniques must be employed to monitor
19

--- Page 22 ---
system events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of
information systems and/or confidential information.
• All CCPS students had unrestricted wireless network level access to the
CCPS data center that housed the servers hosting critical CCPS systems
rather than being confined to devices needed for their education. In
addition, all middle and elementary schools wireless networks were
configured to operate without any form of authentication and connected
users were placed on the CCPS internal network, so anyone in the vicinity
of these middle and elementary schools could gain network level access to
the CCPS data center, including all critical systems.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate neutral network zone,
b. reconfigure the IDPS coverage to properly secure its network, and
c. secure its internal network by authenticating users of the wireless network
and properly restricting access to authorized users to only those devices
related to their respective needs and responsibilities.
Finding 10
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
Analysis
CCPS workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
• Numerous workstations were configured with users having administrative
rights. Administrative rights should be provided only to network
administrators and select others since these rights are the highest
permission level that can be granted to users and it allows users to install
software and change configuration settings. Our test of workstations
assigned to faculty and staff disclosed that the users of 61 of 71
workstations tested had unnecessarily been provided administrative rights
on their workstation. We were advised by CCPS personnel that the primary
reason was to provide added convenience for those employees with
workstations using specialized software. We were also advised that
administrative rights were given to laptop users as well. As a result, if
these workstations were infected with malware, the malware would run
with administrative rights and expose these workstations to a greater risk
of compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated with only
20

--- Page 23 ---
user rights. In addition, users with administrative rights could disable the
malware protection software on their workstations.
• CCPS did not have enterprise-wide management tools to monitor and
ensure that the malware protection software installed on its 5,273
workstations and servers was operational, up-to-date, and using the most
current malware prevention signature files. Without the use of enterprise-
wide management tools, CCPS lacked assurance that its workstations and
servers were properly protected with up-to-date, operational malware
protection software.
Best practices as prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Security
Policy state that agencies, at a minimum, must “protect against malicious
code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by implementing (antivirus, antimalware)
solutions that, to the extent possible, include a capability for automatic
updates.”
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to network
administrators and other select users requiring such rights; and
b. obtain and use enterprise-wide management tools to ensure that all
workstations and servers are configured with malware protection software
that is operating properly, up-to-date, and has current signature files.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS employed a staff of 168 employees to maintain its 30 schools and 3
administrative and support facilities. According to the fiscal year 2017 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to CCPS facilities over the next six years were estimated to cost
$59.1 million.
CCPS Contracts Were Properly Procured and Expenditures for Capital Projects
Were Properly Supported
Our review of five construction-related procurements during fiscal years 2013
to 2015 totaling $25 million, disclosed that they were all properly procured
and approved by the Board. In addition, our test of 10 invoices totaling $4.1
million for these contracts disclosed the invoices were properly reviewed and
approved and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with the related
contract terms.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
CCPS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. For example, CCPS
utilizes an energy management system to monitor heating and air
conditioning systems from a central location to control temperature settings
and turn off lights when not needed, with seventeen of its buildings having
automated settings. In addition, CCPS has written policies that encourage
both students and employees to be aware of and limit their energy use.
Furthermore, CCPS participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore
entities to purchase energy at the best possible terms for the members of the
consortium. According to documents provided by CCPS from the consortium
(which we did not audit), CCPS saved over $2.5 million through energy cost
avoidance from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2015.
Finding 11
CCPS executed three 20-year power-purchasing agreements with a solar
provider without a competitive process or a formal financial analysis, and
without evidence it had fully resolved the risk concerns of its legal counsel.
Analysis
CCPS executed three power-purchasing agreements (PPA) with a solar
provider that included 20-year escalating rate schedules with a combined
estimated total cost of $14.1 million without using a competitive process. In
addition, CCPS did not prepare a formal analysis to ensure that it had received
the most favorable financial terms nor adequately resolve a number of
concerns expressed by its legal counsel regarding the contracts’ terms and
conditions.
In an effort to reduce electricity supply costs, CCPS executed one PPA in 2014
and two PPAs in 2015, that according to the solar provider, could collectively
save CCPS approximately $6.1 to $8.9 million in reduced electricity bills over
the 20-year life of the PPAs. Subsequently, the contractor installed fields of
solar panels at three CCPS locations in exchange for a 20-year guarantee that
CCPS would purchase all the electricity generated by those solar panel
systems, which would supply about 30 percent of CCPS’ needs, from the
contractor at pre-established rates. The contractor retained ownership of all
equipment and the PPAs also allowed the solar provider to retain all
environmental credits, financial incentives, and tax benefits associated with
the systems. Under the terms of the PPAs, CCPS was simply making a
commitment to purchase electricity for a set period for defined rates, with an
option to purchase the equipment at the end of the 20-year period.
CCPS did not conduct a competitive solicitation for the PPAs, rather it was
approached by the solar provider seeking to install solar equipment on CCPS
22

--- Page 25 ---
property and sell CCPS the electricity generated by the same. CCPS entered
into exclusive negotiations with the provider, resulting in the aforementioned
agreements. CCPS’ legal counsel stated that since CCPS was not purchasing
solar equipment it did not appear that CCPS was required to competitively
procure the PPAs. We were advised by legal counsel to the Maryland General
Assembly that a public school solar project funded under a PPA likely would
be subject to the Board of Public Works’ school construction regulations and
that those regulations establish a preference for competitive sealed bidding.
Further, CCPS did not conduct a formal assessment to determine if it obtained
the most favorable terms under the PPAs. There appears to be great
variability in rates, between CCPS’ own PPAs and the rates paid by other local
Maryland school systems for solar generated electricity, which indicates the
potential for flexibility in rate setting in the negotiation process. There were
other Maryland school systems on the Eastern Shore that negotiated PPAs
during the same time-period with similar arrangements regarding credits, tax
benefits and equipment ownership; however, those systems had certain
financial terms that were more favorable than CCPS’. For example, one
school system executed a PPA in March 2014 that had a fiscal year 2016 rate
that was thirty-four percent lower than the CCPS rate from the 2014 PPA for
fiscal year 2016. Another school system executed a PPA in January 2015 that
had a fiscal year 2016 rate was thirty-two percent lower than the
aforementioned CCPS PPA. More significantly, this latter PPA did not have a
rate escalation factor. In comparison, the two percent rate escalation factor
in the original CCPS PPA accounted for $1 million of its total estimated cost of
$5.7 million for its 20-year life.
Furthermore, CCPS legal counsel, who reviewed the general conditions
document of the 2014 PPA, expressed “serious reservations” with the Board
entering into a 20-year contract under the terms proposed. Specifically,
counsel pointed out:
• that the solar provider had excluded all warranties regarding the
useful life of the system and the economic viability of the deal;
• the risks associated with a long-term deal with no escape clause other
than the early termination fee, noting that the technology could become
obsolete or result in higher electric costs instead of savings; and
• that the contract should contain specific provisions permitting CCPS to
terminate the contract without penalty in the event that CCPS’ total
cost for electricity under the contract exceeded the cost of electricity
available from conventional suppliers, or absent that, establish a
23

--- Page 26 ---
nominal early termination fee after five years2 or insist on a shorter
contract term.
There was no evidence that substantive action had been taken to address the
above concerns. Although there was some communication within CCPS and
with the contractor about those concerns, there was no formal explanation
why they were not addressed in the agreements. In our opinion some of the
concerns raised by counsel were significant, and we have found that other
local school system’s PPA’s do address some of them. For example, a PPA
executed in March 2014 by another local school system acknowledged that
solar equipment deteriorated with age and included a provision that
guaranteed a minimum kilowatt output, measured in five-year segments, over
the life of the system. This provision also provided for monetary
reimbursement to the school system for any shortfall in output. These
provisions were absent from CCPS’ PPAs.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that a competitive procurement is used for all future PPAs and that
the award is given to the bid resulting in the best financial terms for CCPS,
and
b. ensure that the proper consideration be given to risks identified and the
resolution of those risks be documented.
Transportation Services
Background
CCPS has approximately 14,750 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on 151 buses of
which 142 were owned and operated by contractors and the remaining 9 were
owned by CCPS. According to CCPS audited financial statements, fiscal year
2015 transportation costs totaled $9.5 million, with $8.1 million (85 percent)
representing payments for contracted bus services. CCPS reported that 2.4
million route miles were traveled to transport students for the 2014-2015
school year.
Monthly payments to bus contractors consist of a per vehicle allotment (PVA),
which includes repayment to the contractors of the full acquisition cost of a
bus and an additional annual payment as a rate for return on investment
2 Under the terms of the current PPAs, if the deal becomes undesirable, CCPS would pay the
provider an early termination fee after 5 or 10 years of $13.6 million or $10.5 million,
respectively.
24

--- Page 27 ---
(ROI). In addition, such payments include funds for operational costs, such as
hourly reimbursements for drivers and attendants, a per mile maintenance
fee, and fuel costs. CCPS’ bus contracts are for a one-year term and renew
automatically over the 12-year useful life of the bus unless terminated by
either party by giving 30-day written notice.
Finding 12
CCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing procedures and did not
periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and related bus
capacities to maximize the efficiency of its bus routes and address bus routes
operating below ridership capacity goals.
Analysis
CCPS bus routing procedures were not comprehensive, as they did not
address the planning, reviewing, and changing of existing routes and they did
not specify ridership goals and student ride time limits. In addition, CCPS did
not periodically perform a system-wide analysis, with the assistance of its
automated bus routing software, of bus routes and related bus ridership to
maximize efficiency and to address bus routes operating below ridership goals
(CCPS has a goal of 90 percent of bus capacity).
Our analysis of student ridership disclosed that ridership was significantly less
than bus capacity limits. Specifically, our review of the 282 regular routes
(131 buses) for the 2014-2015 school year disclosed that 168 routes (61
percent) were below 75 percent of bus capacities based on bus sizes3. Of the
282 routes, 31 (11 percent) had student ridership of less than 50 percent.
Further, 39 buses (30 percent) had no routes that had ridership above 75
percent.
CCPS routing software has been primarily used to map out the bus routes and
bus stop locations and while CCPS utilized an informal student ridership goal
(90 percent of capacity) in planning individual routes, it was not recorded in
the automated routing system. In addition, there were no available system
reports, such as number of students per route and ridership for individual
buses to use to assess the efficiency of bus routes. In practice, CCPS uses
existing routes and makes modifications to accommodate students’ school
assignments without periodically reviewing all routes for efficiency on a
system-wide basis.
3 School bus capacities are lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ depending
on the school level. For example, the capacity for high school, middle/high school, middle,
and elementary school routes is 44, 48, 52, and 60 students, respectively, based on 66-
passenger buses (manufacturer stated capacity).
25

--- Page 28 ---
Recommendation 12
We recommend that CCPS take steps to increase bus utilization efficiency.
Specifically, we recommend that CCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written procedures that include specific
target bus ridership percentages and student ride times; and
b. fully utilize the capabilities of its automated routing software (such as
performing a periodic system-wide bus route analysis) to maximize the
ridership on its bus routes.
Finding 13
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did not
reflect market conditions, use actual costs, or consider available fuel credits,
resulting in higher payments than necessary for student transportation
services.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did
not reflect market conditions, use actual costs, or consider available fuel
credits. Our review of the contract payments disclosed the following
conditions:
• CCPS based its contractor payments in part on a negotiated bus purchase
price reached with the bus contractors, rather than actual price quotes
from bus vendors. We have found that some local education agencies
solely use manufacturer sale prices in calculating the bus cost to
contractors (see description of bus cost in setting PVA in the following
bullet), which provides an objective means to determine cost. CCPS
however, obtains price quotes, but then conducts negotiations with
contractors to set a price.
• CCPS overpaid bus contractors for bus cost. Prior to 2011, CCPS
calculated the PVA reimbursement component as if a bus would be in
operation for only 8 years, but paid the PVA over a 12-year period (the
actual useful life of the bus). Thus, bus contractors would have been paid
150 percent of the bus cost over the life of each bus (12.5 percent of the
cost for 8 years, plus an additional 12.5 percent for the final 4 years of the
bus life). Coupled with a ROI of 7 percent, the effective PVA rate for the
life of the bus was 19.5 percent (12.5 percent plus 7 percent). In 2011,
CCPS corrected its PVA formula by spreading the actual bus cost
reimbursement over the 12-year life of the bus (using a factor of 8.33
percent per year), and changed the ROI in 2011 to 9.5 percent, which
26

--- Page 29 ---
resulted in an overall PVA rate of 17.83 percent. However, CCPS did not
have any support for the ROI rates used prior to or after 2011.
To estimate the financial impact of CCPS paying the PVA over the incorrect
number of years for buses purchased prior to 2011 and not ensuring that
its ROI provided a reasonable rate of return, we recalculated the PVA for
the 142 buses used to transport students during fiscal year 2016 (as of
September 2015), which included buses placed into service dating back
to 20054. Using the prime interest rate5 (which ranged from 3.25 to 8.25)
for the ROI and the 12-year estimated useful life in the standard PVA
formula, we compared our PVA results to the CCPS PVA payments. This
comparison showed that the CCPS’ annual PVA payments per bus were
$2,244 to $7,516 higher than the payments would have been had a 12-
year useful life been used for all service years and the prevailing prime
rate been used in the calculation. The effect is that, over the 12-year life
of these 142 buses that were in service during fiscal year 2016, CCPS
would pay out approximately $7.8 million more than if the proper useful
life (prior to 2011) and a reasonable ROI had been used ($4.3 million
having already been paid and $3.5 million to be paid over the remaining
useful life). This analysis does not include the effects of the lost interest
income that could have been earned. A similar condition regarding the
appropriateness of the PVA calculations was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
• Payments to bus contractors for maintenance costs were negotiated with
the contractors and were not supported by industry studies or documented
maintenance and other repair costs. For fiscal year 2016, CCPS paid a
$0.8041 per-mile fee to reimburse the contractors for bus maintenance
costs, which resulted in CCPS paying approximately $1.8 million for
maintenance costs.
4 We did not include in our calculation buses older than 2005 but still in service or substitute
buses.
5 The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study
commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a
lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment rate: therefore, it is
deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation. However, a May 2010 MSDE PVA
Workgroup commented that the profit (or ROI) to be included in the PVA should reflect what
a reasonable investor or business person would expect on a long-term investment, and not
necessarily the prime rate. As of January 2017, current 10 and 30 year US Treasury Note
rates, which could be reflective of a reasonable long-term investment option were 2.4 and
3.0 percent, respectively.
27

--- Page 30 ---
• CCPS did not exclude federal fuel excise taxes from payments to bus
contractors.6 CCPS pays contractors for fuel usage using a monthly
average of diesel fuel prices, including taxes, and dividing by a miles per
gallon rate established by CCPS. However, according to federal law, CCPS
contractors are exempt from the $0.244 per gallon excise tax on diesel
fuel and are able to receive a credit for federal fuel taxes paid when they
file their income tax returns. If CCPS had considered the $0.244
exemption amount in its calculation, payments to the contractors would
have been lower by $379,000 for fiscal years 2011 through 2015.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that CCPS
a. calculate the annual PVA amount based on the average of the bus cost
quotes received from bus manufacturers,
b. use market investment rates as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for the annual PVA (repeat),
c. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs or otherwise develop supportable cost
estimates as the basis for per mile maintenance costs, and
d. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
Finding 14
There was no documented independent review and approval of the monthly
payments for contractor bus operating costs, and user access to the
automated system used to calculate bus payments was not adequately
restricted.
Analysis
Monthly calculations of bus contractor payments for operating costs were not
subject to documented independent review and approval within the
Transportation Department prior to submission to the CCPS Finance Office for
payment processing. Furthermore, user access to the Department’s
automated payment system used to calculate bus payments was not
adequately restricted. A number of Department employees were involved in
the calculation and review of such payments, which were originally based on
certain data, including route miles, times, PVA, and fuel information, that was
6 Subsequent to the completion of our audit fieldwork, Chapter 397, Laws of Maryland 2016,
effective July 1, 2016, exempted a county board of education or a school bus operator under
contract with a county board of education, from State motor fuel taxes. In addition, the law
authorized county boards of education and a school bus operator to claim refund of State
motor fuel taxes paid. Consequently, this exemption should be factored into future
payments.
28

--- Page 31 ---
entered into the automated system. However, all five Department employees
involved in the process, including the supervisory employees who review the
calculations for correctness prior to submission to the Finance Office have
update access to the automated system. Consequently, payment amounts
could be subject to modification without detection. Finally, the reviews of the
payment calculations were not documented. A similar condition regarding
restricting access to the automated system was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Our review also disclosed that, in addition to the five employees, three other
transportation employees had the same level of unrestricted access to the
system, which allowed them enter and change data, make pay adjustments,
and initiate the payment process. We were advised the system had limited
capabilities and could only grant either unlimited update or read only access.
Furthermore, CCPS did not periodically reassess the appropriateness of
employee access for these eight employees in accordance with their assigned
duties and responsibilities. Finally, available user transaction reports were
not generated for independent review. These conditions resulted in a lack of
assurance that payments are proper and accurate, but our limited test of
these payments did not disclose any errors.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that CCPS establish adequate controls over payments to bus
contractors. Specifically, we recommend that
a. Department supervisors perform documented reviews of bus payment
reports immediately prior to submission to the Finance Office based on a
review of related supporting documentation including system generated
transaction reports;
b. critical system access capabilities be periodically assessed for
appropriateness and limited to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their assigned job duties; and
c. supervisors responsible for reviewing payments be given “read only”
access, thereby eliminating their ability to make changes in the automated
system (repeat).
Food Services
Background
CCPS has 18 cooking cafeterias and 10 finishing cafeterias that serve 30
schools. Food and related supplies are received and stored at a warehouse
and are delivered to the schools as needed. In fiscal year 2016, CCPS had
143 food service positions (consisting of 137 cafeteria positions and 6
29

--- Page 32 ---
administrative positions). According to the audited financial statements, food
service operating expenditures ($6,756,062) exceeded revenues
($6,710,857) for fiscal year 2016. Food service revenues exceed operating
expenditures for two of the last four years. We performed a review of cash
handling and food sale procedures at a limited number of locations and noted
several opportunities for improvement that were communicated to CCPS but
did not warrant mention in this report. Further, we tested food service
commodity procurements and determined they were properly procured by
CCPS.
School Board Operations
Background
The Board of Education of Cecil County is composed of five elected members
and one non-voting student representative. In its oversight responsibilities,
the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent
audits of the CCPS financial statements and federal programs. The Board has
not established any special committees.
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In February 2012, the Board adopted a revised detailed ethics policy in
regulation that conforms to State Law and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosure and was approved by the State Ethics
Commission. Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members and
school officials as well as all CCPS employees. CCPS established an Ethics
Panel consisting of three members appointed by the President of the Board to
provide advisory opinions regarding the applicability of the regulations. The
Panel also reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations.
According to the ethics regulations, annual financial disclosure statements
and conflict of interest statements are required to be filed by Board members,
candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and a number of other
administrators (such as school principals and department heads) by April
30th of each year. Our test of the records for 5 Board members and 10
employees required to submit financial disclosure and conflict of interest
forms for calendar year 2015 disclosed that forms were submitted as
required.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
CCPS is self-insured for healthcare costs for its employee, retiree, and eligible
dependents up to a designated stop-loss limit. For fiscal year 2016, CCPS
healthcare expenditures totaled $17.6 million, which we were advised
included administrative fees and stop-loss insurance premiums of $1.1
million. CCPS contracts with two medical insurance carriers (one preferred
provider organization and one health maintenance organization) to provide
administrative services that include the processing of claims for participants’
medical, dental, vision and prescription costs, and a third insurance carrier for
stop-loss coverage.7 CCPS has instituted a number of practices to control
healthcare costs.
• CCPS bids out its health care services on a periodic basis, with the
assistance of a consultant in developing a solicitation for its health service
plans and stop-loss insurance coverage and analyzing and evaluating
vendor bids received. The next planned solicitation for both plans will be
for the plan year starting September 1, 2017.
• Subsequent to 2009, CCPS instituted a process to verify the eligibility of
employee dependents prior to enrollment in the health care plans.
• CCPS verifies the propriety of administrative fee billings by comparing the
number of plan participants per its benefit system with those per the
administrative fee billings each period for accuracy, and verifies the rates
charged to the related contracts on file.
• CCPS has claims reviews of the two plans performed every five years of
the claims paid for the previous two years. CCPS advised that if the claims
reviews were to disclose significant problems, consideration would be
given to reviewing the claims for the remaining three years. The most
recent reviews were completed in April 2016 and sampled claims that
were paid during the period of July 2013 through June 2015. Collectively,
the results did not identify any significant claims payment errors that had
not been resolved during the period under review.
7 Stop-loss coverage indemnifies CCPS against health insurance claim amounts that exceed a
specified threshold for a covered member, which was $225,000 for plan year 2016.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Cecil County Public
Schools (CCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on CCPS dated September 10, 2009, was limited to those
findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11
areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at CCPS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
32

--- Page 35 ---
appropriate).8 Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
records, and observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2010 through
June 30, 2015. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on
auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits CCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the CCPS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other findings were
communicated to CCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently,
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
We conducted our fieldwork from February 2016 to November 2016. The
CCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
8 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
34

--- Page 38 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Revenues and Receivables
Finding 1
There was no independent verification that all recorded collections were
subsequently deposited.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS
a. independently verify that all receipts per the daily receipts log were
subsequently deposited (repeat), and
b. document that the verifications are completed.
CCPS Response 1:
a. AGREE: Corrective action was implemented after the 2009 audit to
verify collections recorded on the daily receipts log were subsequently
deposited. In addition, the deposit slip is verified by a third individual to
the actual amount deposited in the bank account via an on-line inquiry.
However, the verification document was not signed or initialed by the
reviewer.
b. AGREE: The independent log (reference a.) is now printed daily and
compared with, and attached to the daily deposit slip. A separate
employee verifies the deposit slip and log against the online account
and initials documentation.
Federal Funds (no findings)
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Medicaid Funds Were Requested for Eligible Services
Page 1 of 12

--- Page 39 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 2
CCPS had not established adequate internal controls over its automated
accounts payable functions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes by
a. restricting users’ capabilities to those needed to perform their job duties,
and eliminating the ability of users to perform incompatible duties (repeat);
b. removing users’ access to automated systems immediately upon
separation from service;
c. performing a periodic documented independent review of purchasing and
accounts payable user capabilities to ensure access is properly granted;
and
d. performing independent verifications of payable transactions to supporting
documentation prior to making payments (repeat).
CCPS Response 2
a. AGREE: It was recognized six years ago that the limitations in the legacy
system (20 years old) were preventing us from limiting access to
various financial system functions. Efforts were redirected into
acquiring and implementing a new financial system with more granular
security capabilities. Conversion began in February 2016 and will be
complete January 2018. The total seven year cost of the system is $1.7
million.
b. AGREE: User access will be removed from systems immediately after
separation.
c. AGREE: New system functionality allows for establishing process, data
access and workflow rules by job type (workgroup). Individuals will be
granted access based on their workgroup membership.
d. AGREE: Independent verification of amounts on the accounts payable
register to supporting approved invoices prior to authorizing the bank to
release payments will be documented.
Page 2 of 12

--- Page 40 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Finding 3
CCPS did not use the methodology described in the request for proposal when
evaluating the bids for certain professional services.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS adhere to the award criteria specified in the request
for proposals.
CCPS Response 3
AGREE: CCPS will adhere to the award criteria specified in the request for
proposals. This specific RFP was reissued in April 2016 and the evaluation
criteria specified in the RFP was used.
Finding 4
CCPS did not assess the benefits of using intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPA) as required by State law, nor in most cases did
it establish that the ICPA’s were awarded through a competitive procurement
process.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS
a. comply with State law and ensure that a written determination of the
benefits of using ICPA for services is prepared,
b. obtain evidence that the ICPA contract for goods and commodities was
competitively procured by the originating entity,
c. ensure that the underlying contract used for an ICPA is current before
entering into the agreement and presenting it to the Board, and
d. ensure that copies of all contract documents are retained.
CCPS Response 4
a-d. AGREE: A written determination of the benefits of using ICPA for
services is now being prepared. This includes evidence that the ICPA
contract for all goods and commodities was competitively procured and
is current. A copy of the contract will be retained in the bid file.
Page 3 of 12

--- Page 41 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 5
HR and payroll system user capabilities were not adequately monitored and
restricted. In addition, independent reviews of personnel and payroll
transactions were not performed.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCPS
a. perform a periodic documented independent review of HR and payroll user
capabilities to ensure access to critical functions is appropriate and limited
to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their assigned
job duties (repeat),
b. eliminate the aforementioned unnecessary access and incompatible HR
and payroll system functions, and
c. perform documented independent reviews of critical personnel and payroll
transactions processed to supporting documentation (repeat).
CCPS Response 5
a. AGREE: CCPS assigns rights and system access based on job function,
which is very well defined by Human Resources job descriptions. We will
perform a periodic documented independent review of HR and payroll
user capabilities to ensure access to critical functions is appropriate
based on their assigned job duties.
b. AGREE: The legacy system did not have the functionality to separate
duties to the field level. There were data elements on an employee’s
record that periodically require Payroll personnel to change. By
implementing a new system, some of these overlaps will be eliminated
as process duties are separated.
c. AGREE: As part of the migration to the Tyler Munis Payroll/ HR System,
CCPS is performing reviews of HR and Payroll user capabilities to better
separate duties.
Page 4 of 12

--- Page 42 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 6
CCPS had not established adequate controls over its automated equipment
inventory records as system entries were not independently verified and
access to the records was not adequately restricted.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS establish adequate controls over its equipment
records, and that such controls require
a. that inventory transactions recorded on the system, such as adjustments,
be verified to supporting approved transaction forms by an independent
employee, at least on a test basis; and
b. that critical system access capabilities be periodically assessed for
appropriateness and limited to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their assigned job duties (repeat).
CCPS Response 6
a. AGREE: The legacy system’s inventory records have been imported into
the Tyler-Munis fixed asset module. Transactions will now require
verification and/or approval by another person electronically. We will
also continue the practice of conducting a periodic physical inventory to
verify the accuracy of the fixed asset records.
b. AGREE: CCPS will periodically assess the appropriateness and limit
access to only those employees who require such capabilities to
perform their job duties.
Page 5 of 12

--- Page 43 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Information Technology
Finding 7
Database and server controls were not sufficient, as security activity was not
logged.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS
a. take appropriate action to ensure that the student information database
logs all critical security related events,
b. set the server hosting the financial application to log all critical security
related events and changes to critical files (repeat), and
c. regularly review these logs and retain review documentation for future
reference.
CCPS Response 7
a. AGREE: CCPS will work with the student information system vendor to
achieve this recommendation.
b. AGREE: CCPS will work with the financial application vendor to achieve
this recommendation.
c. AGREE: CCPS will work within resources and staffing limitations to
regularly review the security logs generated by our systems.
Finding 8
CCPS did not have a Disaster Recovery Plan for recovering computer
operations.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that
is in accordance with the aforementioned IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines and
periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the documentation
for future reference (repeat).
CCPS Response 8
AGREE: We conduct a review meeting with key individuals to gather concerns
and review decisions. Staffing limitations have prevented CCPS from beginning
a full Business Risk analysis but there have been efforts to move critical
systems offsite, or back systems up offsite, in order to mitigate some risk.
Page 6 of 12

--- Page 44 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Finding 9
The CCPS computer network was not adequately secured, as the internal
network could be exposed to attack from external sources and reports of
attacks from the CCPS intrusion detection prevention system were either not
generated or when generated not reviewed.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate neutral network zone,
b. reconfigure the IDPS coverage to properly secure its network, and
c. secure its internal network by authenticating users of the wireless network
and properly restricting access to authorized users to only those devices
related to their respective needs and responsibilities.
CCPS Response 9
a-c. AGREE: CCPS is currently working to separate publicly accessible
servers into a neutral zone and is currently implementing a new security
solution for better network protection. CCPS will have this completed by
December 2017.
Finding 10
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to network
administrators and other select users requiring such rights; and
b. obtain and use enterprise-wide management tools to ensure that all
workstations and servers are configured with malware protection software
that is operating properly, up-to-date, and has current signature files.
CCPS Response 10
a. AGREE: CCPS will be working on this recommendation over the course
of the 2017 and 2018 calendar years.
b. AGREE: CCPS will propose additional resources and staffing to procure
and implement an enterprise-management solution.
Page 7 of 12

--- Page 45 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
Finding 11
CCPS executed three 20-year power-purchasing agreements with a solar
provider without a competitive process or a formal financial analysis, and
without evidence it had fully resolved the risk concerns of its legal counsel.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that a competitive procurement is used for all future PPAs and that
the award is given to the bid resulting in the best financial terms for CCPS,
and
b. ensure that the proper consideration be given to risks identified and the
resolution of those risks be documented.
CCPS Response 11
a. AGREE: CCPS will ensure that a competitive procurement process is
used in all future PPAs. We will consider the technical score of each
proposal along with price, as low bid should not be the only criteria
for selecting a provider.
b. AGREE: CCPS will more formally document the proper consideration
and resolution to risks in the future.
ADDITIONAL COMMENTS
PPAs are unique arrangements and involve a long-term commitment. We
understood the economic viability of the deal. Final acceptance of the
negotiated terms was based on the fact that the negotiated fixed price with
escalation in twenty years was not more than the current price of
conventional electric at that time. Terminating this contract “without
penalty” is not an option. The general terms and conditions are generally
standard for these contracts. We were not interested in negotiating other
“perceived benefits” that have no impact on the primary objective of these
arrangements, that being, to provide a relatively stable, environmentally
friendly source of energy at a fixed price for the long-term.
Page 8 of 12

--- Page 46 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Transportation Services
Finding 12
CCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing procedures and did not
periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and related bus
capacities to maximize the efficiency of its bus routes and address bus routes
operating below ridership capacity goals.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that CCPS take steps to increase bus utilization efficiency.
Specifically, we recommend that CCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written procedures that include specific
target bus ridership percentages and student ride times; and
b. fully utilize the capabilities of its automated routing software (such as
performing a periodic system-wide bus route analysis) to maximize the
ridership on its bus routes.
CCPS Response 12
a. AGREE: CCPS will develop a comprehensive written procedure to determine
routing efficiency, based on current practice while ensuring that reserved
capacity is available, while utilizing buses on multiple routes when time and
space permits. Procedures will address:
b. AGREE: CCPS will perform a periodic system-wide bus route analysis to
more fully utilize the automated routing software to maximize ridership.
Finding 13
Certain elements used to determine payments to bus contractors did not
reflect market conditions, use actual costs, or consider available fuel credits,
resulting in higher payments than necessary for student transportation
services.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that CCPS
a. calculate the annual PVA amount based on the average of the bus cost
quotes received from bus manufacturers,
b. use market investment rates as a basis for establishing contractor rates for
the annual PVA (repeat),
c. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs or otherwise develop supportable cost
estimates as the basis for per mile maintenance costs, and
d. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
Page 9 of 12

--- Page 47 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
CCPS Response 13
a. AGREE: CCPS will base the initial annual PVA amount on the average of
the bus cost quotes received from bus manufacturers. However, the
final negotiated price could be lower.
b. DISAGREE: Prime is not a valid measure for a reasonable ROI.
c. DISAGREE: Operating our own fleet of eight buses provides data to
make a determination as to the cost effectiveness of our contracted
fleet. This includes consideration of capital outlay costs of purchasing
new buses, labor, cost of parts, and maintaining and operating
maintenance facilities.
d. DISAGREE: The fuel reimbursement rate is only one of several pay
elements to contractors.
ADDITIONAL COMMENTS
All elements, including the reimbursement for labor, mileage, fuel,
maintenance, and administrative costs must be evaluated as a whole. We
evaluate these elements and negotiate payment terms with our
contractors on an annual basis.
According to the MSDE Fact Book for the 2014-15 school year CCPS ranks
third lowest in the State with a cost per student of $642. Transportation
cost per student for the school year 2008-09 was $636 ($6/student, less
than 1 percent increase).
In addition, Md. EDUCATION Code Ann. § 7-804 was amended in 2013 to add
Cecil County to the list of LEAs approved to operate buses for 15 years.
Finally, the “Per Vehicle Allowance Workgroup Report” released by the
Maryland Department of Education (MSDE) in 2010, concluded that there
is “no single approach to how an LEA should determine its PVA” and that
the determination of how to fairly and equitably determine compensation
to school bus contractors is a choice of the local jurisdiction as each best
knows its own unique transportation needs.
Auditor’s Comment: The evaluation of the various cost components
collectively as put forth by CCPS does not preclude the
identification and quantification of actual costs to determine the
reasonableness of negotiated terms. Our findings focus on the fact
that certain components, when evaluated on an individual basis,
used assumptions that were not supported by current economic
factors or actual cost analyses.
As noted in the finding, our suggested ROI is not solely the Prime
Rate, but a rate necessary to provide a return consistent with long-
Page 10 of 12

--- Page 48 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
term investments, as recommended by a MSDE PVA Workgroup.
Regarding maintenance costs, although CCPS’s own operating
experience could provide a basis for cost determinations, CCPS has
not documented any supportable cost basis. Finally, fuel excise
taxes do not represent a supportable or necessary cost element, as
bus contractors and CCPS are exempt from those taxes.
Finding 14
There was no documented independent review and approval of the monthly
payments for contractor bus operating costs, and user access to the
automated system used to calculate bus payments was not adequately
restricted.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that CCPS establish adequate controls over payments to bus
contractors. Specifically, we recommend that
a. Department supervisors perform documented reviews of bus payment
reports immediately prior to submission to the Finance Office based on a
review of related supporting documentation including system generated
transaction reports;
b. critical system access capabilities be periodically assessed for
appropriateness and limited to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their assigned job duties; and
c. supervisors responsible for reviewing payments be given “read only”
access, thereby eliminating their ability to make changes in the automated
system (repeat).
CCPS Response 14
a. AGREE: Edit functionality has been removed from the supervisor so
that a documented review of payment reports can be conducted.
b. AGREE: As job assignments and tasks are changed, a documented
review of system capabilities and access will be conducted.
c. AGREE: Same as a.
Food Services (no findings)
School Board Operations
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
Page 11 of 12

--- Page 49 ---
Cecil County Public Schools
Responses to OLA Performance Audit Recommendations July 2017
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
CCPS is self-insured for healthcare costs for its employee, retiree, and eligible
dependents up to a designated stop-loss limit. For fiscal year 2016, CCPS
healthcare expenditures totaled $17.6 million, which we were advised included
administrative fees and stop-loss insurance premiums of $1.1 million. CCPS
contracts with two medical insurance carriers (one preferred provider
organization and one health maintenance organization) to provide
administrative services that include the processing of claims for participants’
medical, dental, vision and prescription costs, and a third insurance carrier for
stop-loss coverage. CCPS has instituted a number of practices to control
healthcare costs.
• CCPS bids out its health care services on a periodic basis, with the
assistance of a consultant in developing a solicitation for its health service
plans and stop-loss insurance coverage and analyzing and evaluating
vendor bids received. The next planned solicitation for both plans will be for
the plan year starting September 1, 2017.
• Subsequent to 2009, CCPS instituted a process to verify the eligibility of
employee dependents prior to enrollment in the health care plans.
• CCPS verifies the propriety of administrative fee billings by comparing the
number of plan participants per its benefit system with those per the
administrative fee billings each period for accuracy, and verifies the rates
charged to the related contracts on file.
• CCPS has claims reviews of the two plans performed every five years of the
claims paid for the previous two years. CCPS advised that if the claims
reviews were to disclose significant problems, consideration would be given
to reviewing the claims for the remaining three years. The most recent
reviews were completed in April 2016 and sampled claims that were paid
during the period of July 2013 through June 2015. Collectively, the results
did not identify any significant claims payment errors that had not been
resolved during the period under review.
CCPS Response
Thank you for acknowledging our efforts to control and reduce healthcare
costs. Because of the above initiatives and several plan design changes,
including a High Deductible CDHP, the Board cost of healthcare has remained
relatively flat for five years.
Page 12 of 12

--- Page 50 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Mindy R. Garrett
Matthew P. Henry
Maryia Kuzina
Staff Auditors