Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2007
Date: 01/28/2008
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ecc9d72404c150b84
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:06:17.777562
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2007
January 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 28, 2008
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. Our review of closeout transactions disclosed
general compliance with the applicable laws, regulations, and policies. However,
we determined that certain transactions pertaining to the following agencies were
not in compliance:
Maryland State Department of Education
Department of Human Resources
Department of State Police
Department of Housing and Community Development
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Generally, the non-compliant transactions we identified either suggest that
additional State funds may be required to eliminate potential deficits, or resulted
in the General Fund being denied certain funds as of June 30, 2007. For example,
accrued revenues totaling $27.5 million could not be substantiated. If the
revenues are not available for these accruals, general fund appropriations (or
deficiency appropriations) may ultimately be needed to eliminate the resulting
deficits. A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
Five State agencies reported a total of $22.5 million in unprovided for payables as
of June 30, 2007 (Exhibit 2). This situation means that the related expenditures
will have to be funded with subsequent year appropriations. According to an
opinion of the Attorney General, this is not a violation of State law if the General
Assembly enacts a budget bill for the subsequent year containing an appropriation
that can be used to fund these expenditures.

--- Page 4 ---
The agencies identified in this report generally agreed with our findings. The
primary purpose of this annual review is to alert the Maryland General Assembly
to significant financial and budgetary closeout practices that do not comply with
applicable laws and regulations. The issues identified during this review, as well
as relevant recommendations, will be fully addressed, as appropriate, in our fiscal
compliance audit reports on the applicable agencies. We wish to acknowledge the
cooperation extended to us during the course of our review by the Comptroller of
the Treasury – General Accounting Division and by the various State agencies.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 7
Findings 9
Closeout Transactions
Revenue Transactions
* Finding 1 – Accrued Federal, Special, and Reimbursable Fund Revenues 10
Totaling $27.5 Million Could Not Be Substantiated by Three Agencies
* Finding 2 – A $5.5 Million General Fund Deficiency Appropriation May 12
Be Needed to Eliminate a Special Fund Deficit Balance at the
Department of State Police
Finding 3 – A $7.4 Million Negative Revenue Accrual Was Made by the 12
Department of Housing and Community Development Shifting Non-
Budgeted Fund Revenues to Fiscal Year 2008
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 4 – Fiscal Year 2007 Medicaid General Fund Accrued Expenditures 13
Exceeded the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Projected
Fiscal Year 2007 Medicaid Unreported Claims by $41 Million
Other Issue
Finding 5 – Federal Audit Disallowances for Expenditures Originally 14
Processed by the Maryland State Department of Education Totaling
$49.2 Million May Have to Be Paid With General Funds
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2007 Closeout Review Findings by 16
State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables According 17
to the General Accounting Division
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of the Treasury – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closing transactions that have not been previously recorded in the State’s
accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR).
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the CAFR. In its
audit report dated December 10, 2007, applicable to the fiscal year ended June 30,
2007, the firm stated that the State’s basic financial statements presented fairly, in
all material respects, the financial position of the State of Maryland as of June 30,
2007, and the respective changes in the financial position and cash flows, for the
year then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America (referred to as GAAP).
The State’s CAFR states that the General Fund, on a budgetary basis, had a
balance of approximately $2.1 billion as of June 30, 2007. This amount
represents a decrease of approximately $200 million from the balance reported at
the preceding fiscal year-end ($2.3 billion).
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2007. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 22
Departments and independent agencies to ascertain if they were properly
supported and made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and
accounting policies. We also reviewed, on a limited basis, transactions processed
subsequent to June 30, 2007 to determine if they were properly recorded (such as
charged or credited to the proper fiscal year). Also, we assessed the status of the
findings identified during our review of the budget closeout transactions for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2006, which were reported to the Joint Audit
Committee in a special report dated January 18, 2007. As part of our current
review, we contacted various officials of State agencies, as well as the
independent accounting firm under contract with the State to express an opinion
on its financial statements. Our review excluded public colleges and universities
and transactions processed through the Transportation Trust Fund because the
related financial activity does not involve the State’s General Fund and/or because
agencies have the authority to retain unspent funds at year-end.
Our conclusions for the aforementioned objective are contained on page 9 of this
report. Our follow-up review of the three closeout transactions from the
Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2006 disclosed
that two of the exceptions are repeated in this report, while the third finding was
satisfactorily addressed by the applicable agency.
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. Our fieldwork was conducted during the period from October 2007 to
January 2008.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings
Closeout Transactions
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that five departments or units thereof were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions either were not properly recorded or could not be
substantiated.
Revenue Transactions
Three State agencies could not substantiate certain revenue transactions totaling
$27.5 million. That is, the agencies could not provide evidence that they were
entitled to receive federal or reimbursable funding for the specific expenditures
incurred. To the extent that these funds are not received, the resulting deficits
would likely require the use of general funds. In addition, one state agency
maintained a deficit special fund balance of $5.5 million as a result of an
improper fiscal year 2005 closing transaction. The use of general funds will
likely be required to eliminate the deficit. Finally, one agency recorded a
negative accrued revenue adjustment totaling $7.4 million that resulted in
transferring non-budgeted fund revenue from fiscal year 2007 to fiscal year 2008.
Expenditure Transactions
One State agency recorded its remaining Medicaid general fund appropriation
balance as an accrued expenditure at year-end, which was $41 million more than
its projected incurred but not reported (IBNR) Medicaid claims for fiscal year
2007. If not accrued, the $41 million would have been reverted to the State’s
general fund.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1 on page 16 of this
report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
Accrued federal, special, and reimbursable fund revenues totaling
approximately $27.5 million could not be substantiated.
Analysis
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), the Department of
Human Resources (DHR), and the Department of State Police (DSP) recorded
unsubstantiated revenues of approximately $13.3 million, $12.4 million and $1.8
million, respectively. If revenues are not available for these accruals, which were
recorded to cover expenditures that had been previously incurred, general fund
appropriations (or deficiency appropriations) may ultimately be needed to
eliminate the resulting deficit. These conditions had been commented upon in our
four preceding annual budget closeout reports for DHR and were commented
upon in our preceding annual budget closeout report for MSDE and DSP.
MSDE
MSDE recorded unsubstantiated federal fund revenues totaling $13.3 million at
June 30, 2007 related to the federal Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF) grant. The unsubstantiated amount totaled $15.4 million at June 30,
2006, as reported in our fiscal year 2006 closeout review; during fiscal year 2007
MSDE reduced this amount by $2.1 million using general funds. This
unsubstantiated accrual relates to MSDE’s failure to recover TANF-related
expenditures incurred during fiscal years 2002 and 2003 and for which TANF
funds are no longer available for MSDE expenditure reimbursement.
During fiscal year 2007, MSDE, with the concurrence of the Secretary of the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM), accumulated general fund
recoveries from MSDE’s State aid audit process in a special fund revenue
account, and used these funds to help offset the unrecoverable federal fund TANF
balance. Because these recoveries represented the return of general fund monies,
they should have been recorded as general fund revenue. Furthermore, the
Accounting Procedures Manual of the Comptroller of the Treasury — General
Accounting Division (GAD) requires that the recovery of prior year expenditures
be reported as general fund revenue and deposited in the State’s General Fund.
However, MSDE applied $2.1 million of these general fund recoveries against the
TANF balance during fiscal year 2007 and, as of November 2007, had
accumulated another $2.1 million during fiscal year 2008 for this same purpose.
10

--- Page 13 ---
DHR
DHR recorded unsubstantiated federal fund revenues totaling approximately
$12.4 million relating to the TANF grant ($9.3 million) and the Foster Care Title
IV-E training grant ($3.1 million). Both of these conditions have been reported
upon in our fiscal year closeout reviews since 2003.
DHR’s records indicated that the TANF unsubstantiated accrued revenues totaled
approximately $9.3 million as of June 30, 2007, which is a decrease of $12.4
million from the $21.7 million reported in fiscal year 2006. DHR reported to
GAD in fiscal year 2006 that it was taking action to eliminate the unfunded
receivable by fiscal year 2008. Consequently, DHR used fiscal year 2007 general
fund appropriations to reduce $12.4 million of the prior years’ unfunded liability.
DHR was able to use these general fund appropriations to reduce the unfunded
receivable by identifying certain fiscal year 2007 expenditures that could be paid
by the TANF grant instead of general fund appropriations as originally budgeted.
DHR records indicated that the portion of unsubstantiated federal fund revenues
related to the Title IV-E grant totaled $3.1 million as of June 30, 2007, which is a
decrease of $7.4 million from the $10.5 million reported in fiscal year 2006.
These unsubstantiated revenues related to accounting entries dating as far back as
March 1999, according to DHR records. These entries resulted from DHR
charging a percentage of foster care expenditures against the grant beyond that
which was allowed and eligible for reimbursement by the federal government.
The $7.4 million reduction resulted from a federal audit settlement that reduced
the liability by $2.2. million, as well as the application of approximately $3.6
million in general funds DHR had set aside to pay for the questioned foster care
expenditures, and approximately $1.6 million in Title IV-E reimbursement funds
due from the Department of Juvenile Services related to that federal audit. The
Department of Juvenile Services has not recorded this liability.
DSP
DSP recorded unsubstantiated reimbursable and special fund revenues totaling
approximately $1.8 million relating to unattained revenue from the Maryland
Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) and from other entities. DSP did not
have adequate documentation to support a reimbursable fund accrual of $1.2
million that it claims is due from MEMA. The Military Department, which
provides accounting support services for MEMA, informed us that no
documentation exists that MEMA owes DSP any funds related to this accrual, and
that no liability had been recorded. This unsubstantiated accrued revenue was
reported upon in our fiscal year 2006 closeout review. DSP also did not have
documentation to support a special fund accrual of $560,000 related to DSP
11

--- Page 14 ---
providing services to other entities. Accounting detail records were not available
to substantiate this assertion or identify the other entities that owed these amounts
to DSP.
Finding 2
A general fund deficiency appropriation may be required to eliminate a
special fund deficit balance of $5.5 million.
Analysis
The Department of State Police (DSP) may require a general fund deficiency
appropriation to eliminate a special fund deficit balance of $5.5 million that
existed as of June 30, 2007. Specifically, DSP mistakenly recorded certain
transactions as both accrued revenue and actual revenue during fiscal year 2005.
This resulted in a special fund surplus of $5.6 million which DSP transferred to
the general fund during the fiscal year 2005 closeout because it did not have legal
authority to retain any balance in this special fund. When this mistake was
discovered during fiscal year 2006, DSP was left with a special fund deficit
balance of $5.6 million at the end of fiscal year 2006 due to the automatic reversal
of the previously recorded accrued revenue transaction at the beginning of fiscal
year 2006. During fiscal year 2007 excess revenues of $100,000 were retained in
the fund, which reduced the negative balance to $5.5 million. Consequently, a
general fund deficiency appropriation may be required to eliminate this deficit.
This condition was commented upon in our preceding annual budget closeout
report.
Finding 3
A $7.4 million negative revenue accrual was made by the Department of
Housing and Community Development to shift non-budgeted fund revenues
from fiscal year 2007 and preceding years to fiscal year 2008 revenue.
Analysis
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) recorded
a non-budgeted fund revenue adjustment totaling $7.4 million relating to
incentive fund revenue received by DHCD in fiscal year 2007 and prior years for
managing Section 8 housing subsidies for the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD). This adjustment improperly zeroed-out the non-
budgeted fund balance in which the revenues had been recorded, making it appear
that no net revenues existed at the end of fiscal year 2007. Since DHCD’s
attorney provided reference to State law that allows DHCD’s Community
Development Administration to retain the balance in the non-budgeted fund
account rather than transferring the balance to the General Fund, there was no
12

--- Page 15 ---
need for this journal entry that masked the balance from proper disclosure. This
transaction also resulted in a violation of proper revenue recognition principals
since revenues were being recorded for a period in which they were not earned
(that is, shifting revenues earned in prior years into fiscal year 2008).
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 4
Fiscal year 2007 Medicaid general fund accrued expenditures exceeded the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s projected fiscal year 2007
Medicaid unreported claims by $41 million.
Analysis
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) recorded the
remaining fiscal year 2007 Medicaid appropriation balance of $231 million as
general fund accrued expenditures at year-end, even though it was $41 million
more than its projected $190 million of incurred but not reported (IBNR)
Medicaid claims. If not accrued, the $41 million would have been reverted to the
State’s General Fund.
Medicaid providers have nine months from the date of service to report claims to
DHMH for reimbursement, which results in a portion of the each fiscal year’s
claims being paid in the next fiscal year. Since the total cost of services provided
in a given fiscal year that will be paid in the following year cannot be exactly
determined, DHMH has used a consistent calculation methodology for many
years based on historical data to estimate the IBNR and to record its year-end
accruals. The $41 million of excess retained general fund appropriations, which
is approximately 2 percent of the $2 billion fiscal year 2007 general fund
Medicaid expenditures, represents a potential amount subject to reversion to the
General Fund.
DHMH management believes that its calculated estimate is lower than what will
actually be needed due to the effects of a claims processing backlog on its
calculations, but has no documentation to show the effect.
The “State Policy on Accounts Payable, Accrued Expenditures, and
Encumbrances” requires State agencies to maintain proper detail documentation
to support all accrued expenditure transactions.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Other Issue
Conclusion
A liability of $49.2 million resulting from federal audit disallowances has been
recorded that may have to be paid with general funds.
Liability for Federal Disallowances
Finding 5
Federal audit disallowances totaling approximately $49.2 million may have to
be paid with general funds.
Analysis
Two federal audits of local school-based Medicaid expenditures have resulted in
disallowed claims totaling approximately $49.2 million that may have to be paid
with general funds. The first audit report, dated March 2003, which focused on
expenditures claimed in fiscal year 2000, recommended the refund of $19.9
million of federal Medicaid funds used to pay costs of health-related services
provided in school settings. The federal recommendations were principally based
on the lack of adequate supporting documentation at the local school systems that
were the providers of the disallowed health services claims. The Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE) and the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene (DHMH), which processed the Medicaid claims for MSDE, disagreed
with the federal audit report findings and appealed the refund recommendation in
July 2005. While an appropriation to fund this disallowance was not included in
the State’s budget, during the fiscal year 2007 closing, the $19.9 million was
reported to GAD as a liability with the appeal pending. In July 2007, a final
determination of the appeal was made resulting in the federal government
reducing its claim to $16.4 million; this reduced liability was recorded in the
State’s fiscal year 2007 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR).
The second federal audit report dated May 2007, which focused on similar
Medicaid expenditures that were claimed in fiscal years 2002 through 2004,
recommended the refund of an additional $32.8 million. These recommendations
were principally based on the lack of adequate support for the rates claimed for
school-based health services. These rates had been established by DHMH in
conjunction with MSDE and were uniformly charged by all local school systems
as instructed by MSDE. DHMH and MSDE disagreed with the federal audit
report findings and appealed the refund recommendation in June 2007. During
the fiscal year 2007 closing, DHMH reported the $32.8 million to GAD as a
liability with the appeal pending, and the full amount was recorded by GAD in the
14

--- Page 17 ---
State’s fiscal year 2007 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. As of January
4, 2008, there had been no final determination by the federal government of the
appeal. We were informed by a federal representative that a final decision should
be made in 2008.
Accordingly, funding of the $49.2 million in federal audit disallowances has not
been included in the State’s budget but the associated liability has been recorded
in the State’s fiscal year 2007 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. To the
extent the liability is not reduced and disallowances are not recovered from the
respective local school systems, it will need to be paid with State general funds.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2007 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Agency Finding Finding Description
Number
Maryland State Department of 1 $13.3 million in unsubstantiated federal fund accrued
Education revenues were recorded.
1 $12.4 million in unsubstantiated federal fund accrued
Department of Human Resources
revenues were recorded.
1 $1.8 million in unsubstantiated reimbursable and
special fund accrued revenues were recorded.
Department of State Police
2 $5.5 million special fund deficit balance exists, which
will require a general fund deficiency appropriation to
cover.
Department of Housing and 3 $7.4 million non-budgeted fund negative revenue
Community Development adjustment was recorded to eliminate a positive year-
end fund balance and to shift revenue to fiscal year
2008.
Department of Health and 4 $41 million of general fund appropriations were
Mental Hygiene recorded as accrued expenditures in excess of
projected Medicaid fiscal year unreported claims.
$49.2 million in general funds may be needed to cover
5
disallowed federal claims.1
1 This liability was transferred from the Maryland State Department of Education to the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables
According to the General Accounting Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Unprovided for Payables
Maryland Higher Education Commission $8,969,980
Department of Juvenile Services 8,827,949
Department of Human Resources 2,580,859
Department of State Police 1,340,034
Office of Public Defender 840,715
Total $22,559,537
17

--- Page 20 ---
Audit Team
Timothy R. Brooks, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
James M. Fowler
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Senior Auditors
Ronnette L. Bailey
Amin N. Berrah
Lauren R. Crue
Terry S. Gibson
Henry H. Startzman, IV
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA