Title: Caroline County Public Schools

NOTE: In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, this system has obtained an exemption from one audit which extends the time until the next audit from 6 years to 12 years.
Date: 11/02/2016
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d35cc9d72404c1509fe
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:00:55.443365
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Caroline County Public Schools
November 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
arren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII,CPA
Executive Director November 2, 2016 LegislativeAuditor
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit ofthe financial management practices of the
Caroline County Public Schools (CCPS) in accordance with the requirements
of the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) ofthe Annotated Code of
Maryland. The objectives ofthis audit were to evaluate whether CCPS’
procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its
assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use of financial
resources.
Our audit disclosed that CCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in a number of areas including procurement and
disbursements, payroll processing, and equipment inventory, and in two
areas, transportation services and information systems, numerous
deficiencies were found contributing to inefficiencies, excessive costs, and
significant control risks.
For example, payments to contractors for the cost of buses provided an
investment rate of return that was considerably higher than the recommended
prime interest rate and such payments often continued for several years after
the cost ofthe bus was fully paid by CCPS, practices which in certain cases we
estimated resulted in excessive payments of $475,000 and $262,000,
respectively. Furthermore, these payment arrangements and practices were
not approved by CCPS’ board.
In addition, payments to bus contractors for bus maintenance costs were
negotiated without any evidence CCPS had determined their reasonableness,
and the value of federal excise taxes ($142,000 over a five-year period) were
not excluded from payments to contractors for fuel usage. CCPS also did not
verify the accuracy of bus manifest mileage reported by contractors, which
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
_
resulted in estimated overpayments for certain routes of $144,000. Finally,
CCPS did not perform a system-wide route analysis and we found through
testingthat ridership on certain routes was lower than bus capacities, w[th
some bus routes operating at less than 50 percent of the desired capacity.
We also found that significant risks existed within the CCPS computer
network. For example, firewall rules allowed unnecessary Internet access to
several internal servers and workstations, and three critical servers (including
one that held personally identifiable information for students and employees
in plain text) were not protected by a firewall or an intrusion detection
prevention system. Further, CCPS locations with wireless connections were
not secured to prevent anyone in the vicinity ofthese locations from gaining
access to CCPS’ entire network. Finally, workstations and servers were not
sufficiently protected against malware and CCPS did not have a complete
information technology Disaster Recovery Plan.
CCPS did not always make use of a competitive procurement process or
submit certain procurement and human resource transactions to the Board
for approval. In addition, CCPS had not established processes to monitor
critical system capabilities assigned to employees to ensure that they were
necessary, appropriate, or properly restricted, and we found certain users
could perform incompatible functions. Due to the lack of proper procedures
and controls in these areas, there was an increased risk of unauthorized
procurement and payroll transactions. Also, CCPS entered into a power
purchasing agreement with a solar energy provider, without using a
competitive procurement process or determining whether it had received the
most favorable terms. We noted that other local government entities had
obtained more favorable terms for similar agreements. Finally, CCPS also
needs to ensure the accuracy of payments for employee and retiree
healthcare. For example, CCPS did not ensure the accuracy of payments for
healthcare claims thattotaled $6.6 million in fiscal year 2015.
The CCPS response to this audit is included as an Appendix to this report. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
CcPs.
Respectfully submitted,
7a
ThomasI Barnickel Ill, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 6
External Audits 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Revenue and Billing Cycle 8
Federal Funds 9
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
∗ Finding 1 – CCPS did not monitor and restrict users’ capabilities on its 10
automated procurement and accounts payable system and no
compensating electronic or manual controls were established over
employees with incompatible capabilities.
∗ Finding 2 – CCPS’ procurement policy did not require certain non- 11
competitive procurements to be submitted to or approved by the
Board.
Finding 3 – CCPS did not always award contracts through competitive 12
procurements or publish notifications of contract bids and awards in
eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
Human Resources and Payroll
∗ Finding 4 – Human resources and payroll system user capabilities were 14
not adequately monitored and restricted. In addition, independent
documented reviews of personnel and payroll transactions were not
performed.
Finding 5 – CCPS did not require Board approval of certain fiscal year 15
2013 pay increases totaling $122,000, as required by State law.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Inventory Control
∗ Finding 6 – CCPS had not established adequate recordkeeping 16
practices and controls over its capital and sensitive equipment.
Information Technology
Finding 7 – The CCPS computer network was not sufficiently 17
secured to assist in the detection/prevention of potential
security breaches and attacks, and restrict access to critical servers.
Finding 8 – Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected 19
against malware.
Finding 9 – Controls over the student information system database 20
were not sufficient as security activity was not logged.
Finding 10 – CCPS did not have a complete information technology 20
Disaster Recovery Plan for recovering computer operations.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 11 – CCPS executed a power purchasing agreement with a 22
solar provider without a competitive process or determination that
it had received the most favorable terms.
∗ Finding 12 – CCPS did not maintain documentation of preventive 24
work performed and for 10 preventive maintenance tasks tested,
could not provide documentation to support that the tasks were
performed as required.
Transportation Services
∗ Finding 13 – CCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing 26
procedures and did not periodically perform a system-wide
analysis of bus routes and bus capacities to maximize efficiency.
OLA found 31 percent of all routes had ridership below bus ridership
goals.
∗ Finding 14 – CCPS payments to bus contractors included elements 27
that did not consider market conditions, actual costs, or available
discounts and the basis for payments were not always adequately
documented.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Finding 15 – CCPS did not adequately ensure the accuracy of 30
contractor reported manifest mileage, which was used to
compute certain payments to bus contractors.
Finding 16 – Certain bus payments were not supported or approved by 31
the Board.
Finding 17 – Internal controls over payments to certain bus 32
contractors were not adequate, as there was no independent
review and approval of payment calculations performed by one
CCPS employee.
Food Services
Finding 18 – Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated as 33
transactions could be voided by cashiers without independent
review or approval.
School Board Operations 34
Other Financial Controls
Finding 19 – CCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for 35
employee and retiree healthcare costs.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 37
Agency Response Appendix
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Caroline County Public Schools (CCPS)
ranks 19th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2015 full-time student enrollment was 5,592 students.
CCPS has 10 schools, consisting of 5 elementary, 2 middle schools, 2 high
schools and 1 career and technology center.
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2015 revenues
were $84 million and expenditures were $85 million. The largest expenditure
category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for 70
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2015. According to MSDE
records, during the 2014-2015 school year, CCPS had 814 full-time
equivalent positions, which consisted of 560 instructional and 254 non-
instructional employees.
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of three elected and two
appointed voting members and two non-voting student members. The State
and the Caroline County government provide the vast majority of CCPS
funding. In addition, MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the
establishment and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and
regulations, in accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. MSDE also works with CCPS to comply with the requirements and
mandates of federal law. Caroline County government exercises authority
over the CCPS primarily through the review and approval of CCPS’ annual
operating and capital budgets.
External Audits
CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is
referred to as a Single Audit of CCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audit and
Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2014 and 2015, and examined the related
work papers for fiscal year 2014, which were the latest available at the time
we performed our audit fieldwork.
6

--- Page 9 ---
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the CCPS’ financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas. As a
result, we reduced the scope of our audit work related to State and local
government revenues received via wire transfer, accounts receivable, federal
grant activity, and food service inventory.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk, our audit
included a review to determine the status of 12 of the 18 findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated April 27, 2010. We determined that CCPS
did not satisfactorily address 7 of these 12 findings, and therefore, these
findings are repeated in this report. We did not address the status of the
remaining 6 preceding audit report findings.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
CCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Caroline County, the
State, and the federal government. According to the CCPS audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled $84 million during fiscal year
2015. In addition, schools collect funds for other purposes such as student
activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not considered
school revenue, these school activity funds are accounted for separately by
each school and reported in summary in the audited financial statements.
Although this revenue is raised through student-related activities, CCPS has a
fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year 2015 school activity
fund collections totaled $993,000 and the June 30, 2015 balance was
$418,000.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the CCPS financial statements and the objectives
of our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we reduced the scope of
our audit work related to State and local government revenues received via
wire transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies. Consequently, OLA limited the scope of its work, related to the
revenue and billing cycle, to CCPS Central Office collections and our review
and testing did not disclose any reportable conditions.
Internal Reviews of School Activity Funds
The CCPS fiscal office staff conducts reviews of individual schools’ activity
funds annually. The fiscal office staff’s review of internal controls and tests of
compliance with CCPS policies, procedures, and guidelines for school activity
funds at CCPS schools identified some control weaknesses at certain schools.
The fiscal office staff reports we reviewed disclosed that internal control
weaknesses identified were not prevalent, and tests were conducted without
exception.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted in use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2015 expenditures totaled $6.9
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of CCPS’ federal grants and the objectives of
our audit in this area, we reduced the scope of our audit work related to
federal grants. Besides expressing an opinion on CCPS’ compliance with the
terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure's impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant
expenditures) for fiscal years 2014 and 2015. The related reports stated that
CCPS complied, in all material respects, with the requirements applicable to
its major federal programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance
with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did not
identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds Were Requested for Eligible Services
CCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services. Medicaid is an entitlement program for which certain
service costs can be reimbursed to CCPS. Medicaid activity is not covered by
the Single Audit of federal grants. We concluded from our tests that
reimbursements were generally obtained for Medicaid-subsidized services.
According to agency records, fiscal year 2015 reimbursement for Medicaid-
subsidized services totaled approximately $1.1 million.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and CCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled approximately $25 million during fiscal year 2015.
Requisitions for goods and services are computer generated by the requesting
department and must first be approved by department supervisory personnel
and then by one of the Assistant Superintendents, before issuing the related
9

--- Page 12 ---
purchase orders. The CCPS procurement policy generally provides that
procurements valued at $25,000 or higher be both approved by the Board
and competitively bid. The policies also require solicitation of written or oral
quotes for purchases of $5,000 or greater. Payments are processed by the
finance department through an automated system that prints vendor checks
and posts the payments to the financial records.
Finding 1
CCPS did not monitor and restrict users’ capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system and no compensating electronic
or manual controls were established over employees with incompatible
capabilities.
Analysis
CCPS did not adequately monitor and restrict users’ capabilities on its
automated procurement and accounts payable system. Additionally, there
were no independent approvals of changes to users’ capabilities on the
automated system, and adequate compensating electronic or manual controls
were not established over employees with capabilities that placed them in a
position to perpetuate misuse or misappropriation of resources without
detection. Specifically, seven employees were assigned system capabilities
that allowed them to perform incompatible functions, some of which were not
required by the applicable individuals to perform their job duties.
• Three finance office administrative employees could perform the
incompatible functions of adding vendors, initiating and approving
invoices, and printing and obtaining checks. None of these capabilities
were required to perform their job duties.
• Similarly, two information technology employees could add vendors, and
initiate and approve requisitions, purchase orders and invoices, although
these capabilities were not required for their job duties. Additionally,
these employees were responsible for printing vendor checks. These two
employees also had system administrator access allowing them to add or
change employee accesses and capabilities, including their own, in the
automated system without supervisory review and approval.
• Two accounts payable employees who were responsible for processing
invoices could also perform the incompatible functions of adding vendors,
and printing and obtaining vendor checks.
10

--- Page 13 ---
• CCPS had not established independent electronic approval requirements
for purchase orders and invoices, although they had been established for
requisitions. In addition, although manual disbursement review
procedures were performed, they did not adequately compensate for
existing incompatible capabilities. These manual reviews did not include a
review of appropriate supporting documents, and were not independent,
as one of the seven employees with incompatible capabilities performed
the reviews.
As a result, unauthorized purchases and disbursements could be processed
without detection, although our review did not disclose any inappropriate
transactions that were processed by the employees that had unnecessary or
incompatible access. In our preceding audit report, we commented on the
failure to segregate incompatible functions and restrict system access to
critical system functions for the same seven employees, as well as the failure
to establish independent approvals.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and processes. Specifically, we
recommend that CCPS take appropriate action to
a. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform
incompatible duties (repeat);
b. restrict access to the automated procurement and accounts payable
system to individuals whose job duties require such access (repeat);
c. establish independent electronic approval requirements for critical
purchasing and accounts payable transactions, and changes to user
capabilities; and
d. establish independent approvals for all critical documents that include a
review of applicable supporting documents (repeat).
Finding 2
CCPS’ procurement policy did not require certain non-competitive
procurements to be submitted to or approved by the Board.
Analysis
CCPS’ policies did not require Board approval for certain high-value
purchases. While CCPS had developed formal procurement policies to
address the acquisition and approval of certain procurements over $25,000,
it did not require Board approval for all purchases above this level.
Specifically, Board approval was not required for certain contracts procured
without a competitive bidding process, such as those procured using
11

--- Page 14 ---
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA)1 or sole source
awards.
Consequently, significant procurement activity was not subject to specific
Board oversight. Our test of 24 procurements with fiscal year 2015
disbursements totaling $13.1 million disclosed 8 contracts, each over
$25,000, (with fiscal year 2015 disbursements of approximately $2.4 million)
procured through ICPAs, or were sole source or other non-competitive awards
that were not submitted to the Board for approval. We commented on the
need for Board approval for these types of procurements in our preceding
audit report.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS amend its existing procurement policies to require
that contract awards resulting from the use of intergovernmental purchasing
agreements, sole source, and other non-competitive awards be reported to
and approved by the Board when the awards exceed $25,000 (repeat).
Finding 3
CCPS did not always award contracts through competitive procurements or
publish notifications of contract bids and awards in eMaryland Marketplace,
as required.
Analysis
Our test of 24 procurements for goods and services with fiscal year 2015
disbursements totaling $13.1 million disclosed that contracts were not always
awarded through a competitive process or supported by sole source
justifications as required by CCPS policies, and contract bid solicitations and
awards were not always published in eMaryland Marketplace, as required by
State law.
• Four contractors, each paid over $25,000, with collective fiscal year 2015
payments totaling $325,700, were not competitively bid or supported,
when applicable, by sole source justifications, as required by CCPS policy.
For example, one of these contracts was for auditing services for which
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, in part, defines an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement as a contract that is entered into by
at least one governmental entity in a manner consistent with the purposes set forth in
Section 11-201 of the Article, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering
the contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to
promote efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing.
12

--- Page 15 ---
CCPS has a specific policy requiring competitive procurements. However,
our review disclosed that CCPS had not competitively bid these services
since 2006. Another contract for architectural services was awarded
without the benefit of competitive procurement, even though CCPS has a
specific policy that requires those services to be procured through a
competitive process for costs exceeding $15,000.
• CCPS did not use eMaryland Marketplace to publish bids and awards for 6
of the 9 items tested where CCPS conducted a competitive procurement
process. The payments to these vendors in fiscal year 2015 totaled $1.7
million. State law requires a local school system to publish a procurement
solicitation or notice of award greater than $25,000 on eMaryland
Marketplace.
Recommendation 3
We recommend CCPS
a. comply with Board policies when procuring goods and services, including
using a competitive procurement process or documenting the justification
of any sole source procurements, and submit all contracts to the Board for
approval; and
b. publish contract procurement solicitations or awards in eMaryland
Marketplace, as required by State law.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS
budget. According to CCPS records, fiscal year 2015 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled approximately $60 million, or 70 percent of total operating
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2014 – 2015 school year CCPS had 814 full-time positions, which
consisted of 560 instructional positions and 254 non-instructional positions.
CCPS uses an automated system to maintain human resources information,
record employee time, track leave usage, and to process and record payroll
transactions. Attendance reports are submitted by employees semi-monthly
and leave is recorded and adjustments processed on the system by central
payroll personnel. The system also generates payroll checks and direct
deposit advices. Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such
as compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as
data entry of new employee information).
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 4
Human resources (HR) and payroll system user capabilities were not
adequately monitored and restricted. In addition, independent documented
reviews of personnel and payroll transactions were not performed.
Analysis
Capabilities assigned to users that allowed them to perform critical HR and
payroll system functions were not adequately monitored and restricted, as
certain employees were assigned system capabilities that allowed them to
perform incompatible functions. In addition, independent documented
reviews of critical personnel and payroll transactions were not performed.
• CCPS did not generate periodic system reports of employee access
capabilities for supervisory review to ensure an adequate separation of
duties and to confirm the need for the assigned capabilities.
Consequently, we noted that certain individuals were assigned
incompatible HR and payroll capabilities, such as changing employee
salary and direct deposit information, or were assigned capabilities that
were not needed to perform their duties. For example, of the six CCPS
users we deemed having critical access capabilities, four users could
perform incompatible functions or had unnecessary access, including two
information technology (IT) employees with unlimited system administrator
access that allowed them to perform all HR and payroll functions. A third
employee could change salary and direct deposit information as well as
process payroll.
• There was no process in place to verify that critical HR and payroll
transactions were properly authorized and correct. Specifically, HR and
payroll transactions were not subject to independent review. Further,
available reports of HR transactions processed that could be used for the
review and verification to source documents were not generated. IT
personnel reviewed certain HR and payroll transactions (such as new
hires, salary increases, terminations, and payroll adjustments) recorded on
the system. However, these IT personnel had unlimited system access
and capabilities and used documents prepared by the aforementioned
individuals with incompatible capabilities who originally entered the
transactions on the system; consequently, the review process was not
independent or effective.
As a result, there was a lack of assurance that all HR and payroll transactions
were authorized and appropriate. Our test of HR and payroll transactions and
adjustments did not disclose any inappropriate transactions.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Similar conditions regarding inappropriate access to critical system functions
and the lack of an independent review of HR and payroll transactions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS
a. periodically generate reports of assigned employee access capabilities
and perform documented independent review of user capabilities to
ensure access is properly granted,
b. limit access of critical functions to those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their assigned job duties (repeat),
c. eliminate the capability of individuals to perform incompatible system
functions (repeat), and
d. perform a periodic documented independent review of critical personnel
and payroll transactions processed using appropriate system reports
(repeat).
Finding 5
CCPS did not require Board approval of certain fiscal year 2013 pay increases
totaling $122,000.
Analysis
CCPS did not require Board approval for promotions or pay increases of
certain non-instructional positions. Specifically, 20 employees who received a
promotion or an increase in salary for fiscal year 2013 totaling approximately
$122,000 were not approved by the Board. Agency personnel indicated that
the promotions were approved by the Superintendent at the time and that
since these employees did not hold positions requiring a State teacher
certification, it did not seek Board approval. Section 4-103 of the Education
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires school boards to set all
employees’ salaries.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCPS ensure promotions and increases in pay are
approved by the Board, as required.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $5.6 million as of June 30, 2015.
CCPS uses a spreadsheet maintained by its central office to record capitalized
inventory with a cost of $5,000 or more for financial statement purposes.
Sensitive equipment, defined as equipment items subject to theft (such as
computers), is recorded separately on a database system.
Finding 6
CCPS had not established adequate recordkeeping practices and controls
over its capital and sensitive equipment.
Analysis
CCPS had not established adequate recordkeeping practices and controls
over its capital and sensitive equipment.
• Since at least 2010, CCPS has not performed a complete physical
inventory of capital equipment even though its written procedures require
annual inventory counts.
• Controls over its sensitive equipment inventory records, which as of
September 2015 listed 8,377 active items, were inadequate. Specifically,
one employee was primarily responsible for recording additions, disposals,
and adjustments for sensitive inventory on a database system without the
entries being independently verified to supporting documents by
supervisory personnel. Additionally, upon our inquiry, CCPS advised that
nine employees have access to modify sensitive inventory records.
• At the time of our review, the sensitive inventory listed approximately
2,400 sensitive items as disposed of, for which there was no
documentation of the disposals being approved.
As a result of these deficiencies, there is a greater risk that equipment could
be misappropriated without detection. A similar condition regarding the
failure to properly maintain detail equipment records, was commented upon
in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS establish adequate recordkeeping practices and
controls. Specifically, CCPS should
16

--- Page 19 ---
a. conduct annual physical inventories of all capital equipment; and
b. maintain complete and accurate inventory records for sensitive equipment
items by ensuring that additions, disposals, and adjustments are
independently verified to approved supporting documents (repeat).
Information Technology
Background
The CCPS Department of Technology maintains and administers the CCPS
computer network, computer operations and instructional information
systems. CCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the computer
resources located at the CCPS headquarters and the CCPS central office. The
CCPS network included two critical network firewalls to protect the CCPS
network and CCPS operates several significant administrative and academic
related applications including the finance application and the student
information application. The finance application includes modules for payroll,
human resources, and accounts payable.
Finding 7
The CCPS computer network was not sufficiently secured to assist in the
detection/prevention of potential security breaches and attacks, and restrict
access to critical servers.
Analysis
The CCPS computer network was not sufficiently secured.
• CCPS did not use centralized network based authentication for faculty and
staff computers. We were advised by CCPS network personnel that CCPS’
computers and servers did not use any form of centralized network based
authentication and that directory services software, which assists in such
network based authentication, was not employed. Synchronizing local
users so client computers and servers can effectively access shared
resources is very difficult. In addition, when security updates are
necessary, this condition requires computers to be updated individually,
rather than centrally; increasing the risk that all machines don’t have the
appropriate security software.
• Firewall rules allowed unsecured and unnecessary connections to
numerous network devices. For example, firewall rules allowed
unnecessary Internet access to several internal servers and workstations.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Best practices prescribed by the University System of Maryland’s IT
Security Standards states that firewalls should be configured to block all
services not required and disable unused ports, hide and prevent direct
accessing of trusted network addresses from untrusted networks, and
maintain comprehensive audit trails.
• Three critical servers (including one server that held numerous names and
social security numbers of students and employees in plain text) were not
protected by a firewall or an intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS).
We determined that these three servers were placed in front of the CCPS
firewall and IDPS, and therefore were not subject to the protections
afforded by these devices.
• The CCPS IDPS was not configured to block malicious traffic identified by
the system, but rather reported such traffic for review by CCPS’ IT
personnel. We were advised that the system generated reports of such
malicious activity; however, CCPS personnel did not review these reports.
Therefore, although CCPS had an operational IDPS it was not used to help
secure the CCPS network. Best practices contained in the State of
Maryland Information Security Policy specify that intrusion detection
prevention tools and techniques must be employed to monitor system
events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of information
systems and/or confidential information.
• All 13 CCPS locations providing wireless connections were configured to
operate without any form of user authentication and connected users were
placed on the CCPS internal network. In addition, network traffic from
these wireless connections was not subject to any firewall or router
filtering to block unauthorized access. As a result, anyone in the vicinity of
these 13 locations could gain network level access to the entire CCPS
wired area network, including CCPS critical systems.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS
a. update its network architecture by utilizing a network based directory
service with centralized authentication for all computers,
b. configure its firewalls to achieve a “least privilege” security strategy giving
individuals and devices only those privileges needed to perform assigned
tasks,
c. relocate the three aforementioned servers behind the firewall and IDPS
and configure the firewall and IDPS to properly protect these critical
servers,
18

--- Page 21 ---
d. set its IDPS to block identified malicious traffic from entering the CCPS
network, and
e. secure its internal network by only allowing properly authorized users to
access the internal network through its wireless connection network.
Finding 8
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
Analysis
CCPS workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against
malware.
• Workstations were configured with users having administrator rights.
Administrator rights should be provided only to network administrators and
select others since these rights are the highest permission level that can
be granted to users and it allows users to install software and change
configuration settings. Our test of workstations assigned to faculty and
staff disclosed that the users of all 10 workstations tested had
administrative rights on their workstation and we were advised by CCPS
personnel that all faculty and staff are given administrative rights on their
workstations. As a result, if these workstations were infected with
malware, the malware would run with administrative rights and expose
these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights. In addition,
users with administrative rights could disable the malware protection
software on their workstations.
• CCPS did not have an enterprise-wide management tool to administer the
antimalware software on its workstations and servers. As a result of this
condition, CCPS could not connect to and manage the antimalware
software on its 4,400 workstations and servers. Our review disclosed that
three of ten workstations tested did not have malware protection software
installed. Five of the remaining seven workstations tested (with malware
protection software) were running malware protection software that had
not been updated in over four years. Finally, all three servers tested had
antimalware signatures that had not been updated for over 300 days.
Best practices as prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Security
Policy state that agencies, at a minimum, must “protect against malicious
code (viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by implementing (antivirus, antimalware)
solutions that, to the extent possible, include a capability for automatic
updates.”
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to network
administrators and other select users requiring such rights; and
b. obtain an enterprise-wide management tool to ensure that malware
protection software is installed on all computers and use this tool to
ensure that all workstations and servers are configured with malware
protection software that is operating properly, up-to-date, and has current
signature files.
Finding 9
Controls over the student information system database were not sufficient as
security activity was not logged.
Analysis
The student information database was not configured to log any database
security activity including privileged operations. Best practices identified in
the State of Maryland Information Security Policy require that information
systems must generate audit records for all security-relevant events, including
all security and system administrator accesses and that procedures must be
developed to routinely (for example daily or weekly) review audit records for
indications of unusual activities, suspicious activities or suspected violations,
and report findings to appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS set the student information database to log all
critical security related events, regularly review these logs, document these
reviews and retain this documentation for future reference.
Finding 10
CCPS did not have a complete information technology Disaster Recovery Plan
for recovering computer operations.
Analysis
CCPS did not have a complete information technology Disaster Recovery Plan
(DRP) for recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for
example a fire). The State of Maryland IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines
provide best practices on the minimum required elements needed for a DRP.
CCPS’ DRP did not address several of these minimum requirements. For
example, the DRP did not contain the current alternate processing site,
20

--- Page 23 ---
complete listings of hardware and software, or the restoration of network
connectivity. In addition, the DRP had not been updated since September 30,
2011 and had not been tested. Without a complete and tested DRP, a
disaster could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of time) in
restoring information systems operations above and beyond the expected
delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that is in accordance with
the aforementioned IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines; and
b. periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the
documentation for future reference.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS employs a staff of 52 employees to maintain its 10 schools and 3 other
administrative and support facilities. According to the fiscal year 2015 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to CCPS facilities over the next six years were estimated to cost
$34.7 million.
Steps Have Been Taken to Reduce Energy Use
CCPS has taken steps to reduce energy use. For example, CCPS uses an
energy management system to monitor energy usage and employs an Energy
Management Program Manager to monitor energy practices.
Furthermore, CCPS entered into a 15-year energy performance contract with
an engineering firm, beginning in April 2012, for facility improvements to its
lighting, heating and ventilation, and air conditioning systems that guarantees
energy cost avoidance of $4.2 million at a total project cost of $3.1 million.
According to documents provided by CCPS (which we did not audit), during the
first two years of its Energy Reduction Program, the firm reported cost
avoidance, as of March 2014 (most current data available) of over $485,000.
Additionally, CCPS Energy Management personnel reported to the Board in
March 2014 that from October 2008 to January 2014 its Energy Reduction
Program had resulted in overall energy cost avoidance of $1.9 million from
reduced usage of electricity and heating oil. CCPS’ calculation of the
reduction in energy usage (which we did not audit) was done by comparing
billed energy usage (wattage and gallons) during the period.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 11
CCPS executed a 20-year power purchasing agreement with a solar provider
without a competitive process or a formal analysis to help ensure it received
the most favorable terms.
Analysis
CCPS executed a power purchasing agreement with a solar provider that
included a 20-year escalating rate schedule with an estimated cost of $6.1
million without using a competitive procurement process or formal analysis to
ensure it received the most favorable terms. Further, CCPS could not provide
documentation that any of its agreements with the contractor had been
approved by the Board. Finally, with the concurrence of the Interagency
Committee on School Construction (IAC), State capital project funds totaling
$406,000 were used to prepay certain of the related solar electricity usage
charges, which was inconsistent with State law regarding the use of these
funds for capital improvements.
In 2012, CCPS executed a solar power purchasing agreement (PPA) with a
contractor that allowed the contractor to install fields of solar panels at three
locations on CCPS property that would provide approximately 80 percent of
the electricity requirements for five CCPS schools in exchange for a 20-year
guarantee that CCPS would purchase the electricity generated by those
systems from the contractor at pre-established rates at an estimated cost of
$6.1 million. The solar provider retains all environmental credits and financial
incentives and tax benefits associated with the systems. In 2013, CCPS and
the contractor amended the agreement to use a State grant to make an
advance payment of $406,000 on CCPS’ future electricity usage. This new
agreement provides for somewhat lower rates over the 20-year PPA to offset
the advance payment, although, when considering the advance payment
dollar amount, the overall 20-year cost was virtually unchanged.
• CCPS did not conduct a competitive solicitation and did not maintain
documentation to support that it assessed whether the most favorable
terms under the PPA were obtained. While the PPA provided lower
electricity rates, our limited analysis indicated that the terms and
conditions may not have been the most favorable when compared to PPAs
entered into by one county government (using the same contractor) and
another local school system.
CCPS management advised us that they had used an intergovernmental
agreement with a county government on the State’s Eastern Shore in lieu
of a competitive procurement process. However, there was no evidence of
the use of an intergovernmental agreement as it was not mentioned in the
22

--- Page 25 ---
PPA, and CCPS could not explain why they were paying a higher base rate
($.090 per kilowatt hour) than that county government ($.080 per kilowatt
hour). Although the annual escalation rate increase (2.5 percent rate) was
the same, the lower base rate for the county government provided greater
cost benefits. Based on CCPS’ estimated electricity use and the
differences in rates, additional costs to CCPS would equate to
approximately $28,000 for the first year of the contract and $640,800
over the entire 20-year agreement. 2
Furthermore, there are indications that more favorable terms are possible
for the annual escalation rate. Although the annual escalation rate
increase for CCPS and the county government were the same (2.5
percent), we noted another Maryland school system had more recently
(May 2015) negotiated a lower annual escalation rate (1 percent) over its
20-year contract with a different contractor. The base rate was also lower
for this school system.
Finally, CCPS had not prepared a written determination of the benefits of
using the other local government’s contract, as required by State law. This
law, which specifically states it is applicable to local education agencies,
allows the use of other local government contracts only after the using
entity has determined the use of such arrangements will promote
efficiency or cost savings.
• Although approved by the IAC, CCPS submitted an application that
misstated the agreed-upon intended use of the funds, a use that was
inconsistent with State law. The source of the aforementioned advance
payment for power usage was the Energy Efficiency Initiative (EEI) of the
fiscal year 2013 Public School Construction Capital Improvement Program
(CIP) provided by the IAC. We were advised by CCPS that although their
energy saving projects were completed before the EEI funds became
available, they had consulted with the IAC regarding how they might make
use of the EEI funding. After discussing the details of CCPS’ existing PPA
with the IAC, it was agreed that CCPS could use of the funds for the
purchase of electricity even though the Solar Initiative Application
submitted to the IAC for the use of EEI funds stated that the incentive
must go towards capital costs of a solar energy system and the legislation
that authorized the creation of the State debt funding the CIP stipulated
2 Although the CCPS rate was subsequently bought down through prepayment using State
grant funds beginning in 2013 (.084), the reduced rate was still significantly higher than
the county government’s rate. The prepayment resulted in reducing the annual difference,
but the overall 20-year cost differential would be virtually unchanged.
23

--- Page 26 ---
that the proceeds were to be used for public school construction and
capital improvements. Finally, CCPS did not perform a cost benefit
analysis prior to making the advance payment, although our calculations
using investment rates from the State Treasurer indicate that the resulting
prepayment decision was generally cost neutral.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that the procurement method (competitive procurement or
intergovernmental agreement) chosen for energy contracts, and any
prepayments decisions, provides the most favorable financial outcome for
CCPS;
b. submit all PPAs to the Board for its approval;
c. comply with all requirements of State law when using intergovernmental
agreements; and
d. ensure that State CIP funding is only used for the purposes provided for
under the law.
Finding 12
CCPS did not maintain documentation of preventive maintenance work
performed.
Analysis
CCPS could not provide us with documentation that all required preventive
maintenance and school inspections had been performed. For example, our
test of 10 of the 24 scheduled preventive maintenance tasks (such as weekly
emergency generator checks) to be routinely performed at each school
disclosed that for all 10 tested CCPS could not provide documentation to
support that the preventive maintenance tasks were performed at its schools,
as required.
CCPS had developed a comprehensive maintenance plan that included,
among other details, preventive maintenance and custodial task schedules
and requirements. Agency personnel informed us that they could not perform
all scheduled preventive maintenance tasks identified in the plan on a
consistent basis due to staffing issues. In addition, although CCPS has a web-
based system in place capable of handling work assignments, the system was
not currently being used for preventive maintenance tasks.
A similar condition regarding the lack of documentation supporting that
preventive maintenance was performed was commented upon in our
24

--- Page 27 ---
preceding audit report. Per the fiscal year 2014 audited financial statements
maintenance expenditures totaled $890,000. Per the fiscal year 2015 CCPS
budget, the Maintenance Department has 6 maintenance personnel who
maintain 835,000 square feet of school buildings residing on over 241 acres.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that CCPS
a. evaluate its preventive maintenance schedule to determine whether
changes, such as the tasks performed and frequency, should be made
that considers staffing and risk; and
b. use its existing web-based system for preventive maintenance tasks and
document preventive maintenance performed and maintain such
documentation (repeat).
Transportation Services
Background
CCPS has approximately 4,500 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on 59 buses of
which 13 were owned and operated by contractors, 28 were owned and
operated by CCPS employee drivers (with CCPS effectively leasing the buses),
and the remaining 18 were owned by CCPS. According to CCPS audited
financial statements, fiscal year 2015 transportation costs totaled $4 million,
with $2 million (50 percent) representing payments for contracted bus
services. CCPS reported that 1.1 million route miles were traveled to
transport students for the 2014-2015 school year (with approximately 71
percent driven by contractor and employee drivers).
CCPS’ bus contracts are for an initial five years with annual renewals generally
granted over the 12 to 15-year useful life of the bus. Payments to bus
contractors consist of amounts for the purchase of a bus (known as a per
vehicle allotment or PVA, consisting of a reimbursement for the cost of a bus
and a flat rate for return on investment or ROI), hourly reimbursements for
drivers and attendants, a per mile maintenance fee, fuel costs, and a garage
fee (which is the difference between the PVA based on a useful life of twelve
and ten years). Contractual payments to employee owner/operators include
similar cost components, except they exclude the salaries and related
benefits for drivers and attendants which CCPS pays separately under its
payroll system.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 13
CCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing procedures and did not
periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and related bus
capacities to maximize the efficiency and address bus routes operating below
ridership capacity goals.
Analysis
CCPS bus routing procedures were not comprehensive, as they did not
address the planning, reviewing, and changing of existing routes, and they did
not include formal individual bus capacities, ridership goals, and student ride
times. In addition, CCPS did not periodically perform a system-wide analysis
of its bus routes and related bus capacities to maximize efficiency and to
address bus routes operating below ridership capacity goals. Finally, CCPS
did not fully use its automated bus routing software capabilities to develop
routes to enhance the efficiency of its bus operations.
Our analysis of student ridership disclosed that ridership was significantly less
than bus capacity limits. Specifically, our review of 88 regular routes (46
buses and all regular routes) for the 2013-2014 school year disclosed that 27
routes (31 percent) were below 75 percent of computed ridership goals based
on bus sizes3. Of the 88 routes, 5 (6 percent) had student ridership of less
than 50 percent. Further, 4 buses (9 percent) had no routes that were above
the 75 percent ridership goal.
CCPS transportation management advised that bus routes were revised in
conjunction with the installation of the routing software in 2010, resulting in a
mileage reduction for several routes. Subsequently, however, the routing
software, primarily has been used to map out the bus routes and bus stop
locations, and although CCPS used informal targets of student ridership
percentages and ride times in planning individual routes, they were not
recorded in the automated routing system. Also, available system reports,
such as number of students per route and ridership percentages for individual
buses were not generated and used to assess the efficiency of bus routes.
Using routing software is a recognized best practice that can be used to
reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce student ride time,
and help ensure that routes minimize the number of buses needed to
transport students. Similar conditions regarding the lack of comprehensive
bus routing procedures and not fully using its automated routing software to
3 School bus capacities are lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ depending
on the school level. For example, the capacity for middle/high school and elementary
school routes is 51 and 61 students, respectively based on 72-passenger buses
(manufacturer stated capacity).
26

--- Page 29 ---
help plan more efficient services, were commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that CCPS take steps to determine if buses can be used more
efficiently. Specifically, we recommend that CCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written procedures that include specific
target bus ridership percentages and student ride times (repeat); and
b. fully utilize the capabilities of its automated routing software to maximize
the ridership on its bus routes (repeat).
Finding 14
CCPS payments to bus contractors included elements that did not consider
market conditions, actual costs, or available discounts, and the bases for
payments were not always adequately documented.
Analysis
The majority of the elements used to determine payment amounts to bus
contractors, including employee owner/operators, did not reflect market
conditions, actual costs, or available discounts, and certain elements were not
adequately documented. Consequently, CCPS unnecessarily made excessive
payments for its contracted bus services.
• CCPS pays contractors an annual PVA for each bus, but the formula used
by CCPS results in larger payment amounts in comparison to how other
local school systems usually compute the PVA payments. The CCPS
formula to calculate the PVA includes an amount for the purchase and
financing of the bus, but unlike other school systems, it also includes a
vehicle replacement factor of 66 percent of the purchase cost of the bus,4
to arrive at the amount to be reimbursed over the useful life of the bus.
Also, in the past, CCPS had calculated the PVA payments over 10 years
while paying them over 12 years. But beginning in fiscal year 2013 CCPS
began both calculating and paying the PVA over a 12-year period.
However, CCPS transportation officials advised us that since this 2013
change in the calculation produced less than the desired payment
amount, a new payment component was created to make up the
4 The use of a “replacement factor” in the CCPS’ PVA calculation is unusual when compared
to other LEAs’ methodologies. CCPS’ use of the replacement factor appears to be a method
to increase the payments to the contractor, as the customary bus financing practiced by the
LEAs already includes full reimbursement for the cost to purchase the present bus (making
a replacement component for a future bus purchase unnecessary).
27

--- Page 30 ---
difference called a garage fee. This component, which CCPS could not
substantiate, effectively resulted in increasing the PVA total each year,
offsetting any savings from the increase in the number of years over which
PVA payments were calculated.
Furthermore, CCPS’ PVA formula includes a borrowing rate (established by
obtaining rates from a local bank), which ranged between 6 percent and
3.99 percent during fiscal years 2011 to 2015. The combined effect of
this rate and the aforementioned replacement factor and garage fee
resulted in a total ROI that ranged from 9 percent to 9.6 percent during
the same period. These effective ROIs were considerably higher than the
prime interest rate, which is recommended for use in other studies.5
To estimate the financial impact of CCPS using their effective ROI rates
(including the replacement component) over the life of a bus, we
calculated the PVA for each of the 13 new buses placed into service from
February 2012 through September 2014 using the prime interest rate and
CCPS’ 12-year estimated useful life in the PVA formula. We then
compared our PVA results to CCPS’ PVA payments. This comparison
showed that the CCPS annual PVA payments per bus were $2,719 to
$6,030 higher than the payments would have been had the prevailing
prime rate been used in the calculation. The effect is that, over the 12-
year life of these 13 new buses, CCPS will pay out approximately
$475,000 more than if the prime rate was used for ROI to determine the
PVA payments. This analysis does not include the effect of any new bus
purchases made after September 2014 and the lost interest income that
CCPS could have potentially earned on the aforementioned $475,000. A
similar condition regarding the appropriateness of the PVA calculation was
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
• PVA payments were not discontinued once the service life of the bus on
which the PVA was based was reached, resulting in excess reimbursement
to the contractor for the bus’ purchase cost. For example, while PVA
payments were to be based on a 10-year life for buses placed in service
prior to fiscal year 2013, CCPS’ policy was to pay this annual amount for
up to 15 years (if the bus is kept that long). CCPS paid an additional
$261,696 for fiscal years 2014 and 2015 for 11 and 14 buses,
5 The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study
commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a
lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment rate: therefore, it
is deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation.
28

--- Page 31 ---
respectively, that had been purchased and placed in service at least 10
years prior.
• Payments to bus contractors for maintenance costs were negotiated with
the contractors and were not supported by documentation of actual
maintenance and other repair costs. Furthermore, although maintenance
payments to contractors were higher than in-house bus maintenance
costs, CCPS had not performed a documented assessment of why they
were higher and documented the actual contractor costs. For example,
according to CCPS records, maintenance costs for fiscal year 2015 for
CCPS owned buses was $0.23 per mile, while bus contractors were paid
$0.81 per mile. CCPS questioned the validity of such a comparison and
claimed that, unlike the contractors, CCPS benefits from volume discounts
and lower labor rates than what is charged by commercial vehicle repair
facilities. As previously noted, this contention could not be supported.
• CCPS did not exclude federal excise taxes when paying bus contractors for
fuel. CCPS pays contractors for fuel usage based on the published
American Automobile Association’s average diesel fuel prices, including
taxes, divided by a miles per gallon rate established by CCPS. However,
according to federal law, CCPS contractors are exempt from the $0.244
per gallon excise tax on diesel fuel and are able to receive a credit for
federal fuel taxes paid when they file their income tax returns. As a result,
we estimated CCPS’ total fuel payments to bus contractors were
$142,000 higher than necessary for fiscal years 2011 through 2015.6
Similar conditions regarding the appropriateness of PVA and maintenance
amounts paid were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that CCPS
a. use market investment rates as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for the annual PVA (repeat),
b. pay PVA rates based on the periods of service used in the PVA’s
calculation,
c. develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for establishing
reasonable per mile maintenance costs (repeat), and
6 Subsequent to the completion of our audit fieldwork, Chapter 397, Laws of Maryland 2016,
effective July 1, 2016, exempted a county board of education or a school bus operator
under contract with a county board of education, from State motor fuel taxes. In addition,
the law authorized county boards of education and a school bus operator to claim refund of
State motor fuel taxes paid. Consequently, this exemption should be factored into future
payments.
29

--- Page 32 ---
d. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
Finding 15
CCPS did not adequately ensure the accuracy of contractor reported manifest
mileage, which was used to compute certain payments to bus contractors.
Analysis
CCPS did not ensure the accuracy of mileage payments to bus contractors
(including employee owner/operators). Specifically, the mileage reported on
the monthly manifests submitted by each bus driver, used to calculate the
fuel and maintenance components of the contractor's monthly pay, was not
compared to available bus routing system reports. The routing system has the
capability to generate reports of the turn-by-turn directions along with the
correct mileage for each bus stop.
Our test of 39 manifests from March 2015 for regular bus routes disclosed
that for 36 manifests (and buses), the 3,965 total miles reported by the
contractors, exceeded the actual 3,331 total route miles by a total of 634
miles per day. We calculated the actual route miles using routing system
reports, which we verified with mapping software on a test basis. We also
determined that since the reported mileage remained constant throughout
the year, CCPS potentially overpaid for mileage for these 36 routes by a total
of $144,000 in fiscal year 2015.
Payments for mileage reimbursements totaled $903,000 in fiscal year 2015.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that CCPS
a. independently verify bus contractor’s manifests to ensure that the
payments to the contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services
provided;
b. document the verification process; and
c. review past payments and pursue discrepancies, including those we
identified.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Finding 16
Certain bus payment components were not supported or approved by the
Board.
Analysis
Certain bus payment components were not supported or approved by the
Board, as contractors were sometimes paid for mileage in excess of that
driven or for PVA amounts that were not included in bus contracts or other
approved documents.
 CCPS knowingly paid certain bus contractors for more mileage than
actually driven. For example, our review disclosed five contractors
received payments for guaranteed minimum mileage that exceeded actual
mileage by a combined 125 miles per day (ranging individually from 13 to
35 miles per day). As a result, these contractors received payments for
excess mileage totaling approximately $28,400 in fiscal year 2015. We
were advised that this practice dated from 2010, when the mileage for
several routes were reduced, but CCPS transportation management chose
to continue to pay the affected contractors based on the routes’ previous
mileage. This arrangement was not formally approved by CCPS or the
Board, and was not incorporated in the existing written agreements for
these bus contractors.
 Bus payments were made for PVA amounts that were not supported or
formally approved. CCPS PVA payment amounts for buses are not
included in the bus contracts or budget documents. Consequently, there
has been no Board review or approval of the PVA amounts paid to bus
contractors. The only record of PVA payment rates was on a list
maintained by the Transportation Division based on its calculation sheets.
Furthermore, our review disclosed that PVA rates paid in fiscal year 2015
for 7 of the 41 buses reviewed did not agree to the list of rates and CCPS
did not have any calculation sheets supporting the amounts paid. These
PVA amounts ranged from $9,028 to $11,169 and were for buses placed
in service in fiscal years 2001 through 2003. Due to a lack of available
records, we were not able to determine whether the proper PVA was being
paid for the seven buses. CCPS paid approximately $70,000 in PVA
payments for these buses in fiscal year 2015 and these buses could
remain in service for up to three more years.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Recommendation 16
We recommend that CCPS
a. incorporate all applicable payment arrangements in the written bus
contractor agreements and obtain Board approval for all agreements,
b. pay bus contractors for the actual mileage driven and for the PVA rates
included in formal agreements, and
c. maintain proper documentation supporting the calculation of PVA
amounts.
Finding 17
Internal controls over payments to employee owner/operators were not
adequate, as there was no independent review and approval of payment
calculations performed by one individual.
Analysis
Payments to employee owner/operators were not reviewed to ensure
propriety. Specifically, a transportation management official was responsible
for entering data, including route miles, time, PVA, and fuel adjustments for
each of the 28 employee-owned buses into a system used to calculate the
monthly payments. A report of the monthly payments is generated and
submitted to the finance department for payment processing. However,
neither supporting information nor entries into the system are reviewed by an
independent employee to ensure that payment amounts are proper. Further,
the payment report is forwarded to the finance department for final
processing and payment without detailed information supporting the
payments. Therefore, there is a lack of assurance that payments are
accurate.
Furthermore, a similar process is performed for payments for field trips to one
contractor whereby a summary report is generated of payments calculated,
which is not reviewed by an independent employee, even on a test basis, to
ensure propriety.
As noted in Finding 16, our test of payments did disclose several inaccuracies
related to the PVA amounts used for payment purposes. During fiscal year
2015, payments to employee owner/operators totaled approximately
$889,000. During fiscal year 2015, payments for field trips totaled
approximately $134,000.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that CCPS ensure that an employee independent of the
payment processing verifies the accuracy and propriety of payments by
32

--- Page 35 ---
performing a documented comparison of the amounts paid to supporting
documentation.
Food Services
Background
CCPS has 9 cooking cafeterias at its 10 schools. Food and related supplies
are received and stored at each school. In fiscal year 2015, CCPS had 56
food service positions (consisting of 52 cafeteria positions and 4
administrative positions). According to the audited financial statements, food
service revenues ($3,276,079) exceeded operating expenditures
($3,237,137) for fiscal year 2015, and for four of the previous five years.
Finding 18
Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated as transactions could be
voided by cashiers without independent supervisory review or approval.
Analysis
Cashiers in school cafeterias could void transactions on the CCPS point-of-
sale system without independent review or approval. Specifically, neither the
food service managers at each school nor central office food service staff
performed any type of review of voided transactions. In addition, the system
was capable of generating output reports of voided transactions for
subsequent review; however, these reports were not generated or analyzed
for unusual activity such as cashiers with high volumes of voids that may
warrant further investigation or corrective actions. According to CCPS records,
over 4,700 voids totaling $55,000 were processed during fiscal year 2015.
According to CCPS audited financial statements, food service revenues
generated from the sale of meals totaled approximately $685,000 in fiscal
year 2015.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that independent supervisory personnel review voids and that
the reviews be documented. For example, CCPS could generate periodic
reports of all void transactions and document the analysis of this information
for unusual trends that should be investigated, such as cashiers with
abnormally high numbers of voids.
33

--- Page 36 ---
School Board Operations
Background
The Board of Education of Caroline County (the Board) is composed of three
elected, two appointed members, and two non-voting student representatives.
In its oversight responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public
accounting firm for independent audits of the CCPS financial statements and
federal programs. The Board has not established any special committees.
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In June 2012, the Board adopted a revised detailed ethics policy that
conforms to State Law and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and
financial disclosure and was approved by the State Ethics Commission.
Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all CCPS
employees. CCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of three members
who are nominated by the Superintendent and appointed by the Board to
interpret ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The
Panel also reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations.
According to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are
required to be filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the
Superintendent, and a number of other administrators (such as the Assistant
Superintendents, Chief Financial Officer, and school principals) by April 30th
of each year. Our review of the 58 employees required to submit financial
disclosure forms for calendar year 2014 disclosed that forms were generally
submitted as required.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
CCPS is a member of a consortium for employee and retiree health care. The
Consortium members are self-insured for healthcare costs up to the
designated stop-loss amount. The Consortium contracts with a third party
administrator (TPA) firm for health care claims processing services for
employee medical (including vision), dental and prescription costs. The
Consortium also contracts with the TPA carrier for the stop-loss coverage to
protect against the risk of large claims each year. CCPS subsequently
reimburses the TPA for the paid claims and pays the TPA an administrative fee
for these services. CCPS health care expenditures totaled approximately $7.5
million during fiscal year 2015 including $400,000 for administrative fees
and $491,000 for stop-loss insurance coverage. We were advised by CCPS
management that the Consortium last bid out its health care services for plan
year 2012.
34

--- Page 37 ---
CCPS Contracted for an Audit to Verify Propriety of Dependents
In 2010, CCPS hired a consultant to verify the propriety of individuals that
were covered as dependents under the systems’ health care plans. The
consultant required all employees and under age 65 retirees with
dependents to submit documentation to prove that each individual covered
as a dependent was eligible under the criteria defined in CCPS’ health care
plan. As a result of this review of 864 dependents, the consultant identified
50 ineligible dependents to be removed at an estimated savings of
$151,480. We were advised that CCPS removed the ineligible dependents
from the plans as recommended. During the course of our field work, in
June 2015, CCPS put in place a verification process in its enrollment
procedures whereby employees must submit adequate documentation
(such as, birth certificates) for any individuals the employee wants added as
a dependent to their health plan. We reviewed the financial impact of the
delay since 2010 in implementing this enrollment eligibility verification
process and determined it to be minimal.
Finding 19
CCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and retiree
healthcare costs.
Analysis
CCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that healthcare amounts paid
to the TPA were proper. Our review of CCPS’ procedures and controls over the
contract and related payments for medical claims and administrative fees
disclosed the following conditions:
• CCPS paid for claim reimbursements invoiced by the TPA without any
verification that the amounts invoiced were proper. CCPS did not receive
detailed claims data and therefore could not verify that the billed amounts
agreed to the amounts of reported claims. Furthermore, CCPS did not
audit the propriety of the claims paid on its behalf by the TPA to ensure
that the services were actually provided, were covered by the health plans,
and were appropriately priced. The State Office of Personnel Services and
Benefits administers self-insured health plans for state employees, and
contracts for comprehensive reviews of claims paid by plan
administrators. According to the Office, improper payments identified from
these reviews have consistently exceeded the cost of the reviews.
• CCPS did not verify the amount of claims that exceeded the stop-loss limit
were proper. CCPS relies on the administrator to notify it of any payments
above the stop-loss limit. According to the annual settlement, the paid
claims amount reported includes the offset to claims due to individual
35

--- Page 38 ---
claims hitting the stop loss. Since CCPS did not receive detailed
documentation of all claims paid and stop-loss reductions are not provided
for in detail, CCPS lacks assurance that it did not pay claims that should
have been covered by the stop-loss insurance. We verified that the claims
in excess of the stop loss amount we identified per detail claims
information we obtained from the TPA were offset with the total claims
included in the annual settlement amount for plan years 2013 and 2014.
Recommendation 19
We recommend that CCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for
healthcare insurance. Specifically, we recommend that CCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and ensure that
all amounts billed for claims are proper, and
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer (in this case the TPA).
36

--- Page 39 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Caroline County Public
Schools (CCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on CCPS dated April 27, 2010, was limited to those findings that
were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at CCPS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
appropriate). Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
37

--- Page 40 ---
records, and observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2010 through
June 30, 2014. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on
auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits CCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the CCPS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to CCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from February 2015 to October 2015. The CCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an Appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
38

--- Page 41 ---
APPENDIX
Caroline County Public Schools
204 Franklin Street
Denton, Maryland 21629
TELEPHONE: 410-479-1460
.JOHN D. EWALD FAX: 410-479-0108
SUPERINTENDENTOFSCHOOLS HOME PAGE: cI.k12.md.us
September 29, 2016
Mr. Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Office ofLegislative Audits
301 West Preston St., Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
This letter is in response to your draft performance audit report ofCaroline County Public Schools.
Specific responses follow each ofyour recon-imendations:
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
1.Recommendation: CCPS should strengthen its controls over the automated procurement and accounts
payable system and processes.
Response: Completed: A full review ofusers and their capabilities has been performed and security is now
locked down. Only those individuals whosejob duties require such access are able to perform these functions.
Purchase requisitions with electronic approvals are already required for critical purchases. Newprocedures
have been established that require electronic approval for accounts payable transactions as well as an
independent supervisory review ofsupporting documents. 1 a. Security Access list to be run and verified by
the designated “Reviewer” Periodic and as often as determined; 1 b. Security Access List (8a) reviewed to
-
limit and ensure employee has necessary resources to perform each critical function as that employee’s primary
responsibility. Also need to insure that the backup employee also has the necessary access in the unforeseen
eventthatthe primary employee is unable to fulfill those duties. Two system administrators are necessary to
insure the same backup capability. Logs and History ofall transactions are available for review for any/all
function and date range; 1 c. Requisition Approval Workflow (electronic) and manual payment request and
signatures are in place currently; 1 d. Purchasing and A/P Reports are run and verified by the designated
“Reviewer”. This is reviewed during P0 Conversion, posting and payment processes. An independent review
ofthe logs and history reports ofindividuals with incompatible access will be reviewed.
2. Recommendation: CCPS should amend its existingprocurementpolicies to require that contract awards
resulting from the use ofintergovernmental purchasing agreements, sole source, and other non-competitive
awards be reported to and approved by the Board when the awards exceeds $25,000.
Response: Even though these purchases are not taken to the Board on an individual basis, the purchase amount
is included as part ofour operating budget which gets approved by the Board. It is important to note that we
piggyback on a lot ofState andNational bids, which have already been legally approved and authorized. It is
1
PARTNERSHIPS FOR EXCELLENCE
- -

--- Page 42 ---
also important to note that we are in compliance with our purchasing policy, which states that these purchases
must be approved by the Administrative Services division. Beginning with the November, 2016 Board meeting,
these items will be added to the Board’s consent agenda and the Boards purchasing policy will be amended to
reflect this change.
3. Recommendation: CCPS should comply with Board policies when procuring goods and services, including
using a competitive procurement process or documenting the justification of any sole source procurements, and
submit all contracts to the Board for approval and publish contract procurement solicitations or awards in
eMaryland Marketplace, as required by State law.
Response: Due to our small size we do not have a purchasing department. Since our purchases are
decentralized we have been training our Administrators and Supervisors to use the competitive bidding process
and document the justification of any sole source procurements. Going forward we will use eMaryland
Marketplace for contract procurement solicitations as required by State Law. This was an unintentional
oversight as we had been using eMaryland Marketplace for school construction bids, but not for other bids.
Effective immediately, all bids will be approved by the Board, either as an individual action item or as a
component of the consent agenda. All sole source purchases that exceed the bid threshold will also be placed
on the Board’s consent agenda to include documented justification.
Human Resources and Payroll
4. Recommendation: CCPS should periodically generate reports of assigned employee access capabilities and
perform documented independent review of user capabilities to ensure access is properly granted; limit access
of critical functions to those employees who require such capabilities to perform their assigned job duties;
eliminate the capability of individuals to perform incompatible system functions; and perform a periodic
documented independent review of critical personnel and payroll transactions processed using appropriate
system reports.
Response: The HR applications are hosted solutions that require the additional system administrator user for
database troubleshooting, critical case management, etc. At least seven other MSDE’s LEAs use this same
product. Onsite, CCPS has two system administrators, one HR coordinator, one payroll coordinator, and one
comptroller with access to HR and Payroll, which is necessary for day-to-day operations and critical functions
as well as backup for these same critical functions. After every payroll cycle’s final calculation and before
paycheck printing, a manual checking and review of payroll activity changes is completed between the Payroll
Coordinator (entry) and the system administrator – who serves as the Payroll Processor. Beginning in
September 2016, this review is being conducted by a third and independent staff member. We are now
periodically conducting and documenting a review of user capabilities to ensure access is properly granted.
Security Access List is reviewed to limit and insures employee has necessary resources to perform each critical
function as that employee’s primary responsibility. The review insures that the backup employee also has the
necessary access in the unforeseen event that the primary employee is unable to fulfill those duties. Two
system administrators are necessary to insure the same backup capability. Logs and History of all transactions
are available for review for any/all function and date range. Security Access List reviewed to insure employee
has compatible and necessary resources to perform each critical function as that employee’s primary
responsibility. These logs and history are also being independently reviewed.
2

--- Page 43 ---
5. Recommendation: CCPS should ensure that the Board, as required, approves promotions and increases in
pay.
Response: These promotions and increases were reviewed with and approved by the Board during closed
session but the minutes did not reflect the discussion and vote. Going forward we will ensure that these items
are voted on during the public session so that the minutes are accurate.
Inventory Control and Accountability
6. Recommendation: CCPS should conduct annual physical inventories of all capital equipment and maintain
complete and accurate inventory records for sensitive equipment items by ensuring that additions, disposals, and
adjustments are independently verified to approved supporting documents.
Response: The physical inventory is completed annually by each building administration and independently
done every few years by the central office. We will ensure that the annual inventory process is documented
better in future years to prove that this process is being completed. Although we do not record the purchase
price of sensitive items in the database system, this value can be traced to the source documents (purchase order
and invoice) and therefore we do not see the need to add this field to our database. Original source documents
are maintained at least seven years, which is longer than the anticipated life of nearly every sensitive item. Any
adjustments made, to include additions and disposals, will be independently verified to supporting documents.
Information Technology
7. Recommendation: CCPS should update its network architecture by utilizing a network based directory
service with centralized authentication for all computers, configure firewalls to achieve a “least privilege”
security strategy giving individuals and devices only those privileges needed to performed assigned tasks,
relocate the aforementioned servers behind the firewall and IDPS and configure the firewall and IDPS to
properly protect these critical servers, set the IDPS to block identified malicious traffic from entering the CCPS
network, and secure its internal network by only allowing properly authorized users to access the internal
network through its wireless connection network.
Response: For improved security, servers supporting the Student Information System (SIS) have been relocated
within the school system’s firewall. SSL will be activated by the spring of 2017. Beginning in the summer of
2016, the firewall is being evaluated for “least privilege” security. This will be an ongoing process as the
network(s) evolve. We agree to further research, investigate and consider the implementation of directory
services. We would appreciate receiving any of the research mentioned in the auditor’s comments as we
proceed to investigate.
8. Recommendation: CCPS should ensure that administrative rights on workstations are restricted to network
administrators and other select users requiring such rights and obtain an enterprise-wide management tool to
ensure that malware protection software is installed on all computers and use this tool to ensure that all
workstations and servers are configured with malware protection software that is operating properly, up-to-date,
and has current signature files.
Response: The restriction of administrator rights is not aligned with the philosophy of use for staff in Caroline
County Public Schools and would unnecessarily hinder the capability of staff members’ technology. We are in
3

--- Page 44 ---
the process of testing an enterprise-wide management tool for malware protection and will have an appropriate
tool in place by Summer 2017.
9. Recommendation: CCPS should set the student information database to log all critical security related
events, regularly review these logs, document these reviews and retain this documentation for future reference.
Response: We currently do not have control over the security activity log in the Student Information System
(SIS) application database. We will continue to investigate and work with the SIS to implement.
10. Recommendation: CCPS should develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that is in accordance with
the aforementioned IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines and periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and
retain the documentation for future reference.
Response: CCPS will review for completeness our current DRP (Disaster Recovery Plan) in accordance with
the IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines by the summer of 2017. A schedule of testing will be developed and
implemented by the fall of 2017 for the aforementioned DRP.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
11. Recommendation: CCPS should ensure that the procurement method chosen for energy contracts, and any
prepayment decisions, provides the most favorable financial outcome; submit all PPA’s to the Board for it’s
approval; comply with all requirements of State law when using intergovernmental agreements and ensure that
State CIP funding is only used for the purposes provided for under the law.
Response: Although not documented, we did consult with neighboring school systems relative to the rates that
they pay prior to making the recommendation to the Board. In this specific case, the rate provided to CCPS was
slightly higher than the rate provided to the other jurisdiction; that system was much larger than ours, which
was a significant driving factor associated with the pricing along with the fact that our system was located on
three separate sites compared to just one in the other jurisdiction. The PPA was submitted to the Board for
approval and the Board properly approved it. This action was done during a Board work session and
unfortunately no minutes were taken. The use of State CIP funds for this energy contract was approved by the
State. Any future PPA will be competitively bid and Board approval will be properly documented.
12. Recommendation: CCPS should evaluate its preventative maintenance schedule to determine whether
changes should be made that considers staffing and risk and use its web-based system for preventative
maintenance tasks and document preventative maintenance performed and maintain such documentation.
Response: We have recently automated our maintenance work order system to include iPads for each
maintenance worker. This will enable us to track additional time and material data. The next step is to expand
this platform to include preventative maintenance tasks. We anticipate that this work will be completed by June
30, 2017.
Transportation Services
13. Recommendation: CCPS should take steps to determine if buses can be used more efficiently. Specifically,
we recommend that CCPS develop formal, comprehensive written procedures that include specific target bus
ridership percentages and student ride times and fully utilize the capabilities of its automated routing software to
maximize ridership on its bus routes.
4

--- Page 45 ---
Response: All Caroline County regular route buses are 72 passenger; Bus routes are calculated by time &
capacity. Due to the time it takes to reach some pickup locations, many buses do not operate at capacity. Many
parents transport their child and many high school students drive their personal vehicles and transport other
students with them. Our automated routing software does not take in to account our rural setting; it does not
consider door side pickup and delivery on major roadways. At the end of each school year the supervisor and
dispatcher review each route to see if any adjustments are necessary. During the summer of 2017 we will
develop formal, comprehensive written procedures that include specific target bus ridership percentages and
student ride times and review our routing software to ensure that routes are operating as efficiently as possible
given our safety parameters.
14. Recommendation: CCPS should use market investment rates as a basis for establishing contractor rates for
the annual PVA and pay PVA rates based on the periods of service used in the PVA’s calculation, develop
supportable cost estimates as a basis for establishing reasonable per mile maintenance costs, and exclude fuel
excise taxes from contractor payments.
Response: The 2016-2017 school year is the last year of the current five-year contract. These items will be
negotiated as part of the contract negotiations to include eliminating the federal and state fuel taxes. We will
also negotiate the reimbursements based on supportable cost estimates to include market investment rates and
anticipated period of service.
15. Recommendation: CCPS should independently verify bus contractor’s manifests to ensure that the
payments to the contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services provided; document the verification
process and review past payments and pursue discrepancies, including those we identified.
Response: For the past several years the transportation department has been short handed due to a lack of
qualified bus drivers. On many days we do not have any substitute bus drivers, which requires the Supervisor
of Transportation to drive. This results in the departments’ inability to perform many of these
recommendations. The bus driver pay scale was increased significantly for this fiscal year with the hope to
attract additional drivers to fill vacant positions. Despite these efforts we still have two full time driver
vacancies, which limits our ability to allow driver trainers the time to complete many of the recommendations.
We will investigate using the routing software to verify the mileage for each bus route. This mileage
verification will be documented and used to eliminate discrepancies.
16. Recommendation: CCPS should incorporate all applicable payment arrangements in the written bus
contractor agreements and obtain Board approval for all agreements; pay bus contractors for the actual mileage
driven and for the PVA rates included in the formal agreements, and maintain proper documentation supporting
the calculation of PVA amounts.
Response: All contractors’ current PVA’s will be reviewed and corrections made if necessary. Going forward,
all PVA’s will be listed and kept with current contracts. In addition, going forward all applicable payment
arrangements will be incorporated into the written bus contractor’s agreements and they will be paid for the
actual mileage driven.
17. Recommendation: We recommend that CCPS ensure that an employee independent of the payment
processing verifies the accuracy and propriety of payments by performing a documented comparison of the
amounts paid to supporting documentation.
5

--- Page 46 ---
Response: The Field trip coordinator or dispatcher is now reviewing all monthly calculations before they are
submitted by the supervisor for payment. The field trip payment process is also being independently reviewed
priorto submitting for payment.
EServiccQpcratiois
18. Recommendation: CCPS should independently review voids and that the reviews by documented.
Response: A new point ofsale system was installed for school year 2014-2015. The system was brand newto
all the cashiers and the procedures for ringing in students differed. This was a difficult adjustment for the
cashiers. The old system would allow the cashier to ring the entrée first and see ifthe student had enough
money for ala Carte sales. The new system is opposite, you have to ring in all ala Carte first and then the
reimbursable meal key is the close out for the transaction. The staffhas gotten much better at deducing ifthe
student has enough money for ala carte prior to hitting the close out key.
Managers run a void report daily and comment on any voided transactions largerthen $3.00. The cashiers make
note at the time ofthe transaction. We are also working withthe new POS vendor to change the way a
transaction is completed. On the district level, beginning in March 2015 we are running a month end void
report and follow up with managers ifthere are any suspicious voids or a large number. We handle such little
cash and usually do not have to give students change and therefore feel the opportunity for theft is minimal.
School Board Operations
19. Recommendation: CCPS should establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for healthcare insurance.
Specifically, we recommendthat CCPS obtain documentationto support actual claim payments and ensure that
all amounts billed for claims are proper, and use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid about
the stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer.
Response: We are one ofsix eastern shore school systems and one county government that collectively
purchase health insurance (ESMEC Health Insurance Alliance). We will present this recommendation to
ESMEC at their next meeting and strongly supportthe need for a claims audit. In addition, we will annually
verify the administrative fee and stop loss amounts being charged by the insurance carrierby independently
calculating the administrative fee and obtaining claims data from the insurance carrier in order to calculate the
stop loss amount. This will then be compared to the calculations performed by the carrier and any overpayment
recovered from the carrier.
Thankyou again for the opportunity to respond to your recommendations. Should you have any questions,
please feel free to contact Mr. MiltonNagel or me.
Sine 1,
John$. Ewald
Superintendent ofSchools
Cc: Board ofEducation
MiltonNagel, Assistant Superintendent
6

--- Page 47 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Senior Auditors
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Reni V. Lazova
Michell Min
Staff Auditors