Title: Maryland Insurance Administration - Follow-up Review
Date: 02/10/2016
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150adf
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:07:25.351893
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Maryland Insurance Administration
Follow-up Review
February 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the November 2014
MIA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by MIA Status Based on
Prior Finding
as of Auditor’s Review
May 20151
Premium Tax System
1. The procurement of a new premium tax system did In Progress
In Progress
not comply with State procurement regulations and (See Exhibit 2)
the project was not adequately planned.
2. An MIA management employee exercised
excessive control over the premium tax system Corrected Corrected
procurement and implementation.
3. The premium tax system was not properly secured
and a contractor had complete control over the Corrected Corrected
system.
4. MIA lacked assurance that the premium tax system
was properly protected from external threats and In Progress N/A2
unauthorized changes.
Administration of Premium Tax Filings
5. MIA had not established adequate controls over In Progress
Substantial Progress
audits of premium tax filings and a number of (See Exhibit 2)
errors were detected.
6. Procedures were not sufficient to ensure certain
In Progress
Corrected
premium tax payments were received timely.
(See Exhibit 2)
7. MIA had not established proper controls over
Corrected Corrected
premium tax refunds.
8. MIA did not reconcile its records of premium tax
In Progress
revenues with the corresponding State accounting Corrected
records. (See Exhibit 2)
Page 1 of 2
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
1 MIA’s detailed implementation status for each finding is based upon MIA’s status report, as of
May 20, 2015, as well as MIA’s additional clarification of the actions taken to resolve the
findings. The overall conclusion by finding presented in Exhibit 1 was discussed with, and
agreed to, by MIA management personnel.
2 The premium tax system to which this finding relates is no longer in use by MIA; accordingly,
we excluded this finding from our review.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1
Implementation Status of Findings in the November 2014
MIA Audit Report
Status as
Determined by MIA Status Based on
Prior Finding
as of Auditor’s Review
May 20151
Financial Examination Services
9. Sufficient controls were not established over
Corrected Corrected
financial examination services task order
awards and modifications.
Cash Receipts
10. MIA lacked accountability and control over Corrected N/A
certain cash receipts.
Producer Licensing
11. Sufficient controls were not established for the Corrected N/A
issuance of producer licenses.
12. MIA lacked assurance that producer licensing
and pre-licensing services systems were
Corrected N/A
protected against operational and security
risks.
Purchases and Disbursements
13. Proper internal controls were not established Corrected N/A
over purchases and disbursement transactions.
Information Systems Network
14. Administrative access to MIA’s network was Corrected Corrected
excessive.
Page 2 of 2
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
1 MIA’s detailed implementation status for each finding is based upon MIA’s status report, as of
May 20, 2015, as well as MIA’s additional clarification of the actions taken to resolve the
findings. The overall conclusion by finding presented in Exhibit 1 was discussed with, and
agreed to, by MIA management personnel.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 2
Detailed Comments on the Findings for Which
the Office of Legislative Audits Deemed the
Implementation Status to be “In Progress”
Premium Tax System
Prior Finding 1
The procurement of the new premium tax system did not comply with State
procurement regulations and the project was not adequately planned.
Prior Report Recommendation 1
We recommended that MIA
a. comply with State procurement regulations governing competitive
procurements and contract modifications and obtain Board of Public Works
and Department of Information Technology approvals, as required;
b. ensure contract modifications are properly justified and not artificially split to
avoid having to obtain required approvals; and
c. develop a comprehensive plan prior to further system development detailing
the required functionality, planned deliverables, and cost estimates.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
MIA has established procedures to monitor compliance with State procurement
regulations, which include monthly meetings attended by MIA management in
which all current procurement activity is reviewed to ensure required oversight
approvals are obtained. Our testing of selected procurement activity for the
period from November 20, 2014 through June 30, 2015, during which there was
only limited procurement activity, disclosed that justifications for contract
modifications were documented and contract modifications were not artificially
split to avoid additional approvals.
Following various setbacks associated with its premium tax system implemented
in February 2012, including the deficiencies noted in the audit report, MIA
discontinued its use of this system in November 2014. MIA is currently in the
process of preparing a comprehensive plan for the development of a new premium
tax system. MIA initially prepared documents, as of January 14, 2015, detailing
the required functionality of a new system to be administered by the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), which would be available to
MIA at no cost by virtue of its membership in the NAIC. However, based upon
advice from its legal counsel, MIA decided to conduct a procurement for the new
5

--- Page 8 ---
premium tax system. In this regard, the solicitation for services is currently
planned to occur during fiscal year 2016 through a task order request for proposal
under a Statewide information technology master contract; the contract award is
expected to occur in fiscal year 2017. A total cost estimate of $250,000 for the
first year plus an ongoing annual maintenance cost of $25,000 has been approved
by the Commissioner and, as of October 7, 2015, the agency is in the process of
drafting the project scope details and minimum qualifications for any potential
bidders. Once the request for proposal has been finalized, it will be forwarded to
the Department of Information Technology for approval.
Administration of Premium Tax Filings
Prior Finding 5
MIA had not established adequate controls over audits of premium tax
filings. Our tests of the audit results disclosed a number of errors, including
the issuance of a duplicate account credit and failure to assess penalties and
interest.
Prior Report Recommendation 5
We recommended that MIA
a. ensure that the individuals responsible for auditing transactions do not have
the capability to record tax payments in the premium tax system;
b. ensure that premium tax audits are reviewed by independent supervisory
personnel;
c. ensure that changes to approved tax audits are approved by supervisory
personnel and that a historical record of the changes is maintained;
d. impose penalties and interest unless a waiver is approved by the State
Insurance Commissioner;
e. ensure that companies remit the proper quarterly tax payments and that
penalties and interest are properly assessed, as applicable;
f. ensure that premiums reported on the tax filings agree with the NAIC’s
database and any differences are resolved; and
g. review the aforementioned discrepancies and take corrective action.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
MIA has established adequate controls over premium tax audits to ensure that
access capabilities are properly segregated and individuals who audit premium
taxes do not have the ability to record payments in the manual tax records. (As
previously mentioned, the premium tax system in use during the audit has been
discontinued.) In addition, controls are in place to ensure completed tax audits
and any changes to approved audits are adequately documented and approved by
6

--- Page 9 ---
independent supervisory personnel. MIA has also established procedures to
ensure companies remit the proper quarterly tax payments and that premiums
reported on the tax filings are compared with the NAIC database for agreement.
We noted, however, that MIA did not document its rationale for not always
imposing penalties and interest when quarterly tax payments were received late.
Our test of 12 audits of taxes paid on calendar year 2014 premiums disclosed one
instance where a company made two late quarterly payments; however, MIA’s
rationale for only assessing penalties and interest for one of the late payments was
not documented. According to MIA management, an unwritten policy exists
which allows for late penalties to be limited to one penalty per insurance company
per tax year even if multiple late payments are received.
Finally, at the time our review began, MIA had only completed its review of the
discrepancies identified in 7 of the 11 premium tax audits identified during our
audit. MIA’s review of the remaining 4 premium tax audits was completed
during our follow-up review. However, for 6 of the 11 audits, MIA did not take
appropriate corrective action because its review of the audits resulted in
inaccurate conclusions. For example, quarterly payments received were not
properly credited to the companies’ accounts which could have resulted in
improper penalties and interest being assessed.
Prior Finding 6
Procedures were not sufficient to ensure certain premium tax payments were
received timely.
Prior Report Recommendation 6
We recommended that MIA
a. record the postmark date of premium tax payments so that a determination can
be made regarding the timeliness of payments in accordance with law, and
b. assess penalties and interest for any late payments, as required.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
While MIA has established procedures to record the postmark dates in the manual
tax records, these procedures did not ensure the accuracy of the dates posted.
Currently, a master payment spreadsheet is maintained by MIA to record the
postmark dates and amounts of all tax payments remitted by insurance companies
throughout the year. However, MIA did not verify the accuracy of dates posted to
the master payment spreadsheet by having an independent employee trace the
dates recorded back to the postmark dates. Because this spreadsheet is used by
7

--- Page 10 ---
the premium tax auditors to determine the timeliness of payments for the related
company audits, inaccurate refunds or penalties could result.
In our test of 12 premium tax audits, for which 14 payments had been recorded in
the master payment spreadsheet, we noted that one postmark date was not
recorded accurately. In this instance, because the payment was not late, penalties
and interest were not applicable. We were unable to verify the accuracy of two
other postmark dates because MIA could not provide the related payment
envelopes as supporting documentation.
Prior Finding 8
MIA did not reconcile its records of premium tax revenues with the
corresponding State accounting records.
Prior Report Recommendation 8
We recommended that MIA
a. reconcile its premium tax records with the corresponding State records
(repeat), and
b. investigate the aforementioned differences and take appropriate action.
Auditor’s Assessment of Status – In Progress
Although MIA developed procedures for conducting monthly reconciliations of
its master payment spreadsheet with the corresponding State records, the related
instructions did not provide for a proper reconciliation. Specifically, these
procedures instructed the responsible employee to reconcile the current monthly
activity between the records, but did not require a reconciliation of the two
cumulative year-to-date premium tax record balances. Accordingly, uncorrected
errors or unauthorized changes to a prior month’s activity would not be detected.
For example, MIA successfully reconciled its March 2015 tax activity with the
State’s records in May 2015. However, when we tested this reconciliation in
September 2015, we discovered that a quarterly payment of $2,307, with a deposit
date of March 9, 2015, was recorded twice in the master payment spreadsheet.
This payment was only reflected once in MIA’s reconciliation document. When
we brought this error to its attention, MIA could not provide an explanation.
Furthermore, this error had not been detected by MIA during any subsequent
reconciliations which only considered premium tax activity that was recorded
during the month being reconciled. It is critical that MIA ensure the accuracy of
the master payment spreadsheet because MIA auditors rely on it to perform
premium tax audits of insurance companies.
8

--- Page 11 ---
In addition, these reconciliations were not always performed by an independent
employee. Specifically, the employee who reconciled the premium tax records
during the period between October 2014 and May 2015 also had the ability to post
payments to the master payment spreadsheet.
Finally, based on our testing, we noted that MIA adequately investigated and took
sufficient corrective action to address the differences cited in the audit report
between the State’s accounting records and the premium tax records maintained
by MIA.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Maryland Insurance
Administration (MIA) to address the findings in our November 20, 2014 audit
report. In that report, we concluded that MIA’s fiscal accountability and
compliance rating was unsatisfactory.
The purpose of our review was to determine the status of MIA’s corrective
actions to address certain of our audit findings. This review was conducted under
the authority of Section 2-1220(a)(4) of the State Government Article and was
based on our long-standing practice of performing a follow-up review whenever
an agency receives an unsatisfactory rating in its fiscal compliance audit report.
The rating system was established, in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, for the purpose of
determining an overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability and
compliance with State laws and regulations.
Our review consisted of obtaining a status report from MIA, as of May 20, 2015,
which described the level of implementation of each prior audit report finding, as
well as obtaining additional clarification from MIA of the actions taken to resolve
the findings. Our review also consisted of performing tests and analyses of
selected information and holding discussions with MIA personnel as we deemed
necessary to determine the status of MIA’s corrective actions to address selected
findings from our November 20, 2014 audit report.
This review did not constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Had we conducted an audit in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, other matters
may have come to our attention that would have been reported.
Our review was conducted primarily during the period from July through October
2015, and in certain cases, our assessment of the status of MIA’s corrective
actions was performed at the time of our review.
MIA’s response to our follow-up review is included as an appendix to this report.
As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise MIA regarding the results of our review of its
response.
10

--- Page 15 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Heather A. Warriner, CPA
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Brian S. Han, CPA
Senior Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
Charles H. Hinds, IV
Staff Auditor
Steven D. Bryant
Information Systems Staff Auditor