Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2013 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 03/27/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b1a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:14:23.861326
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to March 26, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Page 1 of 2
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s October 4, 2011 Audit Report on the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Office of the Secretary,
Division of Administration, and the Division of Workforce Development and
Adult Learning
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Information Systems Security and Control
1a. We recommend that DLLR encrypt unemployment insurance
claim records in transit and on the DLLR network in
Corrected
compliance with the Department of Information Technology’s
Information Security Policy.
1b. We recommend that DLLR allow each payroll service provider
Corrected
access to only its unemployment insurance claim information.
2a. We recommend that DLLR use separate credit card service
provider accounts for credit card payment processing and Corrected
service management.
2b. We recommend that DLLR restrict the use of its credit card
service provider service management account to only Corrected
authorized Internet addresses.
2c. We recommend that DLLR either encrypt the credit card
provider account name and related password on the web server Corrected
or remove them from the web server.
2e. We recommend that DLLR either encrypt the plain text log
files containing new licensee personal information or remove Corrected
the log files from the web server.
2f. We recommend that DLLR limit the electronic licensing web
server account’s access to critical files to only those files Corrected
needed to perform required operations.
3a. We recommend that DLLR perform weekly, documented
reviews of web server log files, expanded to include unusual Corrected
events and trends in activity.
4. We recommend that DLLR comply with Department of
Information Technology’s Information Security Policy and
establish adequate access, account, password, and monitoring Not Resolved
controls over the aforementioned professional licensing
application server and database.
Shaded recommendations are more fully described in Exhibit 2.

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 1 to March 26, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Page 2 of 2
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s October 4, 2011 Audit Report on the
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation – Office of the Secretary,
Division of Administration, and the Division of Workforce Development and
Adult Learning
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Equipment
9b. We recommend that DLLR establish and maintain an
independent control account, periodically document a
Corrected
reconciliation of the account to the related detail records, and
investigate any discrepancies.
9e. We recommend that DLLR investigate and resolve
discrepancies between the inventory results and the detail
records, including the reporting of missing or stolen items to Corrected
the Department of General Services and the removal of the
items from the detail records, as necessary.

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 2 to March 26, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Findings Regarding Repeat Findings That Had Not Been Resolved
Information Systems Security and Control
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 4
We recommend that DLLR comply with Department of Information Technology’s
Information Security Policy and establish adequate access, account, password, and
monitoring controls over the aforementioned professional licensing application server and
database (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Account, password, and certain access controls over the professional licensing application server
were proper and were in accordance with the Department of Information Technology’s
Information Security Policy. In addition, DLLR was logging security-related events pertaining
to the professional licensing application server; however, DLLR was not reviewing the logged
items for propriety. Furthermore, for the critical database cited (Maryland Workforce
Exchange), although this database was now being maintained by a service provider, key system
security and audit-related events were not being monitored even though the ability to perform
such monitoring existed. Documentation still did not exist to support DLLR’s or the service
provider’s review and investigation of the database server’s failed logon attempts. Finally, for
the professional licensing application server, two programmers continued to have capabilities
which provided them with unnecessary access to all resources (for example, files) on the server.