Title: Maryland Thoroughbred and Harness Horse Racing Tracks

NOTE: OLA no longer conducts separate reviews of the horse racing tracks.
Date: 09/15/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150b0e
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:12:29.834742
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Audit Report
Maryland Thoroughbred and Harness
Horse Racing Tracks
September 2014
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information
Racetracks
The thoroughbred and harness racing tracks are licensed by the State of Maryland
to conduct live racing and accept wagering on simulcast racing from other
facilities throughout the United States. Details of live race days and wagering at
the racetracks for calendar year 2012 are provided in the following table:
Calendar Year 2012 Racetrack Activity
Live
Pari-mutuel
Type of Racing Racetrack Race
Wagering
Days
Laurel Park 117 $99,296,799
Thoroughbred Pimlico Race Course 29 $57,255,862
Timonium Race Course 7 $1,329,343
Rosecroft Raceway 54 $19,668,505
Harness
Ocean Downs Racetrack 44 $14,511,632
Total 251 $192,062,141
Source: Maryland Racing Commission records (unaudited)
Status of Licensees
In its fiscal year 2013 audited financial statement report, the Ocean Downs
Racetrack independent auditor commented that recurring losses from operations
and cash flow deficiencies for the last 10 years had raised substantial doubt as to
its ability to continue as a going concern.
Automated Online Wagering Systems
Wagers at racetracks, both in Maryland and throughout the United States, are
recorded electronically by use of various automated systems. In Maryland,
racetracks generally use one system to transmit wagering transactions and
compute the payoff of winning bets, and another system to compute deductions,
such as for purses, State taxes, and simulcast signal fees.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of the two findings contained
in our preceding audit report dated August 23, 2012. We determined that these
findings were satisfactorily addressed.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
We have audited the licensees for the following racetracks for the period
beginning July 1, 2011 and ending June 30, 2013:
 Laurel Park
 Pimlico Race Course
 Timonium Race Course
 Rosecroft Raceway
 Ocean Downs Racetrack
These racetracks are licensed by the Maryland Racing Commission (the
Commission) to conduct live thoroughbred and harness racing in Maryland, and
to accept wagering on simulcast racing from other facilities throughout the United
States.
The purpose of this audit was to determine the licensees’ compliance with certain
State laws, rules, and regulations. We also determined the status of the two
findings included in our preceding audit report. The Business Regulation Article,
Section 11-313 of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires the Office of
Legislative Audits to audit the licensees of thoroughbred and harness racing
tracks at least once every two years in accordance with the provisions of the State
Government Article, Sections 2-1217 through 2-1227, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
Objectives
The three objectives of our audit were to determine whether
1. licensees disclosed all forms of ownership, as defined by the Annotated
Code of Maryland, to the Commission;
2. licensees properly distributed wagering revenues, including taxes due the
State; and
4

--- Page 7 ---
3. licensees complied with certain requirements of State law, such as having
annual financial statements independently audited, submitting certain
unclaimed ticket revenue to the Commission, and properly using revenue
from video lottery proceeds, as well as meeting the licensing requirements
of the Commission contained in the Code of Maryland Regulations.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed various individuals employed by
the licensees. In addition, we reviewed applicable State laws, as well as records
maintained by the Commission. Furthermore, independent auditors for Laurel
Park, Pimlico Race Course, Rosecroft Raceway, and Ocean Downs Racetrack
performed certain agreed-upon procedures to provide assurances regarding the
accuracy of wagering revenues collected and the related distributions during the
audit period.1 We have relied on the work of the independent auditors to provide
audit coverage of wagering revenues collected and related distributions.
Therefore, our audit procedures in these areas were generally limited to obtaining
a sufficient basis for that reliance.
The financial statements of each licensee are to be audited annually by
independent auditors for the purpose of expressing opinions on the fair
presentation of the licensees’ financial statements. We reviewed the independent
auditors’ reports of all of the licensees covering their 2012 and 2013 fiscal years
(most of which are on a calendar year basis) to ensure the audits had been
completed as required by State law and to determine if any other conditions
existed that would impact our audit objectives. In each report, the auditors stated
that the licensees’ financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects,
their respective financial positions, results of operations and cash flows for the
years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States.
Our fieldwork was completed during the period from May 2014 to June 2014.
1 Due to the limited number of racing days (seven) at Timonium Race Course, and because the
Maryland Jockey Club (which operates Laurel Park and Pimlico Race Course) provided the pari‐
mutuel staff and expertise during those seven days of racing, agreed‐upon procedures were not
conducted for Timonium Race Course. For similar reasons, we also excluded such procedures
from our scope. Nevertheless, an independent accounting firm, under contract to the Maryland
Racing Commission, monitors the wagering and payments at each of the five tracks whenever
racing is conducted.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Audit Findings
We found that, for the licensees tested, all racetracks had obtained audited
financial statements and all forms of ownership were properly reported to the
Maryland Racing Commission as required by law. In addition, based on the work
performed by other auditors, licensees properly distributed wagering revenues,
including taxes due to the State from wagering. We also determined that certain
unclaimed ticket revenue was submitted to the Commission, video lottery
proceeds disbursed to racetracks were properly utilized, and the licensing
requirements of the Commission contained in the Code of Maryland Regulations
were met.
A copy of this draft report was provided to each licensee and to the Commission.
Since there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not
necessary.
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Jeneba R. Jalloh
Senior Auditor