Title: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene - Processing of Certain Medicaid Claims
Date: 11/23/2009
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3bcc9d72404c150a98
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:59:32.112207
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Processing of Certain Medicaid Claims
Controls Over Edit Claim Functions Were Deficient and Certain Automated
Edits Were Inappropriately Disabled
Post-Payment Claims Review Process Lacked Structure
Sufficient Actions Were Not Taken to Reduce System Rejections of Claims for
Federal Reimbursement
November 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
November 23, 2009
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a performance audit of the procedures for processing certain
Medicaid claims and conducting post-payment reviews. Such claims, which
totaled approximately $2.68 billion during fiscal year 2009, were applicable to
certain provider payments made by the Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene’s (DHMH) Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA),
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA), and the Mental Hygiene
Administration (MHA).
Our audit disclosed MCPA had not established sufficient internal controls over
the automated edit functions within the Maryland Medicaid Information
System (MMIS II). System edits help ensure that provider medical claims are
valid and are eligible for federal reimbursement. Our tests of edits identified
nine automated edits that were inappropriately disabled; consequently, claims
valued at $98 million, which otherwise would have been suspended and
subject to manual reviews, were allowed to be processed for payment during
the nine-month period tested. We also determined that certain employees
could change edit settings without independent authorization, and that
certain claims were improperly paid due to a programming error involving one
system edit.
The post-payment review processes used to validate paid claims (for example,
fee-for-service claims) needed more structure and formal procedures to help
ensure that the reviews were effective, efficient, fully carried out, and fully
documented. For example, the types of claims data analyses to be regularly
performed were not established, and the results of such analyses were not
documented. Consequently, the full extent to which the post-review process
resulted in recoveries from providers was not determinable.

--- Page 4 ---
DHMH management needs to determine how to minimize recurring rejections
by MMIS II of claims for federal reimbursement submitted by MHA and DDA,
and to ensure that rejections are resolved and resubmitted in a timely manner
to maximize federal reimbursements.
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page 3, and our audit
scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on page 11. DHMH’s
response to this audit is included as Appendix A to this report. Auditor
comments related to certain of DHMH’s responses can be found in Appendix
B. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by DHMH during
our audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 3
Background Information 7
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Findings and Recommendations 15
Objective 1: Effectiveness of Claims Processing Edits 15
Conclusion 15
Background 16
Finding 1 – MCPA Had Valid Reasons for Most System Edits That Were 18
Disabled, but Some Edits Should Not Have Been Disabled
Finding 2 – Controls Over Changes to Edit Settings Were Inadequate 19
Finding 3 –Documentation of System Edits and Which Edits to Disable 21
Was Lacking
Finding 4 – A Programming Error Resulted in Improper Claim Payments 21
Finding 5 – Access to Pay Claims Was Inadvertently Granted to 532 Users 22
Finding 6 – Staffing Needs of MCPA Had Not Been Analyzed 22
Finding 7 – Formal Training for Employees Performing Critical and 23
Complex Duties is Lacking
Recommendations 24
Objective 2: Effectiveness of the Post Payment Review Procedures 27
Conclusion 27
Background 28
Finding 8 – Documentation of the Post-Payment Review Process Was in 28
Need of Significant Improvement
Finding 9 – Certain Utilization Reports Were Not Produced or Fully Used 30
Finding 10 – Procedures Were Not Always Revised to Correct Deficiencies 31
Identified in Post-Payment Reviews
Finding 11 – Additional Procedures Could Be Used to Publicize Fraud 32
Referral Hotline
Finding 12 – Post-Payment Reviews of In-State Hospital Payments Could 33
Be Improved
Finding 13 – Out-of-State Hospital Payment Rates Were Not Always 34
Verified
Finding 14 – Procedures to Obtain Information About Third-Party Liabilities 35
Could Be Improved
Office of 1
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 6 ---
Recommendations 36
Objective 3: Effectiveness of Process for Obtaining Federal Funds 39
for Other Administrations
Conclusion 39
Background 39
Finding 15 – There Was No Systematic Process to Analyze the Causes of 40
Rejected Federal Fund Reimbursement Claims
Finding 16 – Rejected Claims for Federal Funds Were Not Promptly 41
Resolved, and Adequate Records of Rejected Claims Were Not
Maintained
Recommendations 42
Agency Response Appendix A
Auditor’s Comments on Agency Response Appendix B
2 O f f i c e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
We conducted a performance audit of certain aspects of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene’s (DHMH) Medicaid claims processing and federal
reimbursement procedures, for which related claims payments totaled $2.68
billion during fiscal year 2009. In our most recent fiscal compliance audit of
the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA), we stated that MCPA
overrode (disabled) automated system edits in the Medicaid Management
Information System (MMIS II) that were designed to prevent improper
payments. MCPA maintained that many of the edits were appropriately
disabled. Due to the complexity of the MCPA claims processing system, as
well as the significance of the system edits that were disabled, we conducted
this audit. The three objectives of this audit were as follows:
1. To evaluate the effectiveness of the claims edit process, particularly
the appropriateness of disabling edits
2. To assess the effectiveness of DHMH’s procedures performed to
review the propriety of claims after payment
3. To evaluate the effectiveness of the voucher claim processes to obtain
federal Medicaid reimbursements for services provided through the
Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) and the Developmental
Disabilities Administration (DDA)
Our audit disclosed that it was reasonable to disable many of the automated
edits since they were not appropriate for the Maryland Medicaid program
requirements. However, we also found many claims with significant payment
amounts that should have been processed through other edits that were
inappropriately disabled.
Improvements, such as better record keeping and better standardization for
routine analyses, are needed in the post-payment review process for Medicaid
claims. In addition, training should be provided to employees performing
complex significant tasks and MCPA should evaluate the staffing needs of its
various units.
The processes used by MHA and DDA to obtain federal Medicaid
reimbursements were cumbersome resulting in lost interest, inefficient use of
staff resources, and lost federal funding.
Office of 3
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 8 ---
Regarding Objective 1, we determined that claims totaling $978 million were
processed during the period between July 2007 and March 2008 that
bypassed 81 disabled edits. Based on our test of 55 disabled edits,
applicable to $976 million in paid claims, we determined that it was
reasonable to bypass 40 of the disabled edits for payments totaling $691
million. For example, one edit that was appropriately disabled looked for
provider facility numbers that were not in the system. Since other information
is used in Maryland to identify providers, the disabling of this edit is
appropriate. However, we found that 9 disabled edits, which were applicable
to paid claims totaling more than $98 million during this period, should not
have been bypassed, and for the remaining 6 edits, neither DHMH nor we
could determine whether the edits should have been disabled. We also found
that clear descriptions of the purpose of the edits in MMIS II could generally
not be provided by DHMH.
In addition to being disabled, edits were often temporarily changed, typically
to facilitate processing of certain claim payments. Changing edit settings
(which are essentially computer program logic changes) can have a significant
impact on whether claims are paid or denied by the Medicaid program. We
found that controls over changes to edit settings were extremely lax. Changes
to edit settings were made without supervisory review and approval, without
documented explanations as to why edit settings were changed, and without
maintaining records of the changes actually made.
During our testing of claims, we determined that certain claims were
improperly processed in MMIS due to a temporary change in edit settings that
was not intended to apply to these claims. After we advised MCPA about
these claims, its research disclosed that $1.4 million in claims were paid in
error and should be recovered from the providers.
Finally, DHMH had not performed a formal study or review to determine the
optimal number of employees required to perform its critical Medicaid
functions, and did not have a training program for its employees performing
critical claims processing functions. Without determining the optimal staffing
levels, MCPA cannot ensure that the appropriate number of its approximately
615 employees has been assigned to claims processing functions.
Objective 2 involved the post-payment review process, which we concluded
needed significant improvement. The post-payment review process is vital for
helping to ensure that payments to providers were for necessary services that
were actually provided. The process was not formally structured or
adequately documented. For example, comprehensive records of data
analysis reports, specific claims reviewed, and any related recoveries were not
4 O f f i c e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 9 ---
maintained. This information could be used to more effectively direct future
analyses of paid claims. In addition, we noted that certain reports designed to
identify potentially improper payment patterns were not routinely produced.
For example, reports of “spike” payments (large amounts of claim payments
to a provider over a short period) were not produced. These reports could
identify improper provider billings.
Audits of hospital payments, which were performed by a MCPA contractor,
were not timely. As of December 31, 2008, no hospital claims paid since
January 1, 2004 had been audited by the contractor.
We noted in objective 3 that numerous Medicaid claims that were previously
paid to providers by the Mental Hygiene and Developmental Disabilities
Administrations were subsequently rejected by MMIS. As a result, federal
funds for these claims were not obtained timely or at all. For example, as of
December 2008, claims paid for DDA services provided in calendar year
2006, totaling approximately $8.4 million, were submitted and denied by
MMIS II for submission for federal reimbursement, and remained outstanding.
Since the claims had previously been determined to be legitimate by the
Administrations that paid them, and were processed through MMIS only to
obtain federal reimbursement, rejected claims should be minimal. However,
resolving rejected claims from these DHMH administrations has been
commented upon in our audit reports for at least 10 years.
Office of 5
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 10 ---
6 O f f i c e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 11 ---
Background Information
Purpose of Program
Medicaid is a joint federal and state entitlement program for low-income
citizens of the United States. The Medicaid program is part of Title XIX of the
Social Security Act Amendment that became law in 1965. Medicaid offers
federal matching funds to states for costs incurred in paying health care
providers for serving covered individuals. The program is administered by the
states, which are required to provide health care coverage to all applicants
who meet the program’s eligibility requirements. To qualify for benefits,
applicants must pass certain income and asset tests.
The Medicaid program in Maryland is primarily administered by the Medical
Care Programs Administration (MCPA), a unit within the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene. MCPA is responsible for enrolling providers (such as
physicians), establishing program regulations, setting provider payment rates,
reviewing and paying provider claims, and obtaining federal reimbursement
for eligible costs (generally 50 percent of amounts paid to providers).
Individuals qualifying for cash assistance through the Temporary Cash
Assistance program or the federal Supplemental Security Income program
automatically qualify for Medicaid benefits. Those eligible for Medicaid
through these programs make up most of the Medicaid population and are
referred to as “categorically needy.” Medicaid eligibility determinations in
Maryland are generally made by the local departments of social services of
the Department of Human Resources.
Federal law also requires the Medicaid program to assist Medicare recipients
with incomes below the federal poverty level in making their co-insurance and
deductible payments.
The Maryland Medicaid program funds a broad range of services. The federal
government mandates that the states provide nursing facility services;
hospital inpatient and outpatient services; x-ray and laboratory services; early
and periodic screening, diagnosis, and treatment services for children; family-
planning services; transportation services; physician care; federally qualified
health center and rural health clinic services; and some nurse practitioner
services. The Maryland program also provides optional services, such as
vision care and podiatry care.
Office of 7
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 12 ---
Most Maryland Medicaid recipients are required to enroll in HealthChoice, the
statewide managed care program that began in 1997. As of June 2009,
approximately 555,000 recipients were enrolled in HealthChoice. Under
HealthChoice, MCPA makes specified capitation payments to private Managed
Care Organizations (MCOs) that provide services to these Medicaid recipients
in Maryland. Our audit did not include payments to MCOs which, during fiscal
year 2009, totaled approximately $2.21 billion.
Populations excluded from the HealthChoice program include the
institutionalized and individuals who are dually eligible for Medicaid and
Medicare. Populations that are not institutionalized and are not covered by
an MCO are covered on a fee-for-service basis. Under this system, health
providers (such as physicians, hospitals, and medical equipment suppliers)
are paid a fee for each service or supply provided. Fees are generally billed at
rates established by MCPA or, in the case of hospital stays, at rates
established by the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission.
During fiscal year 2009, payments made on a fee-for-service basis totaled
approximately $1.51 billion. These payments were the primary scope of our
audit.
Our audit did not include payments to long-term care facilities (for example,
nursing homes), which are not paid on a fee-for-service basis. Payments to
such facilities totaled approximately $1.12 billion during fiscal year 2009.
In addition to Medicaid expenditures incurred by MCPA, DHMH’s
Developmental Disabilities (DDA) and Mental Hygiene Administrations (MHA)
also make payments to providers that are funded through the Medicaid
program. During fiscal year 2009 payments to providers for Medicaid
recipients made by DDA and MHA totaled $1.17 billion. These expenditures
are processed through MMIS for federal reimbursement purposes only, and
were also included in the scope of this audit.
Approximately 615 MCPA employees administered the State’s Medicaid
program which, as of June 30, 2009, had an enrollment of approximately
802,000 individuals. Chart 1 on the next page depicts the State’s Medicaid
expenditures for fiscal year 2009.
8 O f f i c e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 13 ---
Chart 1
FY 2009 Medicaid Claims Processed
($6.28 Billion)
Other
$.27 billion 4%
Fee for Service
$1.51 billion
24%
Managed Care
Organizations
$2.21 billion
35%
Mental Hygiene
Administration and
Developmental
Disabilities
Long Term Care Administration
$1.12 billion $1.17 billion
18% 19%
Source: Medicaid Management Information System II
Updating the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS II)
MCPA is in the preliminary stages of updating the Medicaid Management
Information System (MMIS II), which is the program’s claims processing and
information retrieval system. MMIS II is being updated in accordance with the
Medicaid Information Technology Architecture (MITA) Initiative, a national
framework to support improved systems development and health care
management for the Medicaid enterprise. States receive a 90 percent federal
matching rate for costs for the design, development, and installation of MMIS
II and a 75 percent matching rate for operations-related costs.
The current MMIS II is considered by MCPA to be outdated. It was not
designed for the large volume of claims currently processed and it is deemed
costly to maintain. MMIS II reporting capabilities are limited, and making
program changes to the system is difficult.
Office of 9
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 14 ---
The State’s fiscal 2009 budget included $1.6 million in funding for DHMH to
work with consultants to prepare an advanced planning document for a new
MMIS in accordance with MITA. Throughout the year, MCPA worked with the
consultant to determine exactly what the administration needed from a new
MMIS. The advance planning document was completed and submitted to the
Federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in June 2009.
After receiving CMS approval of the advanced planning document, DHMH will
develop a draft request for proposal (RFP) to obtain vendor bids and
proposals for designing and implementing the new system, which will also be
submitted to CMS, as well as to the State’s Department of Information
Technology, for approval. DHMH anticipates receiving federal approval of the
RFP by the end of calendar year 2009.
A definitive timeline and cost estimate for a new MMIS are not yet available.
However, DHMH is projecting to need approximately 30 months for design
and implementation, from July 2010 through December 2012.
Federal Audit of Maryland’s Payment Error Rates
CMS implemented the Payment Error Rate Measurement (PERM) program to
measure improper payments in the Medicaid program. CMS began PERM
audits of state Medicaid programs during federal fiscal year 2006. In
November 2008, CMS submitted its findings for Maryland.
The data DHMH obtained from CMS to support the findings indicated that
CMS tested 1,591 claims (including 513 fee-for-service claims) totaling $3.9
million, and noted errors totaling $14,193. Primarily, these errors were due to
providers that did not submit adequate documentation to support the claims.
CMS determined the error rate for Medicaid fee-for-service claims to be 1.04
percent. This error rate is well below the published national average error rate
of 8.9 percent for fee-for-service claims.
Although the error rate is commendable, even small error rates in Maryland’s
Medicaid program, which disburses billions of dollars annually, could result in
millions of dollars of overpayments. Also, the federal audit only reviewed
claims for which federal reimbursements were made to Maryland. The federal
audit did not include Maryland-paid Medicaid claims that were not submitted
for federal reimbursement, nor did the federal audit determine the amount of
Medicaid-eligible claims that were never subm itted for federal
reimbursement.
10 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 15 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives,
and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit of certain aspects of the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene’s Medicaid claims payment procedures. This
audit was conducted as a result of the Department’s responses to our
previous fiscal compliance report, dated July 28, 2006, on the Medical Care
Programs Administration (MCPA), the agency primarily responsible for
administering the Medicaid program in Maryland. In that report, we stated
that MCPA bypassed certain automated system edits designed to prevent
improper payments. The Department maintained that there were legitimate
reasons for disabling the edits. Due to the complexity of the MCPA payment
processes, we conducted this audit to examine certain of the payment
processes in more depth.
We conducted the audit under the authority of the State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence
obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based
on our audit objectives.
Objectives
Our audit had three specific objectives:
1. To evaluate the effectiveness of the claims edit process, particularly
the appropriateness of disabling edits
2. To assess the effectiveness and efficiency of DHMH’s procedures
performed to review the propriety of claims after payment
3. To evaluate the effectiveness of the voucher claim processes to obtain
federal Medicaid reimbursements for services provided through the
Office of 11
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 16 ---
Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) and the Developmental
Disabilities Administration (DDA)
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed and tested numerous paid claims;
reviewed available documentation describing system edits including
programming logic; examined other records related to paid Medicaid claims,
including provider documentation available from DHMH, and reviewed audit
reports related to other Medicaid organizations. We interviewed DHMH
personnel, specifically MCPA, DDA, and MHA personnel and their contractors,
and performed extensive procedural reviews and tests of a number of
systems deemed critical to our audit objectives. The audit also included a
review of appropriate federal requirements and regulations regarding
operations of Medicaid programs.
Our first objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of the automated edit
controls for processing Maryland fee-for-service Medicaid claims. To
determine the extent of automated system edits that were disabled, we
obtained a computer file of all fee-for-service claims paid between July 1,
2007 and March 31, 2008. From this file, we isolated the $978 million of
claims that were flagged as having not been processed through one or more
of the 81 disabled system edits. We subsequently evaluated the propriety of
disabling 55 of the 81 edits; the 55 edits reviewed accounted for $976 million
(99 percent) of the transactions that bypassed disabled edits during the
period. For these edits, we determined the appropriateness of disabling them
by reviewing descriptions of the edits, by reviewing billing procedural manuals,
by reviewing programming logic, and by discussing them with MCPA
employees. In addition, we tested numerous claims for which these edits had
been disabled to confirm our understanding of the edits and to determine if
claims were paid that should not have been paid. We also reviewed the
procedures used to change edit settings, such as to temporarily disable edits.
Additionally, we reviewed the procedures over the payment of claims that
were initially suspended by the system due to failing an automated edit
control.
Our second objective was to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of the
claims post-payment review procedures. The focus of our review was the
Surveillance and Utilization Review Subsystem (SURS), which uses
computerized reports to monitor providers and recipients to help identify
potential abuse of the Medicaid program. We reviewed procedures over
SURS, compared the practices used by DHMH’s SURS to the practices used by
other states, and determined if appropriate action was taken when SURS
12 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 17 ---
identified improper payments. We also evaluated the effectiveness of the
contractor used to audit paid hospital claims and evaluated procedures to
ensure that the proper rates were used for out-of-state hospital claims.
Our final audit objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of the processes
MHA and DDA used to obtain federal Medicaid funds for claims paid on behalf
of their recipients. We reviewed procedures used by the two administrations
to obtain Medicaid federal funds. Additionally, we reviewed the actions taken
by DHMH and the Administrations when claims for federal funds were rejected
by the MCPA processing system.
We attempted to compare Maryland’s staffing structure with other states.
However, unlike most other states, Maryland uses its own employees to
perform most tasks associated with the Medicaid program, including the
processing of claims. Consequently, we were unable to compare MCPA’s
staffing structure to other states since the other states generally relied on
contractors to administer their programs.
Our audit scope excluded payments made on a capitation basis to Managed
Care Organizations (MCOs) and long-term care facilities. Also excluded was
an evaluation of the initial payment determinations made by MHA and DDA for
payments to their respective service providers; rather, for these two
administrations, our focus was the federal reimbursement process through
MMIS II.
Fieldwork and Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
Response
We conducted our fieldwork during the period from March 2008 through April
2009. The Department’s response to our findings and recommendations is
included as an appendix to this report.
Office of 13
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 18 ---
14 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 19 ---
Findings and
Recommendations
Objective 1
Effectiveness of Claims Processing Edits
Conclusion
This audit objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of the Medical Care
Programs Administration’s (MCPA) management of edits over claims. Our
primary focus for this objective was to determine whether it was appropriate
for MCPA to disable 81 automated edits that were programmed to prevent
improper payments. We also reviewed procedures over changes to edit
settings and examined certain other aspects of the claims payment process.
Our performance audit disclosed that MCPA processed fee-for-service claims
totaling approximately $978 million between July 1, 2007 and March 31,
2008 that bypassed 81 disabled system edits within MMIS II. We examined
55 of these disabled edits and attempted to determine if it was proper to
bypass them. The 55 edits tested were applicable to $976 million of the
claims processed through disabled edits.
We found that MCPA’s decision to disable automated system edits was proper
in most instances. Specifically, out of the 55 disabled edits tested, we
determined that the decision to deactivate the edit was appropriate for 40
edits. For example, one deactivated edit was intended to prevent payment if
a facility provider number was not in the Maryland Medicaid Information
System (MMIS II). Since other information is used in Maryland to identify
providers, the disabling of this edit is appropriate. However, we found that 9
disabled edits should not have been deactivated; these 9 edits applied to
claims totaling in excess of $98 million of the $978 million disbursed during
the nine-month period ended March 31, 2008. For example, one of the
deactivated edits was intended to prevent payments for procedures for
patients in long-term care facilities when payments for these procedures
Office of 15
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 20 ---
would typically be included in the payments made to the facilities. For 6 of
the disabled edits, neither the Department nor we could determine if
deactivating the edits was proper. We also found that comprehensive
descriptions of the purpose of the edits were frequently not available from
MCPA.
Controls over changes to edit settings were lacking. Changes to edit settings
were made without supervisory review and approval, without documented
explanations as to why edit settings were changed, and without maintaining
records of the changes actually made.
During our testing of claims, we determined that certain claims were
improperly processed in MMIS II due to a temporary change in edit settings
that was not intended to apply to these claims. Consequently, these claims
were paid rather than suspended by MMIS II for subsequent manual review.
After we advised MCPA about these claims, its research disclosed that claims
totaling $5.3 million should have been manually reviewed before payment. It
also determined that $1.4 million of these claims were paid in error and
should be recovered from the providers.
We also found that authority in MMIS II to process certain claims for payment
was inadvertently granted to 532 system users who did not require such
capability. After we brought this to MCPA’s attention, it removed the capability
to process claims from these employees who did not need that capability.
Finally, DHMH had not performed a formal study or review to determine the
optimal number of employees required to perform its critical Medicaid
functions, and did not have a training program for its employees performing
critical claims processing functions. For example, knowledge of system edits,
billing procedures, medical procedures, and diagnoses codes, must be used
to properly evaluate suspended claims. Without determining the optimal
staffing levels, MCPA cannot ensure that the appropriate number of its
approximately 615 employees has been assigned to claims processing
functions.
Background
The vast majority of Maryland’s Medicaid expenditures can be categorized
into one of three payment types: fee-for-service, managed care, and long-term
care. Under the fee-for-service payment method, healthcare providers, such
as physicians and hospitals, submit claims to MCPA for each service provided
to a Medicaid recipient. Once MCPA approves the claims, the providers are
paid the allowed amount for the services billed. With the managed care
16 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 21 ---
payment method, managed care organizations (MCOs) are paid a specified
monthly fee (capitation fee) for each enrollee. The MCOs are then responsible
for providing appropriate healthcare to their enrollees through contracted
health care providers. Long-term care providers, such as nursing homes, are
paid through a cost-reimbursement system. The focus of this audit was on
the fee-for-service payments, which totaled approximately $1.51 billion during
fiscal year 2009.
An inherent concern with fee-for-service payments is that the entity
authorizing payment for services cannot be certain that the services billed by
providers were actually provided. As required by the federal government,
Maryland uses a computerized system (the Medicaid Management
Information System or MMIS II) to pay provider claims and to process paid
claims for federal reimbursement. MMIS II contains 658 automated edits that
are designed to assist in verifying that claims are complete and legitimate.
For example, automated edit controls exist to verify the eligibility of providers
and recipients, to prevent payment of duplicate claims, and to allow payment
for gender-specific medical procedures for patients of the applicable gender.
No single claim would be subject to all of the 658 edits. Rather, each claim
would only be subject to certain edits, depending on the nature of the claim.
For example, some edits are intended only for inpatient claims; these edits
would not be triggered unless the claim met certain criteria defining it as an
inpatient claim.
Most claims submitted electronically, pass the automated edits, and are paid
with minimal employee effort. However, a large number of paper claims are
still submitted that require manual processing. In addition, claims that are
suspended by system edits must be reviewed manually by a MCPA employee
who then determines if the claim should be paid or denied. Claims paid in
this manner are referred to as ‘forced’ claims because the claims are paid
even though they have not passed all MMIS II edits.
In our July 28, 2006 fiscal compliance audit report on MCPA, we stated that
significant amounts of claims were paid without going through system edits
designed to prevent improper payments. In response to that audit report,
MCPA maintained that disabling many of the MMIS II edits was proper
because those edits were unique to the State of Florida’s Medicaid system
(from which the Maryland system is derived) or were federally approved
changes to the Maryland Medicaid program.
Office of 17
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 22 ---
Findings
1. The disabling of claim edits appeared reasonable for most
deactivated edits, but some edits should not have been
deactivated. The propriety of deactivating certain other edits could
not be determined.
A summary of the results of our review of the propriety of the disabling of edits
is shown in Table 1 below. The Department generally agreed with our
conclusions.
Table 1
Results of Review of Edits Tested
July 1, 2007 through March 31, 2008
Number of Value of Paid
Category
Edits Claims (cid:110)
Proper to Disable 40 $690,861,748
Should Not Have Been Disabled 9 98,594,958
Propriety Could Not be
6 186,532,323
Determined
Total 55 $975,989,029
(cid:110) Although each claim may pass through more than one edit, each claim is counted
only once in this column based on its first bypassed edit. Accordingly, this table
conservatively shows the value of paid claims that were not processed through
edits.
We determined the appropriateness of deactivating edits by reviewing
available descriptions of the edits, billing manuals, and programming logic,
and through discussions with MCPA employees. In addition, we tested
numerous claims related to these edits to confirm our understanding of the
edits and to determine if claims were paid that should not have been paid.
An edit entitled “facility provider number is not on file” is an example of an
edit that we determined was properly disabled. This edit denies a claim when
a facility provider number on a claim is not entered into MMIS II; however,
MCPA does not use facility numbers for payment identification purposes.
Instead, Maryland’s MMIS II uses alternative provider numbers to ensure
payments are only made to eligible providers.
18 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 23 ---
An example of an edit that should not have been disabled is entitled
“inpatient claim in conflict with outpatient claim,’ which was applicable to
claims totaling approximately $33 million between July 1, 2007 and March
31, 2008. This edit was designed to prevent payments to providers for
inpatient claims when services may have been previously paid as an
outpatient claim. Another example of an edit that should not have been
disabled is the edit entitled “procedure invalid for a recipient in a long-term
care facility,” which was applicable to claims totaling approximately $4 million
during the same period. This edit was designed to prevent payments for
procedures (including medical equipment and supplies) for patients in a long-
term care facility when payment for these procedures would typically be
included in the payments made to the facility. We tested 50 claims totaling
approximately $120,000 that bypassed this edit and found 5 claims totaling
$8,695 that should have been denied. These payments represent claims for
procedures on behalf of recipients at a long-term care facility that should not
have been separately billed.
An edit entitled “unable to determine waiver eligibility” which was applicable
to claims totaling $182.7 million between July 1, 2007 and March 31, 2008,
is an example of an edit for which the propriety of disabling the edit could not
be readily determined for recipients with Medicaid (only) eligibility as well as
for those with Medicare (and Medicaid) eligibility. DHMH management initially
advised us that this edit existed in the Florida’s Medicaid system and was not
applicable to Maryland’s program, but subsequently advised us that the edit
was not in Florida’s system and was added to Maryland’s MMIS II system by
DHMH. Based on our review and interviews with MCPA personnel, it is
believed that this edit relates to eligibility coding in MMIS II; however, neither
we nor MCPA could determine the exact reasons why or how this edit applies
to these claims. See additional comments in Finding 3 (on page 21) regarding
the lack of documentation of system edit descriptions.
2. Adequate internal controls were not established over changes to
edit settings.
An informal and generally undocumented process was used to temporarily
change edit settings. Four employees could alter (deactivate or reactivate)
the MMIS II automated edit settings without further supervisory review. One
of these users, who is an MCPA manager, was primarily responsible for
altering the edit settings when necessary to process claims through MMIS II.
MMIS II allows one user to alter the edit settings without requiring another
system user to independently approve the changes. Also, there was no
manual approval to document authorizations for changes to edit settings, and
Office of 19
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 24 ---
written justifications as to why edit setting changes were made were not
prepared. Furthermore, there were no output reports prepared from MMIS II
of changes made to edit settings which could be reviewed for propriety.
If an operation as large and complex as Maryland’s Medicaid program is to be
managed effectively, its edit changes (which are essentially computer
program logic changes) must be adequately controlled; otherwise, Medicaid
claims may not be processed as intended and inappropriate payments may be
made. Because of the very large volume of Medicaid claims, even small error
rates in claims processing can lead to millions of dollars in inappropriate
payments. It is, therefore, critical that controls be established to minimize the
risk of errors.
Written justifications should be prepared and retained for all changes to edit
settings. These justifications should clearly explain why an edit setting
needed to be modified. Before any changes to edit settings are made, a
management employee, other than the employee who initiated the change,
should approve the change in edit settings. After the change is made, the
results should be monitored to determine that the change is having the
desired effect on claims processing, and to ensure that the edit setting is
changed back at the appropriate time, if applicable. In addition, records of all
changes to edit settings, including the reasons they were changed and the
related approvals, should be maintained. Finally, procedures should be
implemented to ensure that only properly authorized changes to edit settings
are made.
We noted an example of the lack of controls over edits during our test work.
Specifically, we identified one edit, which was designed to prevent payments
for overlapping inpatient and outpatient periods, which should not have been
deactivated. During July 2008, we brought this to the attention of MCPA, and
as a result, an MCPA employee altered the edit setting (which was in place
since at least July 1999), so that all future inpatient claims for periods when
outpatient claims have also been paid would be suspended from payment.
This would subsequently allow MCPA employees to review the suspended
claims and related documentation to determine if the suspended claims
should be paid or denied. Although we agree with the reason for this change
in edit setting, the change was not adequately controlled. Specifically, the
edit setting was changed solely by one employee without additional review,
approval, or documentation of the change or the reason for the change. (This
edit is included in Table 1 as an edit that should not have been disabled.)
20 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 25 ---
We were unable to determine the number or frequency of changes made to
automated edit settings because MCPA was not producing or retaining a
record of these changes.
3. Documentation for the system edit descriptions and the related
decisions as to which edits should be disabled was lacking.
Although the MMIS II programming documentation contained descriptions of
its edits, these descriptions were often brief and vague. As a result, we
frequently had to ask MCPA employees the purpose of edits and under what
circumstances they would deny or suspend a claim. On numerous occasions,
we received contradictory explanations from MCPA employees regarding the
purpose of certain edits. Furthermore, written explanations as to why edits
had been deactivated were generally not available and MCPA personnel could
not always explain why edits were not being used. We were advised by DHMH
management that certain edits were disabled when the system was obtained
from the State of Florida, because the edit conditions may have applied to
Florida but did not apply to Maryland. However, there was no documentation
available to support the decision to disable these edits.
The lack of documentation for the edits contributed to our difficulty in
determining if certain edits should be active or disabled. Furthermore, MCPA
could not substantiate that it took appropriate actions regarding these edits.
While our testing disclosed that there were generally valid reasons to disable
most of the edits that were not being used, additional information related to
these edits was obtained primarily from one employee. This one employee
generally had complete control over the automated MMIS II edit process,
including the ability to change edit settings. If this employee were to cease
employment at MCPA, because of the lack of documentation of the edit
process, it would be extremely difficult for MCPA to be able to effectively
manage the edit process.
4. A programming error resulted in the improper payment of claims.
During our testing of claims, we determined that certain claims were
improperly processed in MMIS II due to a temporary change in edit settings
that was not intended to apply to these claims. Consequently, these claims
were paid rather than suspended by MMIS II for subsequent manual review.
Our test of 15 of these claims paid in March 2008, totaling $1.05 million,
disclosed that all 15 claims should not have been paid without further
Office of 21
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 26 ---
research. Specifically, either the preauthorization numbers submitted in the
provider claims tested did not match the preauthorization numbers in MMIS II,
or there were no MMIS II preauthorization numbers. Preauthorization is
required for certain claim types. The intention was that proper
preauthorization data must be recorded in MMIS II for the dates of service in
order for a claim to be paid. MCPA management agreed that the claims that
we tested should not have been paid. After we advised MCPA about these
claims, its research disclosed that claims totaling $5.3 million that were paid
during March and April 2008 should have been manually reviewed before
payment. It also determined that $1.4 million of these claims were paid in
error and should be recovered from the providers.
5. MMIS II access to pay forced claims that were suspended was
inadvertently granted to 532 users.
During our review of system access, we determined that 532 employees had
unintentionally been provided with the capability to direct the MMIS II system
to pay claims that had failed edits. According to the system access records,
these employees had “inquiry only” access to the system screen that allows
the user to direct MMIS II to pay suspended claims. However, we determined
that the users actually had update access and these users could force the
payment of claims that failed edits. We advised MCPA management
personnel who immediately removed all access to this screen for the
aforementioned 532 users.
MCPA was not able to determine why the system allowed users full
transaction capabilities when the intended setting was to only allow inquiry
access. In addition, MCPA was unaware if the system settings for other
critical screens allowed users with “inquiry only” access to modify critical data
and execute transactions. Our test of selected forced claims found no
instances of claims paid by unauthorized users.
6. Although certain functional areas have significant backlogs, DHMH
had not performed any formal studies of its staffing requirements
to determine if its existing resources should be reallocated.
DHMH management has not performed a formal study or review to determine
the optimal number of employees required to perform its critical Medicaid
functions. Although there have been several personnel changes, and a
realignment of duties during the past several years, there has been no formal
22 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 27 ---
evaluation of the workload and the number and qualifications of the related
employees required for each functional unit. Without determining the optimal
staffing levels, MCPA cannot ensure that the appropriate number of its 615
employees has been assigned to claims processing functions.
Most claims are submitted electronically, pass the automated edits, and are
paid with minimal employee effort. However, a large number of paper claims
are still submitted that require manual processing. In addition, claims that
are suspended by system edits must be reviewed manually by an MCPA
employee who then determines if the claim should be paid or denied. Claims
paid in this manner are referred to as ‘forced’ claims because the claims are
paid even though they have not passed all MMIS II edits. Approximately 60
MCPA employees in three units are responsible for processing paper claims
and for determining the resolution of these suspended claims; during the
nine-month period ending March 31, 2009, these units processed a total of
721,074, claims totaling $301.5 million. All three of these units had
backlogs. For example, as of February 13, 2009, one unit had 52,787
unprocessed claims, including claims that were approximately two months
old. We were advised by MCPA management that claim backlogs are typical
due to the lack of sufficient number of employees assigned to this unit. In
addition, inadequate staffing could also limit the number of manually
processed claims that are subsequently reviewed for propriety by supervisory
personnel.
7. Formal training for employees performing critical and complex
functions is lacking.
MCPA does not have a training program for any employees performing critical
claims processing functions. Specifically, employees in the three units
(Claims Exam Entry, Adjustments, and Provider Relations) responsible for
reviewing claims and determining if these claims should be paid or denied did
not receive formal training for their job duties. In order to review and
determine the propriety of these claims, extensive knowledge of Medicaid
practices must be acquired and utilized. For example, knowledge of system
edits, billing procedures, medical procedures, and diagnoses codes, must be
used to properly evaluate suspended claims. We were advised by MCPA
management that there was no formal training program (such as a training
curriculum) for these employees. Rather, these employees received on-the-
job instruction, as needed, from supervisors. We noted that one supervisor
prepared an ad-hoc (informal) written guide for users to follow when
processing forced claims. However, based on responses to our audit inquiries
during our fieldwork regarding edit explanations and claims review
Office of 23
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 28 ---
procedures, certain individuals responsible for supervising claims processing
employees did not appear to be adequately trained themselves. Considering
the significant effects from rather complex decisions that these employees
make, a formal training program is warranted.
Recommendations
1. We recommend that MCPA
a. process all claims through all applicable system edits;
b. further investigate the edits for which it could not be determined if they
should have been disabled, and determine whether these edits should
be used;
c. review the questionable payments that we identified, and obtain
recovery of any improper payments; and
d. where systemic issues exist, identify and recover any additional
overpayments.
2. We recommend
a. that DHMH modify its system and procedures to require that all
changes to edit settings be independently approved by supervisory
personnel who are not involved with initiating the changes;
b. that written explanations be prepared and retained for each change to
edit settings;
c. that records of all changes to edit settings be maintained that indicate
what the changes were, when the changes were made, and by whom;
and
d. that edit setting modifications be documented and that, after the
modifications are made, the effects of the changes be monitored to
determine if the changes had only the desired effect.
3. We recommend that MCPA develop clear written descriptions for all MMIS
II edit settings that indicate the purpose of the edits and categories of
claims they impact. These descriptions should include explanation(s) for
any edits that are disabled.
4. We recommend that all of the improperly processed claims, due to a
programming error that we identified, be reviewed for propriety and that
any payments determined to have been made in error be recovered.
24 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 29 ---
5. We recommend that update access to critical data only be provided to
employees who require such access to perform their job duties, and that
DHMH periodically review employee access.
6. We recommend that DHMH perform a study to determine the staffing
needed to ensure adequate claims processing capacity and effective
control procedures for Medicaid claims. We also recommend that DHMH
allocate the needed staff to these functions.
7. We recommend that MCPA develop a training program that provides.
structured and consistent training for new employees, as well as
continuing training for existing employees, to ensure that employees with
claims processing duties have the requisite knowledge to perform their
duties.
Office of 25
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 30 ---
26 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 31 ---
Objective 2
Post-Payment Review Procedures
Conclusion
This audit objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of the post-payment
review procedures performed by DHMH over fee-for-service Medicaid claims.
During fiscal year 2009, fee-for-service claims totaled approximately $1.51
billion. Post-payment review procedures are essential to help determine that
medical procedures paid for were actually provided and were medically
necessary.
Our audit disclosed that the post-payment review process was not formally
structured and adequately documented. For example, written risk
assessments were not prepared to identify high-risk types of claims that
should be subject to routine additional scrutiny. There were no written
requirements as to the type and frequency of claims data analysis (utilization)
reports to run and the expected level of research required. Furthermore,
comprehensive lists of specific claims data analysis reports actually produced,
specific claims reviewed, and records of overpayments recovered as a result
of the related investigations were not maintained. Such information can be
used to more effectively direct future efforts. Consequently, assurance was
lacking that the post-payment review process was as effective as possible.
We also noted that certain reports designed to identify potentially improper
provider billings were not routinely produced. For example, reports of “spike”
payments (large amounts of claim payments to a provider over a short period)
were not produced. In addition, reports to identify unbundling of procedures
to increase reimbursements were not routinely produced. (Unbundling occurs
when providers bill several related procedure codes rather than bill for one
comprehensive code that includes all services provided.) Furthermore,
appropriate procedural changes were not always implemented when post-
payment reviews identified systemic deficiencies that allowed improper
payments to occur. In one instance, a post-payment review detected that
MCPA paid claims for female recipients of a drug intended only for males;
however, MMIS II was not promptly modified to prevent future similar
occurrences.
We noted that the post-payment review practices for hospital billings need
improvement. Although MCPA contracted with a vendor to audit in-state paid
hospital claims, these audits were not completed timely. As of December 31,
Office of 27
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 32 ---
2008, no claims paid since January 1, 2004 had been subject to audit by the
vendor. Also, MCPA did not verify that it paid the proper rates for out-of-state
hospital bills. Our limited testing of payments to out-of-state hospital billings
disclosed an overpayment of $87,054.
Finally, DHMH did not have an effective process for pursuing reimbursement
from third parties (such as private health insurers) that may be liable for the
costs of treatment provided to Medicaid recipients.
Background
As is the case with all fee-for-service health plans, the entity that pays the
claims does not know if the claims submitted were for services that were
actually provided and were medically necessary. While a properly functioning
automated edit process can prevent some improper payments, such a system
cannot ensure that all services paid for were appropriate. To help ensure the
propriety of claims paid, state Medicaid programs have post-payment review
procedures. One critical component of a Medicaid post-payment review
system is the Surveillance and Utilization Review (SURS) process. This
process, which as of April 2007 is administered by the DHMH’s Office of
Inspector General (OIG), attempts to identify potentially improper or fraudulent
paid claims by performing computerized analyses of claims data. Such an
analysis could, for example, indicate which physicians were paid for
substantially more procedures per patient than the average physician in the
program. Once such data anomalies are identified, provider case records can
be reviewed to determine if the procedures paid for were actually provided
and were medically necessary. In addition, MCPA has contracted with a
vendor to audit hospital claims.
Findings
8. Documentation of the post-payment review process was in need of
significant improvement.
The organization and documentation of the entire post-payment process
should be improved. There were no comprehensive written procedures for the
post payment review processes, such as the SURS process. As a result, there
were no specific requirements as to the type and frequency of computer
utilization reports (computerized analyses of claims data) to run to identify
potentially improper or fraudulent paid claims, and there was no formal
guidance as to which DHMH units were responsible for reviewing the reports.
There were also no written directions regarding the level of research required
28 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 33 ---
to review the propriety of the claims identified in the reports, as well as no
written guidance regarding the level of extended testing expected when
improper claims were noted during a review. Also, utilization reports
produced were not based on formal risk assessments to identify the higher
risk claim types for analysis. One state that we contacted indicated that it
completed a yearly risk assessment based on several factors, including
fluctuations in payments, changes in payment rules, and recent industry
changes. The results of such a risk assessment could be used by DHMH
management to direct resources to be more effective and efficient in
identifying potentially improper payments.
On August 1, 2008, DHMH issued draft guidelines and procedures for
conducting post-payment reviews or investigations of allegations of fraud,
waste, or abuse. This draft provides general guidance rather than specific
instructions. For example, the guidelines do not address how investigative
efforts are to be documented and the retention requirements for SURS
reports or report results. The guidelines also do not provide specific direction
or procedures for permanent correction of claim processing weaknesses
noted during the post payment reviews as further discussed in Finding 10.
There was no comprehensive list or database of all the utilization reports
produced and the results of reviews performed on the related claims. As a
result, we were not able to readily determine the total population of utilization
reports produced, or effectively evaluate the review processes performed and
investigations conducted for the related claims. Moreover, DHMH likewise
cannot effectively monitor the effectiveness of the SURS process. A
comprehensive list or database of utilization reports produced could be used
by DHMH employees and management to ensure that sufficient claims
utilization reports were produced and properly investigated, and to help
determine which utilization reports should be produced in the future.
Records were typically not maintained in a manner that would allow us, or
DHMH management, to easily evaluate the results of the claims reviewed.
Documentation was frequently not available to support the number of claims
shown on the reports that were reviewed, the type of reviews performed (such
as the specific computerized claims analyses), and the conclusion of the
claims reviewers. Also, reports produced were not maintained after three
months unless the individual user designated a longer retention period.
Furthermore, records of actual recoveries resulting from post-payment
reviews, including SURS, were not maintained. The OIG did maintain a record
of recommended recoveries, but the actual recoveries were frequently less
than what was recommended. For example, one case was investigated and
Office of 29
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 34 ---
the OIG recommended recoveries totaling approximately $194,000, but no
actual recovery was initiated for this case and no recoveries were made. In
this instance, the OIG found that the professional credentials for the
provider’s employees were expired or not available at the time of the review.
The investigation covered services provided during the period from January 5,
2005 through March 31, 2006. We noted payments were made to this
provider totaling approximately $500,000 for the period July 1, 2007 through
March 31, 2008.
9. Certain utilization reports were not produced or fully used.
While DHMH produced frequent reports based on algorithms deemed to
identify high-risk claims, certain ‘best practice’ reports — as determined by
contacting other states and the Federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) — were not utilized, and certain other reports were not utilized
as fully as possible.
• There was no comprehensive procedure or report to identify all payments
made on behalf of deceased recipients for services provided after their
dates of death.
• Routine utilization reports were not produced to determine if providers
performed services outside of their specialty. However, in October 2006,
a one-time utilization report was run for one provider that was enrolled as
a podiatrist but who billed for categories of services related to heart
procedures. As of September 1, 2008, this case was still under
investigation.
• There have been no reports produced to identify ‘spike’ payments made to
providers that submitted large amounts of claims in a short period.
• Reports to determine if procedures were ‘unbundled’ were not produced
on a regular basis. Unbundling occurs when providers bill several related
procedure codes rather than bill for one comprehensive code that includes
all services provided. By improperly billing separate procedure codes,
reimbursement amounts are greater than the amounts that would be paid
under the comprehensive procedure codes.
While there are nearly a limitless number of utilization reports that could be
produced from claims data, to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the
organization, reports that have been previously used and proven effective, as
well as potential reports that have proven beneficial to other State Medicaid
30 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 35 ---
operations, should be regularly evaluated to identify claims with the most
potential for recoveries.
10. Procedures were not always revised to correct deficiencies
identified in post-payment reviews.
Preventive controls were not always implemented when systematic
deficiencies were noted during post payment claim reviews. Specifically,
during the course of our audit, we noted the following deficiencies:
• A post payment review detected adopted children that were eligible for
federal Medicaid reimbursements, but for which their medical care was
paid only from State general funds; however, DHMH did not correct their
eligibility for federal reimbursement in MMIS II. Periodically, a utilization
report was run for general fund claims paid for adopted children. An
employee reviewed the recipient eligibility data to determine if any of the
recipients should have been categorized so that their claims were eligible
for federal reimbursement. A manual adjustment was performed, when
appropriate, so that the proper federal match could be received for the
eligible claims. However, the recipient eligibility was not corrected in
MMIS II so that future claims would also be automatically processed for
federal reimbursement. For the period from October 1, 2007 through
June 2008, a manual adjustment totaling $88,000 was made so that the
State could obtain a $44,000 (50 percent) federal reimbursement for
previously eligible adopted children for whom medical care was being paid
for with State general funds.
• DHMH - OIG concluded an investigation of a case based on SURS
utilization reports that showed instances in which payments were made to
a provider for a male-specific drug given to female recipients. As a result
of the investigation, recoveries were made from the provider. The
investigation also discovered that the system edit for this procedure was
not set to prevent payment based on the patients’ sex and, therefore, did
not preclude payment of claims billed on behalf of a female recipient for a
procedure that can only be performed on a male patient. In December
2007, the DHMH-OIG notified the MCPA of the need to correct the related
system edit; however, the correction was not made until we advised MCPA
of the miscoding.
Office of 31
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 36 ---
11. Additional procedures could be used to publicize the DHMH fraud
hotline and more data should be maintained to monitor its
effectiveness.
DHMH operates a hotline and a website to report instances of Medicaid fraud,
waste, and abuse. However, procedures could be improved to increase their
effectiveness.
A call log has been maintained since January 2008, which shows that 81 calls
were received during calendar year 2008. The majority of calls were
unrelated to Medicaid fraud, waste, and abuse; rather, many calls were
questions and comments about other DHMH operations. The DHMH website
also has a method to report instances of fraud via email. A log of the emails
that were received from the DHMH website showed that 22 referrals were
received from the implementation date of the website (August 2008) through
December 31, 2008.
DHMH uses several methods to advertise the hotline, such as posting the
telephone number on its website and placing posters in State-owned hospitals
and DHMH offices. Based on our previous survey of other state governments,
DHMH could use the following methods to increase public awareness of its
Medicaid fraud hotline:
• Placing information and the telephone number on State employee check
stubs
• Including the hotline number on DHMH business cards
• Placing posters and brochures in non-DHMH State government buildings
Stakeholders that are likely to be knowledgeable about Medicaid fraud,
waste, and abuse cases include Medicaid recipients, as well as providers and
their staff. In order to reach these individuals, DHMH should consider
additional methods to advertise the hotline, such as placing posters at private
provider locations, and working in conjunction with DHR to notify recipients
during eligibility determinations. Considering the limited number of referrals
received on the hotline and website, additional publicity about the fraud
referral methods may be beneficial.
We also noted that DHMH did not maintain statistics to monitor the
effectiveness of the hotline. Although logs were maintained to record the
referrals and, when applicable, to indicate the DHMH unit that was assigned
the case, the logs typically did not contain the ultimate disposition of the
investigations. Specifically, statistics were not maintained to show the origin
32 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 37 ---
and outcome of all hotline tips, such as the number of hotline tips that led to
recoveries or referrals to the Medicaid Fraud Control Unit (MFCU).
Increasing the efforts to make individuals aware of the hotline, and
maintaining comprehensive statistics may improve the effectiveness of the
hotline.
12. Post-payment reviews of in-state hospital claims could be
improved. DHMH should ensure that a sufficient number of claims
are audited and that they are audited more timely.
Audits of hospital claims were not timely. DHMH has contracted with a vendor
to review medical documentation for in-state hospital claims. The scope of
the contract requires the vendor to obtain and review documentation for
payments made to hospitals to determine if reimbursement was based on
actual services rendered to patients. For a specified period, as directed by
DHMH, the vendor reviews hospital medical records for documentation
evidencing that the services were provided. The vendor is compensated by
the providers on a contingency fee basis. Specifically, the provider must pay
the vendor a percentage of the amount of overpayments found during claims
reviews and must also return the identified overpayment amounts to MCPA.
This post-payment review mechanism was recognized by CMS as a
benchmark best practice. During fiscal year 2008, the contractor identified
overpayments totaling approximately $3.3 million.
• Our fiscal compliance audit report on MCPA, dated July 28, 2006, noted
that MCPA did not ensure that the hospital audit contractor performed the
required number of hospital bill audits. At the time that our audit work
was conducted, the contract required a specific number of reviews to be
performed. For example, the contractor was required to audit at least 50
percent of the inpatient claims over $6,000 and the outpatient claims
over $1,000. Effective December 2005, DHMH amended the contract to
no longer require a specific number of audits; rather, the contract stated
that the contractor would use its own criteria to determine which claims
would be subject to medical documentation reviews during the hospital bill
audit. However, DHMH management was not able to adequately describe
the selection criteria used by the vendor, nor had DHMH evaluated the
selection criteria used by the vendor.
Office of 33
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 38 ---
• There was a significant time lag between the claim payment dates and the
dates the claims were reviewed by the vendor. As of December 31, 2008,
the most recent claims subject to review covered services paid for during
the period from October 1, 2001 through December 31, 2003, a delay of
five years. (According to the contractor reports, there were a total of
33,193 hospital claims paid during this period; however, certain claims
that were outside the scope of the audit, such as inpatient claims less
than $6,000 and claims that have historically proven to be areas of low
risk, were excluded. The contractor determined that 27,312 of these
claims were subject to the selection process, of which 6,373 were
selected.) We were advised by MCPA management that the delay is
intentional because it allows time for the hospitals to perform self-audits.
Hospitals have an incentive to perform accurate self-audits and return
amounts paid for undocumented services since the hospitals are subject
to additional fees when the MCPA contractor audits result in claim
retractions. While some delay is necessary, the Medicaid provider
agreement only requires that providers maintain adequate records
describing the nature and extent of goods and services provided for six
years. MCPA advised that certain claims for services provided during
calendar year 2003 can no longer be audited since the six-year record
period has lapsed.
• The hospital bill audit contract expired on July 31, 2008. MCPA did not
procure a new contract for hospital bill audits until July 1, 2009.
13. DHMH did not always verify that payments to out-of-state hospitals
were made at the proper rates.
Our limited tests of out-of-state hospital payments resulted in the
identification of an overpayment of $87,000 to one hospital. Maryland
Medicaid reimburses out-of-state hospitals the lesser of the billed amount or
the amount that the host state’s Medicaid program would pay. Generally, in
order to determine the proper reimbursement rate, DHMH is required to
receive and review documentation of the host state’s Medicaid rate structure
for the specific bills prior to making payments. Our test of 27 payments to
out-of-state hospitals for claims paid during fiscal years 2006 through 2008,
totaling $813,276, disclosed that 7 claims totaling $548,928 were paid by
DHMH to five hospitals without obtaining documentation of the proper rates
from the applicable states. After we brought this to the attention of DHMH
management, they could not readily obtain the proper rates for six of these
claims because the rates were no longer recorded in MMIS II. The rate
34 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 39 ---
documentation obtained from the host state for the remaining claim payment,
totaling $128,375, indicated that the proper payment should have been
$41,321 — an overpayment of $87,054.
Out-of-state hospital claims must usually be processed manually since DHMH
must obtain documentation of the proper rates from the host state(s). (MMIS
II will only process claims automatically when rates are recorded in the
system.) We were advised by DHMH management that maintaining current
rates in MMIS II for all out-of-state hospitals would not be feasible due to the
its limited capacity. Nevertheless, for six of the seven aforementioned claims,
the payments were made automatically because rates had been recorded in
MMIS II; accordingly, no documentation was obtained for the rates used to
pay these claims. Subsequently DHMH management advised us that they
believed the rates to be incorrect (overstated), and that they would remove
the rates for these hospitals from MMIS II so that future claims would have to
be paid manually only after receipt of documentation of the host states rates.
According to MCPA records, payments to out-of-state hospitals totaled
approximately $21.3 million for the period from July 1, 2005 through June 30,
2008.
14. Procedures to obtain information regarding third-party liabilities
could be improved.
Payments made for procedures that are performed on patients with certain
specific diagnosis codes (such as injuries caused by trauma) are coded in
MMIS II so that a letter is produced to attempt to determine if there is a legally
responsible third party to pay the claim, such as a private health insurer or a
settlement payment from a liability insurer. The letter and related
questionnaire is sent to the recipient requesting information about the
incident that may have caused the injuries requiring medical services. The
recipient is requested to answer the questionnaire, and return it to DHMH. If
the questionnaire is not returned within 30 days, a second request is sent. If
the second request is not returned, DHMH does not pursue the issue further.
According to DHMH records, 10,203 second request tort letters and related
questionnaires were sent during fiscal year 2008; however, only 2,342 of
these questionnaires were returned. DHMH management advised that they
do not send additional requests because they believe there is a low likelihood
of receiving a response since the medical assistance population is transient.
Office of 35
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 40 ---
The Department of Human Resources (DHR) is responsible for performing an
annual reassessment of eligibility for Medicaid clients. The reassessment is
typically performed through the mail, as necessary forms are sent to the
client, and submitted back to DHR representatives to verify that the
individuals are still eligible. In an effort to improve the aforementioned
response rate, DMHM could have DHR send the questionnaires with the
annual reassessments.
Recommendations
8. We recommend
a. that DHMH develop comprehensive written procedures for the post-
payment review process;
b. that the procedures developed indicate how topics for SURS reports
are to be selected and their related frequencies, how data on reports
are to be investigated, how reviews of data on reports are to be
documented, and specify policies for retention of SURS reports and
the related documentation of investigation on the reports; and
c. that a listing of all SURS reports, the number of claims reviewed, and
the related results (such as recoveries) be maintained and be used
when determining which areas to select for future SURS reviews.
9. We recommend that DHMH perform periodic and documented
assessments of areas or categories of claims considered to be high risk
for fraud and abuse, and document how these assessments were
addressed in the post-payment review procedures through the use of
utilization reports.
10. We recommend that DHMH modify its procedures (such as edits in MMIS
II) to prevent improper payments due to systemic issues discovered
during the post-payment review process.
11. We recommend that DHMH
a. consider additional methods to publicize its Medicaid fraud hotline
and website-based fraud referral process, and
b. maintain statistics that can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of
the fraud referral procedures.
36 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 41 ---
12. We recommend that DHMH
a. establish and maintain a current contract for post-payment audits of
hospital claims, and
b. review and assess the procedures used by the contractor to select
claims for audit to ensure a sufficient number of hospital claims is
audited in a timely manner.
13. We recommend
a. that DHMH verify that payments to out-of-state hospitals are based
on the appropriate rates, and
b. that previous payments to out-of-state hospitals are reviewed and
any overpayments identified are recovered.
14. We recommend that DHMH develop and implement a more effective
process for pursuing reimbursement from third parties that may be liable
for treatment provided to Medicaid recipients, such as working with DHR
during the reassessment process.
Office of 37
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 42 ---
38 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 43 ---
Objective 3
Obtaining Federal Funds for Other
Administrations
Conclusion
This audit objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of the voucher claim
processes to obtain federal Medicaid reimbursements for services provided
through the Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) and the Developmental
Disabilities Administration (DDA).
Numerous Medicaid claims that were paid by MHA and DDA were
subsequently rejected by MMIS II; as a result, the receipt of federal Medicaid
funds for these claims was delayed or not obtained. For example, as of
December 2008, claims paid for DDA services provided in calendar year
2006, totaling approximately $8.4 million, were submitted and denied for
federal reimbursement by MMIS II and remained outstanding. MHA claims for
federal reimbursement totaling $14.5 million that were rejected by MMIS II
were outstanding as of January 2009, including $6.3 million in claims that
were outstanding for more than one year.
Since these claims were previously determined to be legitimate and were paid
by these Administrations, the amount of claims rejected by MMIS II for federal
reimbursement purposes should be minimal. However, the large number of
claims rejected by MMIS II from these DHMH administrations has been a long-
standing problem. Comments regarding this issue have been in our audit
reports for the last ten years. Moreover, DHMH lacked a systematic process—
involving MHA, DDA, and MCPA—to identify the causes of the rejected claims
and to modify procedures to reduce the magnitude of rejected claims in the
future. We also noted that follow-up efforts to resolve the rejected claims
were frequently untimely, resulting in lost interest to the State, and lost
federal recoveries.
Background
MHA and DDA are responsible for paying providers for mental health services
and services provided to individuals with developmental disabilities. Both
agencies pay providers through separate automated payment systems, and
subsequently submit paid claims to MCPA for MMIS II processing to obtain
Office of 39
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 44 ---
federal reimbursements. Since the processing of these claims through MMIS
II does not generate payments to providers but only reimbursements from the
federal government, these are referred to as “voucher only” claims. MHA
contracts with an Administrative Service Organization (ASO) to pay its claims
and to electronically submit eligible claims to MMIS II for federal
reimbursement. DDA uses an in-house computer system (Provider Consumer
Information Service or PCIS) to directly process claims and to electronically
submit eligible claims to MMIS II. During fiscal year 2009, Medicaid funding
received by MHA and DDA totaled $517 million ($280 million was received by
DDA and $237 million was received by MHA). These paid claims must pass
MMIS II edits in order for reimbursement to be obtained. Since both DDA and
MHA claim payments to providers are made outside of MMIS II, and the claims
must be processed through MMIS II for federal reimbursement, MMIS II edits
that deny these claims may cause delays in receipt of federal reimbursement
to the State, or denial of federal reimbursement.
Findings
15. There was no systematic process involving MHA, DDA, and MCPA
to analyze the cause(s) of rejected federal fund reimbursement
claims and to modify procedures to reduce the amount of future
rejected claims.
Numerous claims for federal reimbursement from DDA and MHA were
rejected by MMIS II. However, there was no systematic process among DDA,
MHA, and MCPA to determine the causes for the rejected claims so that
procedures and processes could be modified to minimize future rejected
claims.
For example, during a five-week period ending in August 2008, 7,657 MHA
claims totaling $3.7 million were rejected by MMIS II. Similarly, 116,000 DDA
claims submitted during August 2008 totaling $12.2 million were rejected by
MMIS II. As of January 6, 2009, outstanding MHA rejected claims for federal
reimbursement totaled $14.5 million, including $6.3 million of rejected claims
that had been outstanding for more than one year. (A cumulative record of
outstanding DDA rejected claims for federal reimbursement was not
maintained, as noted on the next page.) Obtaining the federal funds for these
rejected claims requires labor-intensive investigative efforts by DDA and MHA.
The reason(s) for the rejections must first be determined and corrective
action, often for each claim, must then be taken so that the claims can be
submitted to the federal government.
40 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 45 ---
Our tests indicated that some DDA claims were being unnecessarily rejected
by MMIS II. We tested 25 DDA claims that were rejected for federal funding
by MMIS II during July 2007 and determined that 10 of the claims should not
have been rejected. For example, 8 of the claims were rejected because each
recipient’s eligibility was not properly recorded in MMIS II.
The difficulties of MHA and DDA in obtaining federal Medicaid funds for their
previously paid claims has been a long-standing issue, for at least 10 years.
Our October 20, 1999 audit report on MHA, and several subsequent reports
on both DDA and MHA, have included comments about these difficulties.
Despite these ongoing deficiencies, there have been no systematic efforts by
DDA, MHA, and MCPA to reduce the amount of rejected claims for federal
reimbursement. For example, no cumulative records of the amount of DDA
rejected claims for federal reimbursements or the causes of rejected claims
are maintained. Furthermore, records of DDA rejected claims that were never
resolved were not maintained.
16. Rejected claims for federal reimbursement were not promptly
investigated and resolved, adequate records of rejected claims
were not maintained, and certain rejected claims were not
pursued.
We noted many instances in which federal funds were not obtained for
extended periods after State funds had been disbursed to providers. For
example, payment data we obtained from DDA, which we determined was
reliable, showed that, as of December 2008, claims paid for services provided
in calendar year 2006, totaling approximately $8.4 million, were submitted
and denied for federal reimbursement and remained outstanding. The federal
government generally will reimburse claims for up to two years after the
calendar quarter in which the expenditures were made. If these claims were
not successfully processed through MMIS II, federal fund reimbursements of
up to $4.2 million (50 percent of $8.4 million) may have been lost. As
previously mentioned, MHA claims for federal reimbursement totaling $14.5
million that were rejected were outstanding as of January 2009, including
$6.3 million in claims that were outstanding for more than one year. At a
minimum (assuming that federal reimbursement for all of these claims are
received immediately), the State will have lost interest income totaling at least
$243,000.
Office of 41
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 46 ---
Records for rejected DDA claims were not maintained in a manner that
facilitated a complete and timely resolution of the claims. DDA received a
weekly status report that showed claims that were accepted through MMIS II
for reimbursement and claims that were denied. Although DDA received a file
of rejected claims, it did not document the efforts used to investigate and
correct the claims, and the ultimate status of the claims.
DDA did not typically submit claims to MMIS II for reimbursement beyond nine
months past the dates of service. DDA management advised us that they
adhere to the requirements in State regulations, which allow providers only
nine months to submit Medicaid claims for reimbursement. (Effective March
1, 2008, State regulations allow providers twelve months to submit claims.)
However, federal regulations allow States to submit claims for reimbursement
up to two years after the calendar quarter in which the expenditures were
made. Therefore, regardless of the dates of service, DDA may submit claims
within two years from the expenditure dates.
Recommendations
15. We recommend
a. that MCPA, in conjunction with DDA and MHA, improve the process
for obtaining federal Medicaid funds for voucher claims;
b. that, at a minimum, MCPA continually track the number and amount
of claims rejected, determine why the claims were rejected,
document what actions were needed to resolve the rejection of
claims, and develop processing modifications that will reduce the
number of future rejections by MMIS II; and
c. that, if necessary, DHMH consider alternative methods of processing
claims for DDA and MHA.
16. We recommend that MCPA, in conjunction with DDA and MHA, ensure
that all rejected claims for federal Medicaid funds are promptly pursued
and resolved.
42 O f f ic e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 48 ---
PERFORMANCE AUDIT RESPONSES
MEDICAL CARE PROGRAMS
November 19, 2009
MMIS EDITS
AUDITOR’S FINDING #1
The disabling of claim edits appeared reasonable for most deactivated
edits, but some edits should not have been deactivated. The propriety
of deactivating certain other edits could not be determined.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that MCPA:
a. process all claims through all applicable system edits;
b. further investigate the edits for which it could not be determined
if they should have been disabled, and determine whether these
edits should be used;
c. review the questionable payments that we identified, and obtain
recovery of any improper payments; and
d. where systemic issues exist, identify and recover any additional
overpayments.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
1a: The Administration agrees with the recommendation to process all claims
through the system edits that are determined appropriate and will be
undertaking this task as we develop the requirements for the new MMIS. In the
interim, MCPA believes that there are adequate controls to minimize the risk that
inappropriate claims are paid. These controls include but are not limited to: prior
review of medical necessity and limiting the medically necessary number of
inpatient days to be claimed, existing MMIS edits, post payment reviews of
forced claims, post payment hospital bill audits and credit balance audits, and
utilizing the capabilities of SURs to identify patterns of over utilization and
potential fraud and abuse. As the review of MCPA’s claims and edit processes
revealed, 40 of the 55 edits representing $690 million out of $976 million in
claims, reviewed by the Legislative Auditors were determined to be proper to lift
the edits. The results of the PERM audit, performed by CMS, indicate that the
MMIS does support the correct payment of claims according to Maryland policy.
1

--- Page 49 ---
1b: The Administration agrees with the recommendation to investigate the 6
edits, totaling $186 million, that the Legislative Auditors were not able to
determine if they should be bypassed or not. MCPA has investigated these edits
and continues to affirm that these edit overrides are appropriate.
1c/d: Additionally, the Administration agrees with the recommendation to review
the questionable payments identified and ensure recovery of improper payments.
For the 9 edits, totaling $98 million, which were categorized as “should not have
been lifted”, MCPA has reviewed the rationale for lifting the edits and has taken
appropriate steps to change the status for several of the edits from pay to
suspend or deny. The fact that an edit should have been set does not indicate
that the claim was improper and should not have been paid. Subsequent review
of the suspended claims by MCPA staff could result in the edit being overridden,
subject to the 3% post-payment review. Coding errors by providers may also
cause an edit to be set and require correction and resubmission in order to pass
the edit. A significant number of the overridden claims occurred as a result of
lifting the edits for special MHA batches to obtain federal funding, which MHA
and MCPA are working to reduce or eliminate with the new MHA ASO vendor.
Additional controls over inappropriate payments exist as part of the SURS post
payment review process in which providers are subject to audits based upon
abnormal billing patterns (see audit finding #10 response for additional info).
Where MCPA believes that lifting the edit resulted in claims that were improper,
we are taking steps to retract the improper payments.
2

--- Page 50 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #2
Adequate internal controls were not established over changes to edit
settings.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend
a. that DHMH modify its system and procedures to require that all
changes to edit settings be independently approved by
supervisory personnel who are not involved with initiating the
changes;
b. that written explanations be prepared and retained for each
change to edit settings;
c. that records of all changes to edit settings be maintained that
indicate what the changes were, when the changes were made,
and by whom; and
d. that edit setting modifications be documented and that, after the
modifications are made, the effects of the changes be monitored
to determine if the changes had only the desired effect.
ADMINSTRATION’S RESPONSE
2a: The Administration disagrees with the recommendation to modify its system
so that on-line changes to edits are approved by supervisory personnel who are
not involved with initiating the changes. The Administration is currently in the
process of replacing its legacy system and any significant systemic changes to
the current system are on hold. In the interim, the Administration agrees with
the recommendation to modify its procedures so that all changes to edits are
approved by supervisory personnel who are not involved with initiating the
changes.
2b: The Administration agrees with the recommendation to prepare and retain
written explanations for each change to edit settings.
2c/d: Additionally, the Administration is producing the MMIS report that contains
edit settings. This report will be reviewed by executive management. All
documentation pertaining to the edit settings will be maintained. The
Administration is currently training a staff person that can perform this function
independently of claims processing staff. The training is expected to be
completed by December 15, 2009.
3

--- Page 51 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #3
Documentation for the system edit descriptions and the related
decisions as to which edits should be disabled was lacking.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that MCPA develop clear written descriptions for all
MMIS II edit settings that indicate the purpose of the edits and
categories of claims they impact. These descriptions should include
explanation(s) for any edits that are disabled.
ADMINSTRATION’S RESPONSE
The Administration agrees with the recommendation and as part of the
requirements analysis for the design, development and implementation of the
new MMIS, the Administration will be identifying all edits and their disposition
appropriate for the Maryland Medicaid Program.
4

--- Page 52 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #4
A programming error resulted in the improper payment of claims.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that all of the improperly processed claims, due to a
programming error that we identified, be reviewed for propriety and
that any payments determined to have been made in error be
recovered.
ADMINSTRATION’S RESPONSE
As recommended, the Administration reviewed 766 claims as identified by the
auditors. The review revealed the following results:
The 766 claims were released mistakenly during the initial weeks when we
required providers to submit claims using their NPI. Claims that did not have a
NPI were suspended and were eventually paid after holding them for two weeks.
After reviewing the claims further, it was determined that approximately one-half
of the claims would need to be retracted. Therefore, the Administration
recouped the money owed from the providers during the November 14, 2009
payment run.
5

--- Page 53 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #5
MMIS II access to pay forced claims that were suspended was
inadvertently granted to 532 users.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that update access to critical data only be provided to
employees who require such access to perform their job duties, and
that DHMH periodically review employee access.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
The Administration agrees with the recommendation.
The security access that was granted to unauthorized staff has been revoked.
This was resolved almost immediately when it was reported to the
Administration. As per the auditor’s request, the Administration has modified the
MMIS Security Application to restrict individuals from updating critical data.
6

--- Page 54 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #6
Although certain functional areas have significant backlogs, DHMH had
not performed any formal studies of its staffing requirements to
determine if its existing resources should be reallocated.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that DHMH perform a study to determine the staffing
needed to ensure adequate claims processing capacity and effective
control procedures for Medicaid claims. We also recommend that
DHMH allocate the needed staff to these functions.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
The Administration agrees with this recommendation, but believes that in effect
this study has already been completed. In developing our analysis of
implementation alternatives for the new MMIS, the Administration made
estimates of staffing requirements to maintain industry standard service levels.
This analysis contributed to our decision to select the fiscal agent contractor
option which will allow for the allocation of appropriate resources to meet
contract performance standards. Therefore, due to the impending
implementation of the fiscal agent, the Administration will not be performing a
separate study of its staff needs.
7

--- Page 55 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #7
Formal training for employees performing critical and complex
functions is lacking.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that MCPA develop a training program that provides
structured and consistent training for new employees, as well as
continuing training for existing employees, to ensure that employees
with claims processing duties have the requisite knowledge to perform
their duties.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
The Administration agrees with the intent of the recommendation to develop a
training program, but given the Administration’s current lack of resources and
our intent to transfer the claims processing operations to a fiscal agent
contractor, we are not able to do so. The contractor will be required to process
claims in accordance with Department policies and we expect them to be able to
train their staff to effectively maintain those procedures.
8

--- Page 56 ---
POST PAYMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
AUDITOR’S FINDING #8
Documentation of the post-payment review process was in need of
significant improvement.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend
a. that DHMH develop comprehensive written procedures
for the post-payment review process;
b. that the procedures developed indicate how topics for
SURS reports are to be selected and their related
frequencies, how data on reports are to be investigated,
how reviews of data on reports are to be documented,
and specify policies for retention of SURS reports and the
related documentation of investigation on the reports;
and
c. that a listing of all SURS reports, the number of claims
reviewed, and the related results (such as recoveries) be
maintained and be used when determining which areas to
select for future SURS reviews.
* ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
8a/b. The Division of Program Integrity (“PI”) exists within the Office of the
Inspector General. It was transferred from Medicaid’s Office of Planning and
Finance in July of 2006. Program Integrity’s primary objective is to prevent
fraud, waste and abuse of Medicaid funds in Medicaid fee-for-service programs.
The PI is composed of 5 general sub-units or groups: 1) Data Analysis; 2)
Provider Investigations; 3) Provider Audits; 4) Recipient Fraud, and 5) Special
Projects-Medicaid. There is no “SURS” unit within PI. “SURS” is a computer
program. The Department concurs that Program Integrity should operate under
written policies and procedures.
Upon its relocation to the OIG, management began a comprehensive policy and
procedure manual to include a substantial appendix of audit-related tools. The
procedure manual has not yet been formally approved. The staff person tasked
with completing the manual left the Department and was not replaced. More
importantly, with the passage of the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 and the
creation of the Medicaid Integrity Group at the federal level, program integrity
has been fluid and dynamic. Certain program integrity concepts were developing
* See Appendix B for related auditor comment.
9

--- Page 57 ---
and changing at the federal level as the OIG’s manual was being drafted. The
OIG is currently awaiting the results of a review conducted by CMS’ Medicaid
Integrity Group of our PIU. Pending those results, OIG management plans to
have the manual completed and approved by the close of the fiscal year.
Likewise, the OIG can include in the procedure manual the level of detail
recommended by the auditors so long as some flexibility is allowed for the
methods selecting “topics for SURS reports.” In 2000, CMS (then the Health
Care Financing Administration) reacting to Congress’ passage of the Balance
Budget Act of 1997, repealed the requirement that State PI units conduct rigid
System Performance Reviews (SPR). SPRs were requirements placed upon
States to run a certain number and type of SURS reports on a yearly basis.
Understanding the need for flexibility and creativity, Congress, and in turn CMS
removed those rigid requirements. This was done to allow the States to
concentrate on developing and working more substantive cases. So, while the
OIG can develop some procedures surrounding how topics for SURS reports are
to be selected, the OIG would not want to return to a rigid system that dictated
quantity of SURS runs over quality case development.
* 8c. The Department does not concur.
First, The J-SURS System is not a unit, but rather, a subsystem of MMIS that
allows for certain reports to be created to analyze provider behavior.
When a SURS report is created, it identifies providers who do not fit a norm. It
does not identify claims. Therefore, PI cannot maintain documentation on
information that is not produced by a SURS report. Program Integrity
determines whether a provider identified warrants an audit. That determination
of whether to audit a provider in a SURS run involves a number of
considerations. For example, taking into account staff available for review, PI
management will scrutinize the Department’s total claims exposure attributable
to the given provider, whether the provider “excepts” on any other claims
criteria, whether the provider has had prior billing issues, etc. Only once these
issues are considered does PI decide to audit a given provider. Appearing
(“excepting”) is merely the first consideration.
Currently, when PI’s, Data Analysis Unit creates a report that is to be used by PI
to investigate potential improper Medicaid payments, PI maintains the report
used to identifying the aberrant provider, and, if the provider is to be audited or
reviewed, PI documents pertinent information such as the number of claims
initially reviewed, whether the initial review developed into a full audit, the
results of the audit, and the amount of any recovery recommended. Program
Integrity has not maintained this level of detailed information on SURS reports
not leading to full audits, because the information simply does not exists.
* See Appendix B for related auditor comment.
10

--- Page 58 ---
Likewise, the J-SURS System is also used by many within the Department to
analyze things other than claims payment. Program Integrity’s Data Analysis
Unit runs reports from the J-SURS System at the request of other DHMH Units so
that those units can conduct utilization reviews and quality of care assessments.
PI cannot maintain a complete record of those runs and their results because
they are not run with the same intent. So while there is a record of the report
being run, there will not be any resulting claims reviewed, audits conducted, or
recoveries identified simply because the SURS report was requested for a reason
other than payment review.
11

--- Page 59 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #9
Certain utilization reports were not produced or fully used.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that DHMH perform periodic and documented
assessments of areas or categories of claims considered to be high risk
for fraud and abuse, and document how these assessments were
addressed in the post-payment review procedures through the use of
utilization reports.
* ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
The Department does not concur with the recommendation, because the OIG, to
the extent possible using the J-SURS System and the limited expertise available,
currently conducts assessments of high risk claim areas. The auditors
acknowledge that the Department produces reports based on algorithms deemed
to identify high-risk claims. However, many of the specialty reports cited as
“best practice reports” from CMS and other States are reports run from systems
with much more updated and user-friendly software than the J-SURS system.
The J-SURS system is an older utilization review technology not perfectly geared
towards today’s fraud fighting needs. The OIG is actively seeking a more
updated technology that can manage and analyze large volumes of detailed
health data to provide more timely and accurate investigative data analysis and a
decision support system. Before being able to regularly and routinely run most
of the reports cited by the auditors, the OIG must have an antifraud system that
features improved analytic productivity and requires no database administrator
or extensive programming skills
Death Runs
One of the reports listed by the auditors as not being fully utilized involves the
“death algorithm.” The J-SURS System is capable of creating “death runs” with
relative ease. Likewise, the OIG staff employs an individual who is capable of
extracting this type of run from the J-SURS System. The Department concurs
that until very recently, death algorithm runs were not “routinized” under one
unit within DHMH. As a result, there were OIG employees in multiple units
reviewing many types of claims after date of death.
Another issue related to the death algorithm involves the reliability of the actual
date of death as it appears in MMIS. The date of death in MMIS is a direct data
field transfer from the Department of Human Resources’ CARES System. When a
* See Appendix B for related auditor comment.
12

--- Page 60 ---
DSS case worker enters a Medicaid recipient’s date of death in the CARES
System, that date of death is automatically fed to MMIS. Unfortunately, if the
DSS employee makes an error (by entering a date when the recipient is not
actually deceased) and later changes that information in CARES by noting it in
the comments field and removing the date of death, the removal of the date
(i.e.: the blank field) is not transferred to MMIS.
This problem between the two systems causes potential overpayments identified
by using death algorithms to be unreliable. To correct this reliability issue, the
Department has previously had to manually check each individual identified1.
That is potentially a labor-intensive task for which the OIG has no resources.
The OIG has struggled with identifying a method to both “routinize” the running
of the death algorithm, and to produce results that are reliable and actionable
without individual, manual review. The OIG has determined that, going forward,
its staff will run two different death reports, two times each year. A
comprehensive fee-for-service run will be conducted twice a year and a
capitation payment run will be conducted twice per year. We will place this
requirement in the OIG policy and procedure manual.
Prior to seeking recovery of payments that appear on these four runs, the OIG
will provide the results file to the Vital Statistics Administration (VSA) and ask
that VSA compare the dates of death from the runs to dates of death in VSA.
Should VSA’s data show the recipient not to be deceased, the OIG will remove
the individual from the recovery list. The OIG will then send only those claims to
Medicaid to recover that have been verified through the VSA check as having
been paid for deceased recipients. The OIG will also send to Medicaid a list of
the living individuals to Medicaid to correct the date of death in MMIS.
Billing Outside Specialty Runs
Another issue cited by the auditors involves reports run to determine whether
providers are billing outside of their practice areas. The J-SURS System is
capable of creating such a run, however, a very experienced user, or “super-
user” is required to create such a run. The auditors cite a case of a podiatrist
opened by the OIG in 2006. This particular podiatrist’s billings were discovered
through a routine provider profile comparison. The provider “excepted” because
the providers billings per patient were extremely high. The provider was not
found through an “billing outside a specialty” run. When this particular
podiatrist's were audited by the OIG, the OIG determined that services had in
fact been provided, and provided by the appropriate type of service provider.
The provider in question was a part of a large practice group with multiple
1 In a recent project between the OIG and CMS, a manual review demonstrated an approximately 50%
error rate in the date of death contained in the MMIS system.
13

--- Page 61 ---
specialty providers. A billing clerk employed by the provider entity had
inadvertently used the podiatrist’s Medicaid number to bill services performed by
others in the practice.
The auditors go on to suggest that the Department should regularly conduct
such runs to uncover these anomalies. However, to create most of these runs, a
super-user is needed. Additionally, an individual with both significant clinical
expertise and significant expertise in coding is needed to both create the run and
review the documentation associated with each claim. For some years, the SURS
unit employed a physician and two nurses. Unfortunately, the physician PIN has
been cut and one of the RN PINs is currently empty. The OIG has, thus far,
been unsuccessful in attracting an RN to fill the vacant position. The one
remaining nurse has been training steadily in CPT coding to increase her
expertise in this arena. Therefore, while the Department concurs that such runs
should be conducted, and will conduct them to the extent the expertise in the
OIG allows for it.
Spike Reports
Another issue cited by the auditors is the OIG’s failure to create runs to
determine whether claims have spiked over time. Though the J-SURS system
has data mining capabilities, it is primarily a peer-to-peer comparisons tool
designed to identify providers billing in patterns that are excessive and unlike
their peers. A spike detection model looks for suspicious surges in billings by a
single provider. It is used primarily to uncover fictitious providers enrolling in
the system.
Therefore, “spike reports” discussed by the auditors, and the drill down reports
required to further analyze the resulting data, are quite difficult to craft and
require significant expertise using J-SURS. Despite that, the OIG began
attempting to utilize J-SURS’ “spike” capabilities in March of 2009 and plans to
continue creating and reviewing surges to the extent that it is a productive use
of scarce resources and can be done with the expertise available to the OIG.
Unbundling
Another issue cited by the auditors is runs to determine whether claims have
been “unbundled.” As with runs related to billing outside of specialty areas, in
order to conduct comprehensive code unbundling runs and the related
investigations of potential overpayments, the OIG must have clinical staff and
individuals with significant clinical and coding experience.
14

--- Page 62 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #10
Procedures were not always revised to correct deficiencies identified in
post-payment reviews.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that DHMH modify its procedures (such as edits in
MMIS II) to prevent improper payments due to systemic issues
discovered during the post-payment review process.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
DHMH agrees with this recommendation and will implement all appropriate
payment edits. When notified of systemic errors as a result of the post-payment
review process, MCPA will determine if edits can be implemented in MMIS to
address the error and if so, make the adjustments. If edits can not be
implemented, the program will continue to review through post-payment.
15

--- Page 63 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #11
Additional procedures could be used to publicize the DHMH fraud
hotline and more data should be maintained to monitor its
effectiveness.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that DHMH
a. consider additional methods to publicize its Medicaid fraud
hotline and website-based fraud referral process, and
b. maintain statistics that can be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the fraud referral procedures.
* ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
11a. The OIG concurs and will consider additional methods to publicize the
Medicaid fraud hotline. Although, certain methods suggested by the auditors are
not likely to be effective. For example, the majority of State employees do not
receive check stubs. Also, without a legislative mandate, a provider cannot be
required to post a fraud hotline notice. However, management from the Office
of the Inspector General meets regularly with provider groups and associations in
Maryland to educate those groups about how to report fraud. Those providers
groups and non-governmental entities generally invite the OIG to speak at
association meetings but as stated before, are not legally required to post
information about the Department’s fraud hotline in their places of business.
11b. The OIG does not concur that it fails to maintain statistics relating to the
effectiveness of its fraud hotline. For example, in our FY 2008 Annual Report,
we reported the following statistics on our hotline’s activity: the number of calls
received, the number of calls responded to, the number of calls referred to other
Administrations within DHMH, the number of calls referred to Departments
outside of DHMH, the number of OIG investigations initiated as a result of the
calls, the number of calls abandoned by the complainant, and the number of
other issues addressed not related to fraud, waste and abuse. Additionally, the
OIG works closely with the Medicaid Fraud Control Unit of the Office of the
Inspector General and tracks all cases referred to that office. Furthermore, the
fraud hotline is not the sole source of referrals received by the OIG. Many cases
are opened as a result of written referrals, calls made directly to OIG
management, and data mining activities.
* See Appendix B for related auditor comment.
16

--- Page 64 ---
The OIG, however, does concur and will consider the possibility of capturing
more data to measure the effectiveness of its hotline.
17

--- Page 65 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #12
Post-payment reviews of in-state hospital claims could be improved.
DHMH should ensure that a sufficient number of claims are audited and
that they are audited more timely.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that DHMH
a. establish and maintain a current contract for post-payment
audits of hospital claims, and
b. review and assess the procedures used by the contractor to
select claims for audit to ensure a sufficient number of hospital
claims is audited in a timely manner.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
DHMH concurs with the recommendation.
12a: The Program was able to comply with the recommendations by awarding
the contract on July 1, 2009.
12b: As a result of the delay in the procurement process, the Program will be
unable to review payments for part of the calendar year 2003. The audit
contractor is currently reviewing claims from 2003 to 2009. The Program is
currently working with the new contractor to ensure that a sufficient number of
hospital claims are reviewed in a timely manner.
18

--- Page 66 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #13
DHMH did not always verify that payments to out-of-state hospitals
were made at the proper rates.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend
a. that DHMH verify that payments to out-of-state hospitals are
based on the appropriate rates, and
b. that previous payments to out-of-state hospitals are reviewed
and any overpayments identified are recovered.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
DHMH concurs with the recommendation.
13a: As noted in the report, processing of out-of-state hospital claims is a very
labor intensive, manual process. The process is unique to Maryland because no
other state shares our payment structure for hospitals. Because our in-state
reimbursement methodology is different from that of other states, MMIS has
never been programmed for other state hospital methodologies. At this time the
state is unable to incorporate an IT based solution. Until the Program is able to
incorporate an IT based solution in the new MMIS, the Program will use the
hospital bill auditor to validate the accuracy of the rate on claims submitted by
out of state hospitals from July 1, 2009 forward.
13b: The audit contractor is currently reviewing claims from 2003 to 2009. The
Program is currently working with the new contractor to ensure that a sufficient
number of hospital claims are reviewed in a timely manner.
19

--- Page 67 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #14
Procedures to obtain information regarding third-party liabilities could
be improved.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that DHMH develop and implement a more effective
process for pursuing reimbursement from third parties that may be
liable for treatment provided to Medicaid recipients, such as working
with DHR during the reassessment process.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
The Administration agrees with the recommendation to change an existing policy
to pursue reimbursement from third parties that may be liable for treatment
provided to Medicaid recipients.
The Administration disagrees with the recommendation that DHMH work with
DHR to improve the process for identifying third parties that may be liable for
health care cost incurred for Medicaid recipients. The Administration does not
believe that sending a third tort letter from DHR will be any more effective in
increasing the response rate or improving the process for identifying third
parties. Therefore, the Administration will employ its TPL Recovery vendor to
pursue recovery of Medicaid payments where third parties are liable for health
care costs incurred for Medicaid recipients when the second tort letter is returned
to the Administration. This initiative will require modification to the new TPL
vendor contract which will be implemented on January 10, 2011.
20

--- Page 68 ---
VOUCHER ONLY CLAIMS
AUDITOR’S FINDING #15
There was no systematic process involving MHA, DDA, and MCPA to
analyze the cause(s) of rejected federal fund reimbursement claims
and to modify procedures to reduce the amount of future rejected
claims.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend:
a. that MCPA, in conjunction with DDA and MHA, improve the
process for obtaining federal Medicaid funds for voucher claims;
b. that, at a minimum, MCPA continually track the number and
amount of claims rejected, determine why the claims were
rejected, document what actions were needed to resolve the
rejection of claims, and develop processing modifications that
will reduce the number of future rejections by MMIS II; and
c. that, if necessary, DHMH consider alternative methods of
processing claims for DDA and MHA.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
15a/c: DHMH agrees with the recommendation to improve the process for
obtaining federal Medicaid Funds for voucher claims. We are considering
alternatives to be implemented with the new MMIS system, including
modification of the current claims processing flow, where DDA and MHA process
claims and then submit them again through the MMIS, should be considered as a
way to reduce the risk that appropriate federal funds are delayed or not
recovered. We believe that the MHA Administrative Services Organization (ASO)
should be utilized to authorize services and that Mental Health providers could
submit claims directly into the new MMIS. The current DDA provider payment
process will be assessed to determine the best way to integrate them into the
new MMIS during the design phase of the MMIS development effort, expected to
begin in FY 2011.
15b: The new MMIS is not expected to be available until 2013. In the meantime,
the Department is considering revising the edits for MHA claims to minimize the
number of claim denials by the MMIS. We are investigating the possibility that
edits for MHA ASO claims be limited to: Recipient Eligibility, Provider Eligibility,
Timely filing and Duplicate Claims. MHA claims are already subject to additional
reviews, primarily by the ASO. These extensive procedures, noted by the
21

--- Page 69 ---
Legislative Auditors, should be sufficient to minimize the risk of submitting claims
for Federal Funding that is not appropriate. A final determination of the specific
edits to be revised will be completed by MHA and MCPA staff by December 31,
2009 and implemented within 90 days of the decision. Since there is no ASO
contractor to rely upon for the accuracy of DDA claims, we would retain the
existing edits in place until the new MMIS and revised DDA processes could be
established.
Recommendations regarding tracking of claims errors within MMIS II are
addressed in our response to audit finding #16.
22

--- Page 70 ---
AUDITOR’S FINDING #16
Rejected claims for federal reimbursement were not promptly
investigated and resolved, adequate records of rejected claims were
not maintained, and certain rejected claims were not pursued.
AUDITOR’S RECOMMENDATION
We recommend that MCPA, in conjunction with DDA and MHA, ensure
that all rejected claims for federal Medicaid funds are promptly
pursued and resolved.
ADMINISTRATION’S RESPONSE
DHMH agrees with the recommendation that all rejected claims for federal
Medicaid funds be promptly pursued and resolved. Although there are adequate
electronic records of claim denials available for use in error resolution, there are
insufficient dedicated resources at both MHA and DDA to assess and resolve the
errors in a timely manner.
DHMH does not agree that the current MMIS should be modified to track the
status of each denied DDA claim. Last year, the MMIS set a denial reason for
nearly 1.3 million claim lines submitted by DDA. If each claim required only five
minutes of staff time to follow-up on, it would take six full time staff working for
one year to go through all of the errors. Recipient eligibility errors, the most
frequent, almost always require individual research and a change to either an
eligibility file or a claim submission to address. The Department intends to work
with DDA to identify some of the processes that might reduce the numbers of
errors that occur in anticipation of developing revised processes to be utilized in
the new MMIS.
We recommend changing the edit for timely filing for claims from DDA and MHA
to at least 18 months, instead of the current 12 months, to reduce the number of
unnecessary claim denials for timely filing. The Department intends to request
at least 4 additional dedicated staff for both DDA and MHA in order to improve
the claims and Federal reimbursement process for both agencies and address the
requirements for the new MMIS.
23

--- Page 71 ---
APPENDIX B
Auditor’s Comments on the Department’s Response
In its response (Appendix A) to the audit report, the Department disagreed
with certain information in the report. We continue to believe that the
information in the report is valid. Auditor’s comments are presented below
about the Department’s responses to certain information in this report.
Finding 8: Minor wording changes were made to address the Department’s
comments concerning the nature of the Surveillance and Utilization Review
Subsystem (SURS).
The Department stated that SURS reports identify providers who do not fit a
norm but do not identify claims, and accordingly, it cannot maintain
documentation on claims reviewed. Although certain reports produced by the
Department may focus on providers and do not include detailed claims data,
we would like to point out that SURS analyzes detailed claims information on
both providers and recipients to identify activity and trends for further review
or investigation. According to Departmental documentation, SURS is designed
to reveal, in substantial detail, actual activity in the medical assistance
program that can be used to identify claims that should be investigated.
The response also stated that, with respect to specific investigations
performed, the Division of Program Integrity maintains the reports, the
number of claims reviewed, the results, and the recommended recoveries for
investigations performed. The Department’s response indicates a
misunderstanding of the issue. Specifically, while we recognize that
documentation is maintained when SURS reports result in formal
investigations, the response does not address the recommendation that a
listing of SURS reports produced and the related results (such as actual
recoveries) be maintained with respect to all SURS reports so that these
reports can be evaluated as to their effectiveness. Specifically, a formal
process should be in place to evaluate the effectiveness of the SURS reports
generated and should be used to determine which areas to select for future
SURS reviews.
Finding 9: The audit report recommended that the Department perform
periodic and documented assessments of areas or categories of claims
considered to be high risk for fraud and abuse, and document how these
assessments were addressed in the post-payment review procedures through
the use of utilization reports. The Department disagreed with the
recommendation because of cited technology limitations of its current SURS
system, while acknowledging the need for an antifraud system that features
improved analytical productivity. However, the Department does not address
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 72 ---
other commercially available analytical tools that could be used to identify
high-risk activity.
Finding 11: In its response, the Department disagreed that it did not maintain
statistics relating to the effectiveness of the fraud hotline, and pointed out the
data that were included in its annual report, including the number of calls
received, the calls referred to others, and the OIG investigations initiated.
Nevertheless, the Department stated that it does concur and will consider the
possibility of capturing more data to measure the effectiveness of its hotline.
O f fi c e o f
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 73 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Alexandra E. Zouras, CPA
Senior Auditors
Nadine L. Forgenie
Michael J. Murdzak
Rick E. Pyles
Amber M. Schon, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors
Brett M. Sheppard
Staff Auditor Intern
Other Staff Who Contributed to This Report
Richard L. Carter, CISA