Title: Managing for Results - Performance Measures - Environment - Department of Natural Resources - Maryland Department of the Environment - Maryland Department of Agriculture
Date: 07/18/2011
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a84
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:57:20.080427
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Managing for Results
Performance Measures
Environment
Department of Natural Resources
Maryland Department of the Environment
Maryland Department of Agriculture
July 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the Office of
Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland 21201. The Office
may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle, Annapolis,
Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related correspondence. The
Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301- 970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 4
Background Information 4
Conclusions 4
Recommendations 5
Findings 6
Certification Results 6
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 10
Exhibit 1 – Definitions of the Environment Performance Measures Audited 12
Exhibit 2 – Categories of Performance Certification 15
Exhibit 3 – Managing For Results – State Comprehensive Plan – List 16
of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Exhibit 4 – Managing For Results Audit Reports Previously Issued by 21
the Office of Legislative Audits Pertaining to the 62 Measures
Auditees’ Responses Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Executive Summary
Background Information
In July 1997, the Governor implemented the Managing for Results (MFR)
initiative, which is a strategic planning process used by department leaders and
others to establish direction and priorities for State programs to achieve
meaningful results. MFR requires State agencies to submit missions, goals,
objectives, and performance measures for each program as part of the annual
budget request. This information may then be considered in determining
Statewide spending priorities and the allocation of resources in agency budgets.
Effective July 1, 2004, the MFR process was established in State law, with the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) as the lead agency for developing
a State comprehensive plan for MFR. The resultant 2005 Managing for Results -
State Comprehensive Plan categorized MFR goals into five functional areas,
referred to as pillars, which contained a total of 62 measures. Also, State law
requires agencies to maintain documentation of the internal controls established to
evaluate their performance measures.
As requested by the chairmen of the legislative budget committees, we are
systematically auditing these 62 measures. This audit is the seventh to be
conducted pursuant to this request and focuses on certain data reported by the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Maryland Department of
Environment (MDE) in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or
the Managing for Results Annual Performance Report issued in March 2010 for
seven of the nine1 measures contained within the Environment portion of the State
Comprehensive Plan (see Exhibit 1). Certain data reported by DNR included
information gathered by the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA). The
categories of performance certification are explained in Exhibit 2 of this report,
and a list of the 62 MFR measures is contained in Exhibit 3. Exhibit 4 references
the first 6 MFR audit reports issued by our Office, which collectively covered 51
measures in the Public Safety and Safer Neighborhoods, Education, Fiscal
Responsibility, Health, Commerce, and Higher Education portions of the State
Comprehensive Plan.
Conclusions
We concluded that for the seven measures, three were Certified with
Qualification, and four were designated as Factors Prevented Certification. These
results are further described in the Findings section of this report.
1 Two of the Environment measures included in the 2005 Managing for Results - State
Comprehensive Plan were not included in the Plan when it was reissued by DBM in November
2009. Furthermore, MDE did not report on these measures in its fiscal year 2011 budget request
or Annual Performance Report. Consequently, these two measures were not included in this audit.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Recommendations
The following detailed recommendations are among those we made to DNR,
MDE, and MDA to help strengthen the quality control processes and improve
reporting for the measures we audited.
 Establish procedures to ensure that all relevant data are included in the
measure calculation and that the data, including data obtained from third
parties, are reasonably accurate and complete.
 Retain documentation supporting the reported measure results.
 Accurately submit reported results that are prepared in a manner that is
consistent with clearly written performance measure definitions.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings
Certification Results
Agency,
Performance
Program Level of
Measure Results
Name and Certification Comments / Causes
(See Exhibit 1 for Reported
Budget (See Exhibit 2)
Definitions)
Reference2
Department of Acres of Calendar Factors The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) did not perform any evaluation
Natural submerged aquatic Year Prevented or verification of the third-party data used to calculate the performance
Resources vegetation 2008 Certification measure to the related source documents (aerial surveys). Consequently, there
Budget Book 1, was no assurance that the data used by the third-party contractor to calculate
Page 697 35,000 the performance measure were complete and reliable. In addition, the result
reported for calendar year 2008 was actually the result for calendar year 2007
data collected between May and October 2007. Also, DNR did not have
copies of the initial source documents available for our review and testing.
Department of Dredge survey Fiscal Factors DNR – Fisheries Service (FS) did not evaluate or verify the data received from
Natural index of stock size Year Prevented a third party in Virginia, which provided about one-half of the data used to
Resources, (crabs) – actual 2009 Certification calculate the measure. With respect to Maryland’s portion of the data, internal
Fisheries count of crabs per controls and documentation were not sufficient to establish that the scientific
Service dredge tow3 43 process for determining the crab population was carried out as intended.
Budget Book 1, Specifically, FS did not have a documented process in place to ensure the data
Page 772 results recorded on source documents (field notebooks) were reasonably
accurate for the surveys it conducted. Also, FS did not document independent
verifications of the survey data results recorded in the computer system
database to ensure the accuracy of the data used to calculate the performance
measure. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that the data used to
calculate the performance measure were complete and reliable.
FS did not report the performance measure using the basis described in the
measure’s definition (see Exhibit 1 on page 12 for the definition). The measure
was reported as the “actual count of crabs per dredge tow;” however, it was
calculated as the count of crabs per 1,000 square meters. It takes
approximately 5 dredge tows to cover 1,000 square meters
2 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
3 The measure reviewed replaced the “blue crab landings (3 year average)” performance measure that appeared in the Department of Budget and Management’s (DBM) original
Managing for Results State Comprehensive Plan issued in January 2005.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference2 for Definitions)
Department of Oyster biomass Fiscal Factors DNR - FS did not have a documented process in place to ensure the oyster
Natural index4 (1994 Year Prevented biomass data results recorded on the related source documents (sampling
Resources, base=1) 2009 Certification sheets) were accurate. Also, FS did not perform any independent verification
Fisheries Service of the oyster biomass data entered into their database used to calculate the
Budget Book 1, 0.8 performance measure to the related source documents. Consequently, there
Page 772 was a lack of assurance that the data used to calculate the performance
measure were accurate and reliable.
The measure results were not consistently reported. FS reported two
different numbers in the 2011 operating budget request; FS reported 0.9 at
the department level (which agreed with the calculation result using its
database information) but reported 0.8 at the program level. The measure
was also reported as 0.8 in the Department of Budget and Management’s
(DBM) 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report.
Department of Estimated nitrogen Fiscal Certified with Independent verifications were not performed to source documents for the
Natural load to the Year Qualification data entered into databases maintained by DNR, the Maryland Department of
Resources Chesapeake Bay 2009 Environment (MDE), and the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA).
Budget Book 1, from Maryland (in The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency used this data to calculate the
Page 697 million of pounds) 53.71 performance measure result. Nevertheless, we were able to determine that
the reported result was reasonably accurate.
2 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
4 The measure reviewed replaced the “oyster landings (3 year average)” performance measure that appeared in the original DBM Managing for Results State Comprehensive
Plan issued in January 2005.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 for Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference2 Definitions)
Maryland Waters impaired Calendar Certified with MDE - Science Services Administration did not independently verify the
Department of by nutrients per Year Qualification data received from DNR used to calculate the performance measure. Also,
Environment, the 303 (d) listing 2008 DNR did not perform independent verifications of changes to their computer
Science Services cycle5 system database used to compile data given to MDE to calculate the
Administration 107 measure. Nevertheless, we were able to determine that the reported result
Managing for was reasonably accurate.
Results Annual
Performance
Report
Page 49
Maryland Percent of Fiscal Factors Prevented MDE - Water Management Administration (WMA) did not maintain the
Department of Marylanders Year Certification data that were used to calculate the measure. Consequently, we could not
Environment, served by public 2009 determine if the measure was calculated accurately.
Water water systems in
Management significant 87%
Administration compliance with
Budget Book 3, rules adopted as of
Page 604 20096
2 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or the March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
5 The measure reviewed replaced the “watersheds impaired by nutrients” performance measure that appeared in the original DBM Managing for Results State Comprehensive
Plan issued in January 2005.
6 The measure reviewed replaced the “percent of Marylanders served by public water systems in significant compliance with rules adopted as of 2002” performance measure
that appeared in the original DBM Managing for Results State Comprehensive Plan issued in January 2005.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 for Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference2 Definitions)
Maryland Three-year Calendar Certified with MDE - Air and Radiation Management Administration did not perform
Department of average of days Year Qualification independent verifications of decisions to exclude certain ozone
Environment, the eight-hour 2009 concentration readings (for example, readings that appeared to be
Air and ozone standard erroneous) obtained from monitoring stations. Furthermore, MDE did not
Radiation was exceeded7 32.3 perform independent reconciliations to ensure the accuracy of ozone
Management
concentration data transferred from its system to the national air quality
Administration
database (maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency),
Managing for
which ultimately was the source of the reported measure. Nevertheless,
Results Annual
we were able to determine that the reported result was reasonably
Performance
accurate.
Report
Page 51
2 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or the March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
7 The measure reviewed replaced the “three-year average of days the one-hour ozone standard was exceeded” performance measure that appeared in the original DBM
Managing for Results State Comprehensive Plan issued in January 2005.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
Under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we conducted an audit of selected performance
measure results reported in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget
request or measure results that were reported in the Managing for Results Annual
Performance Report dated March 2010. The audit was performed in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As requested by the chairmen of the legislative budget committees, we are
systematically auditing the performance measures from the 2005 Managing for
Results - State Comprehensive Plan produced by the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM). This Plan included 62 performance measures categorized
into five functional areas referred to as pillars. This audit is the seventh to be
conducted pursuant to this request and focuses on the 7 performance measures
from the Environment functional area as reported by DBM in the 2005 State
Comprehensive Plan.8
Objectives
The objectives of our audit were (1) to determine whether the most recent actual
measurement results for the selected performance measures were accurately
reported in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request (or the
Managing for Results Annual Performance Report dated March 2010) and (2) to
determine whether adequate control systems existed over the collection and
reporting of the data related to the measurement results. Our performance audit
did not include an assessment of whether the performance measures reviewed
were consistent with the goals and objectives of the related programs, or were
meaningful indicators of program performance.
8 DBM reissued the State Comprehensive Plan in November 2009 with 98 performance measures
categorized into six functional areas. Certain of the performance measures from the Environment
area of the original January 2005 Plan were replaced by similar measures in the reissued Plan.
We audited the replacement measures to the extent they were being reported on by the State
agencies.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed Department of Natural Resources
(DNR), Maryland Department of Environment (MDE), and Maryland Department
of Agriculture (MDA) personnel responsible for collecting and reporting the
measure data, reviewed performance measure calculations for accuracy, reviewed
the data collected and reported for the performance measures, and determined
whether the calculations and data were consistent with the definitions of the
performance measures as noted in Exhibit 1. We also analyzed DNR’s, MDE’s
and MDA’s performance measurement data collection and reporting activities to
evaluate whether proper controls existed to ensure data integrity.
We developed a system to categorize the results of our audit of performance
measures. The four categories represent varying levels of certification of the
accuracy of the performance reported. The categories of performance
certification are defined in Exhibit 2. If, during the course of our audit of a
measure, we found circumstances that would require us to conclude that factors
prevented certification of the measure, we did not perform additional audit work
that may have disclosed other factors that might have adversely impacted the
reported results.
Our fieldwork was conducted on site at DNR, MDE, and MDA during the period
from April 2010 to January 2011. The responses from DNR, MDE, and MDA to
our findings and recommendations appear as appendices in this report. As
prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise DNR and MDE regarding the results of our review of
their responses.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the Environment Performance Measures Audited
Page 1 of 3
Performance
Definition1
Measure
Acres of This measure is the annual (calendar year) accounting of the total
submerged acreage of aquatic grasses in the Maryland portion of the Chesapeake
aquatic vegetation Bay and its tidal tributaries. Aquatic grasses are the dense growths
(“beds”) of vascular aquatic plants growing in shallow areas of the
Bay that are rooted or secured to the sediments and grow toward the
surface.
The acreage of aquatic grasses is the surface area of shallow bottom
waters that are covered by measurable densities of one or more
species of aquatic grasses as detected by aerial photographs.
Dredge survey The performance measure is derived from the annual Baywide winter
index of stock size dredge survey conducted by Maryland Department of Natural
(crabs) – actual Resources and by a third party in Virginia. Data are collected
count of crabs per annually from December through March from the mouth of the
dredge tow Chesapeake Bay, north to Pooles Island. The index of stock size is
the average number of crabs caught in each dredge tow.
Oyster biomass The biomass of an oyster is its living tissue not including the shells.
index (1994 As the Chesapeake Bay’s oyster population improves or declines, so
base=1) does the biomass. The Department of Natural Resources samples
selected oyster bars each year, assesses the total amount of oyster
biomass (grams per bushel) in the samples, and generates an index of
Maryland’s oyster biomass based on this data. The index tracks the
status of the population based on the 1994 oyster benchmark set by
the Environmental Protection Agency’s Chesapeake Bay Program.
1 The definitions are substantially derived from those provided to the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM) in annual State agencies’ Managing for Results budget submissions and DBM’s Managing for Results
Annual Performance Report. Additional information, such as data sources, was included in certain definitions in
this exhibit for informational purposes. Also, certain definitions were shortened to enhance readability.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the Environment Performance Measures Audited
Page 2 of 3
Performance
Definition
Measure
Estimated nitrogen The annual estimation of the amount (measured in millions of
load to the pounds) of nitrogen delivered to the Chesapeake Bay from Maryland.
Chesapeake Bay High nitrogen loads can facilitate the growth of algae and can result
from Maryland (in in very low dissolved oxygen concentrations in the deeper areas of
millions of pounds) the Bay, which affect the survival of other aquatic organisms (that is,
fish, crabs, and oysters). Therefore, elevated nitrogen loads degrade
water quality and are targeted for load reductions.
Pollutants delivered via air, water, and land (fertilizers, human and
animal waste, and power plant emissions) cause excessive nitrogen in
the Bay. Maryland’s Bay agencies (DNR, MDE, and MDA) adopted
34 specific and accelerated actions (related to factors such as cover
crops, livestock waste structures, and stormwater runoff) that impact the
level of nitrogen in the Bay. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency - Chesapeake Bay Program uses the data, collected and
transmitted by Maryland’s Bay agencies, with computer simulations
to estimate the amount of nitrogen delivered to the Chesapeake Bay
based on the control efforts implemented.
Waters impaired The number of watersheds on Part 4a (impaired watersheds with a
by nutrients per Total Maximum Daily Load - TMDL - completed) and Part 5
303 (d) listing cycle (impaired watersheds with a TMDL needed) of the 303 (d) list of
impaired waters.
Inclusion of a watershed on the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Section 303(d) listing indicates a violation of the water quality
standards. The TMDL is the maximum amount of a pollutant that
can enter a water body and still allow the water quality standard to be
met.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the Environment Performance Measures Audited
Page 3 of 3
Performance
Definition
Measure
Percent of The total population served by all active community water systems in
Marylanders Maryland in compliance with the drinking water standards defined
served by public by the Code of Maryland Regulations 26.04.01 divided by the current
water systems in state population served by a community water system.
significant
compliance with
all rules adopted
as of 2009
Three-year This measure is the three-year average of the number of days within
average of days a given calendar year in which the federal ozone standard is
the eight-hour exceeded. The total number of days is reported to the Environmental
ozone standard Protection Agency on an annual (calendar year) basis where it is
was exceeded entered into a database and becomes the basis for the number of days
for which the ozone standard was exceeded.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 2
Categories of Performance Certification
Category Definition
Certified Reported performance was reasonably accurate.
Certified with Reported performance was reasonably accurate even though
Qualification minor deficiencies were noted with the supporting
documentation, controls were not sufficient, or the methodology
used to calculate reported performance was not consistent with
the measure definition.
Inaccurate Reported performance differed significantly from actual
performance; the calculation process was wrong, such as
excluding data relevant to the calculation; or, as reported, the
measure was misleading, such as failing to disclose the measure
as a rate when applicable.
Factors Prevented Reported performance could not be verified, as documentation
Certification was unavailable, controls were not adequate to ensure the
accuracy of the results, or results were not presented in a manner
consistent with the performance measure description.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 1 of 5
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Public Safety and Safer Neighborhoods
Keeping Maryland communities safe – measured by
1 Firearm homicide rate per 100,000 (calendar year)
Recidivism: Percent of offenders returned to Department of Public Safety and Correctional
2 Services supervision for a new offense within one year of their release from the Division of
Correction - all releases
3 Traffic fatality rate per 100 million miles traveled (calendar year)
Maintaining necessary security standards in correctional institutions – measured by
Number of inmates who escape from all Division of Correction Facilities, Patuxent
4
Institution, and Division of Pretrial Detention and Services facilities (in aggregate)
Total number of inmates who walk off from Division of Correction minimum security
5
settings, prerelease or alternative confinement settings (in aggregate)
Providing effective rehabilitation and treatment services to offenders or substance abusers –
measured by
Percent of Proactive Community Supervision cases closed where the offender had
6
satisfactorily completed substance abuse treatment programs
Preventing youth violence, alcohol and substance abuse – measured by
Violent offense arrest rate for youths between 15 and 17 years of age (per 100,000 children
7
per calendar year)
8 Recidivism: Percent of youth re-adjudicated or reconvicted within 1 year after release
Percent of 12th grade public school children who report using alcohol within the last 30
9
days
10 Percent of 10th grade public school children who report using heroin within the last 30 days
Protecting the well being of children – measured by
Rate of injury-related deaths due to accidents to children and youth between 0 and 19 years
11
of age (per 100,000 children per calendar year)
12 Percent of children with recurrence of maltreatment within six months of first occurrence
Statewide percent of current child support paid (Includes cases for persons who receive
13 public assistance, and for other persons who apply for child support services from the
Department of Human Resources)
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 2 of 5
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Education
Children will enter school ready to learn – measured by
Percent of students entering Kindergarten demonstrating Full Readiness on the Work
1
Sampling System Kindergarten Assessment
Children will be successful in school – measured by
Percent of students scoring proficient or better by grade and content area
 Reading – Grade 3 – Total all groups
 Reading – Grade 8 – Total all groups
2  Reading – Grade 10 – Total all groups
 Mathematics – Grade 3 – Total all groups
 Mathematics – Grade 8 – Total all groups
 Algebra – Total all groups
Children will complete school – measured by
3 High School Graduation Rate
4 Percent of children in grades 9 through 12 who drop out of school in an academic year
Schools will promote high levels of learning – measured by
5 Percent of schools demonstrating Adequate Yearly Progress in reading – State totals
6 Percent of schools demonstrating Adequate Yearly Progress in mathematics – State totals
Higher Education
Promoting access and academic success in postsecondary education – measured by
Six year graduation rate of first-time, full-time students at Maryland public four-year colleges
1
and universities (all groups)
Percent of bachelor’s degrees awarded to racial/ethnic minorities at public and private
2
Maryland colleges and universities
3 Number of community college students who transfer to a Maryland public four-year campus
Producing an educated and skilled workforce including addressing the State’s critical workforce and
healthcare needs – measured by
Number of graduates in teaching from Maryland’s public and private higher educational
4
institutions
Percent of teacher candidates from Maryland public and private higher educational
5
institutions who pass Praxis II
Number of graduates in nursing from Maryland public and private higher educational
6
institutions
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 3 of 5
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Health
Promoting health and well being: Babies Born healthy – measured by
1 Infant mortality rate for all races (per 1,000 live births)
2 Rate of live births to adolescents between 15 and 19 years of age (per 1,000 women)
Promoting health and well being: Healthy children, adolescents, and adults – measured by
3 Percent of Maryland children fully immunized (by 24 months)
4 Number of children under 6 years of age with elevated blood lead levels (>10ug/dl)
Cumulative percent change from the calendar year 2000 baseline for underage high school
5
students smoking cigarettes
Overall cancer mortality rate per 100,000 persons (age adjusted to 2000 U.S. Standard
6
Population)
7 Percent change in number of new HIV cases from calendar year 2007 baseline
8 Rate of primary/secondary syphilis incidence (cases per 100,000 population)
Number of reported cases of vaccine preventable communicable diseases including hepatitis
9
A, measles, mumps, pertussis
Promoting health and well being: Services to the disability community – measured by
Number of people with disabilities who achieved successful employment through assistance
10
by the Department of Education’s Disability Rehabilitation Services rehabilitation programs
Percent of Developmental Disabilities Administration Community Service respondents of
11 the “Ask ME!” survey who expressed satisfaction with physical well-being, personal
development, and self-determination (reported separately)
Promoting health and well being: Substance abuse treatment – measured by
12 Percent of substance use decrease during substance abuse treatment
Promoting health and well being: Mental health services – measured by
Percent of adults who report mental health services have allowed them to deal more
13
effectively with daily problems
Environment
Restoring the health of the Chesapeake Bay and its living resources – measured by
1 Acres of submerged aquatic vegetation
2 Blue crab landings (3 year average)1
3 Oyster landings (3 year average) 1
4 Estimated nitrogen load to the Chesapeake Bay from Maryland (in million pounds)
Improving and protecting water quality and ensuring safe drinking water – measured by
5 Watersheds impaired by nutrients 1
Percent of Marylanders served by public water systems in significant compliance with all
6
rules adopted as of 20021
1 Measure replaced in the Comprehensive Plan reissued in November 2009.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 4 of 5
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Ensuring clean air – measured by
7 Three-year average of days the one-hour ozone standard was exceeded1
Restoring contaminated industrial sites to productive use – measured by
Number of acres of property in the Voluntary Clean-up Program completed and a No
8
Further Requirements Determination or a Certificate of Completion issued 2
Reducing hazardous waste and hazardous materials in the environment – measured by
9 Number of remedial actions at all State Superfund sites that are completed2
Commerce
Helping businesses to grow and create jobs – measured by
1 Percent change in Maryland employment from the 2001 baseline (12 month average)
2 Rate that adult employment trainees enter employment
3 Maryland Port Administration total general cargo tonnage (thousands)
Estimated direct expenditures from film, television, and other production activities in
4
Maryland 2
5 Annual Baltimore Washington International Airport passenger growth rate
Improving the State’s transportation infrastructure – measured by
6 Percent of State system roadway mileage with acceptable ride quality
Percent of bridges on the State portion of the National Highway System that will allow all
7
legally loaded vehicles to safely traverse
8 Total ridership for bus and rail transit (in thousands)
System Preservation Funding Levels in the Consolidated Transportation Program (in
9
millions) 2
Invigorating communities – measured by
10 Home ownership
11 Annual percent change in Maryland per capita personal income
12 Total acres enrolled in agricultural preservation districts
Making the most of Maryland’s history and culture – measured by
Value of rehabilitation expenditures approved for the State Rehabilitation Tax Credit for
13
restoration and preservation of historic properties
1 Measure replaced in the Comprehensive Plan reissued in November 2009.
2 Measure not audited - not included in the Comprehensive Plan reissued in November 2009
19

--- Page 22 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 5 of 5
Fiscal Responsibility
Effective resource management – measured by
1 Number of fiscal years closed with a positive General Fund balance
Maintaining a triple A bond rating from all three nationally recognized bond rating agencies
2
for each issuance of State General Obligation Bonds
20

--- Page 23 ---
Exhibit 4
Managing for Results Audit Reports
Previously Issued by the Office of Legislative Audits
Pertaining to the 62 Measures
Number of
Report Report Date Measures
Audited
Public Safety and Safer Neighborhoods March 19, 2009 13
Education October 2, 2009 6
Fiscal Responsibility March 31, 2010 2
Health February 4, 2011 13
Commerce April 18, 2011 111
Higher Education April 21, 2011 6
1 Two of the Commerce measures included in the 2005 Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan (as
detailed in Exhibit 3) were not included in the Plan when it was reissued by DBM in November 2009. Furthermore,
DBM had not reported on these two measures since March 2008 (which reported fiscal year 2007 actual results).
Consequently, these two measures were not audited.
21

--- Page 26 ---
Performance Audit Responses
Department of Natural Resources
Performance Measure: Acres of submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV)‐Calendar Year 2008
Level of Certification: Factors Prevented Certification
Auditor’s Comments/Causes
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) did not perform any evaluation or verification of the
third‐party data used to calculate the performance measure to the related source documents (aerial
surveys). Consequently, there was no assurance that the data used by the third‐party contractor to
calculate the performance measure were complete and reliable. In addition, the result reported for
calendar year 2008 was actually the result for calendar year 2007 data collected between May and
October 2007. Also, DNR did not have copies of the initial source documents available for our review
and testing.
Department’s Response
DNR respectfully disagrees that it did not perform any “evaluation or verification” of the SAV data
received from a “third party contractor” to calculate this performance measure. The “third party
contractor” is the Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences (VIMS) – an Institute chartered by the
Commonwealth of Virginia in 1940 with a “legal mandate to provide research, education and advisory
service to government, citizens and industry.”1 Its SAV data collection methodology has been
independently peer‐reviewed, published and verified by the scientific community. Finally, under the
auspices of the Chesapeake Bay Program’s SAV Workgroup, DNR and other management agencies (the
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, and United States
Geological Survey) and academic institutions (University of Maryland, St. Mary’s) annually review the
VIMS data to the verify the presence of SAV and species composition in a given area. In 2010, DNR’s
diver‐based estimate of outer and inner edges of a specific bed was within 2 meters of the beds mapped
by VIMS.A
DNR concurs that the result reported for calendar year 2008 was actually the result for calendar
year 2007 data collected between May and October 2007. The acquisition and analysis of the SAV
data takes a full year to perform and the results in 2008 were reported in the calendar year following
1 http://www.vims.edu/about/vims_at_a_glance/index.php
A Auditor’s Comment: DNR could not provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate the described
methodologies had actually been implemented and that the related data collection and recording
methodologies had been adequately controlled, or independently reviewed and validated by DNR or
VIMS.
1

--- Page 27 ---
acquisition of the photography in 2007. DNR now reports in the year in which it acquires the
photography.
DNR has in‐house or on line all source documents related to SAV surveys and made these available to
the auditors. We do not have copies of the original aerial SAV photographs, but these are digitized by
VIMS and are available on line.B
Performance Measure: Dredge Survey Index Stock Size (Crabs) – Fiscal Year 2009
Level of Certification: Factors Prevented Certification
Auditor’s Comments/Causes
DNR – Fisheries Service (FS) did not evaluate or verify the data received from a third party in
Virginia, which provided about one‐half of the data used to calculate the measure. With respect to
Maryland’s portion of the data, internal controls and documentation were not sufficient to establish
that the scientific process for determining the crab population was carried out as intended.
Specifically, FS did not have a documented process in place to ensure the data results recorded on
source documents (field notebooks) were reasonably accurate for the surveys it conducted. Also, FS
did not document independent verifications of the survey data results recorded in the computer
system database to ensure the accuracy of the data used to calculate the performance measure.
Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that the data used to calculate the performance
measure were complete and reliable.
FS did not report the performance measure using the basis described in the measure’s definition (see
Exhibit 1 on page 12 for the definition). The measure was reported as the “actual count of crabs per
dredge tow;” however, it was calculated as the count of crabs per 1,000 square meters. It takes
approximately 5 dredge tows to cover 1,000 square meters
Department’s Response
The blue crab data received from a “third party in Virginia” came from the Virginia Institute of Marine
Sciences – see comments above. While DNR respectfully disagrees that it was required to evaluate or
verify the data received from VIMS – the methods of data collection are standardized – we will work
B Auditor’s Comment: At the time of our audit, there was no indication that source documents were
available, nor was there any evidence that DNR had undertaken any verification process of the actual data
used to calculate the measure.
2

--- Page 28 ---
with scientists at VIMS to examine the potential for creating an annual and documented data
verification system.C
DNR agrees to document the process it uses to ensure the data results recorded on its field
notebooks are reasonably accurate for the surveys it conducts starting with the 2011 crab dredge
data, and to document independent verifications of survey data results recorded in the computer
system database. DNR also agrees that the blue crab density is expressed as “crabs per 1,000 square
meters,” not “number of crabs per tow” as inadvertently stated in the budget book, although the error
did not impact the accuracy of the reported number.
Performance Measure: Oyster Biomass Index – Fiscal Year 2009
Level of Certification: Factors Prevented Certification
Comments/Causes
DNR ‐ FS did not have a documented process in place to ensure the oyster biomass data results
recorded on the related source documents (sampling sheets) were accurate. Also, FS did not
perform any independent verification of the oyster biomass data entered into their database used to
calculate the performance measure to the related source documents. Consequently, there was a
lack of assurance that the data used to calculate the performance measure were accurate and
reliable.
The measure results were not consistently reported. FS reported two different numbers in the 2011
operating budget request; FS reported 0.9 at the department level (which agreed with the
calculation result using its database information) but reported 0.8 at the program level. The
measure was also reported as 0.8 in the Department of Budget and Management’s (DBM) 2010
Managing for Results Annual Performance Report.
Department’s Response
DNR agrees to have a documented process in place to ensure that oyster biomass data results
recorded on the sampling sheets are accurate, and to document independent verifications of the
C Auditor’s Comment: The need to evaluate or verify data obtained from third parties is an essential
control procedure to ensure the data used by DNR for this measure are reliable. The requirement to
establish controls over reported MFR measures is established by Maryland law as stated on page 4 of the
audit report. The law specifically states that each agency “shall maintain documentation of the internal
controls established to evaluate performance measures that shall be subject to review by the State,
including the Office of Legislative Audits.” Nevertheless, DNR has indicated that, for the future, it will
examine the potential for creating an annual documented data verification system.
3

--- Page 29 ---
oyster biomass data entered into its database. DNR also agrees to correct the inadvertent
inconsistencies in reporting the oyster biomass performance measure.
Performance Measure: Estimated nitrogen load to the Chesapeake Bay from Maryland (in
millions of pounds) – FY 09
Level of Certification: Certification with Qualifications
Auditor’s Comments/Causes
Independent verifications were not performed to source documents for the data entered into
databases maintained by DNR, the Maryland Department of Environment (MDE), and the Maryland
Department of Agriculture (MDA). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency used this data to
calculate the performance measure result. Nevertheless, we were able to determine that the
reported result was reasonably accurate.
Department’s Responses
It is not feasible or cost‐effective for the Department to independently verify and document nutrient
loads used to calculate USEPA’s performance measure result. As this performance measure is not
appropriate for DNR, DNR will eliminate it although as noted, the auditors determined that the reported
result was reasonably accurate.
4

--- Page 31 ---
Managing for Results
Performance Measures
Department of Environment
July 2011
Performance Measure:
Estimated Nitrogen Load to the Chesapeake Bay from Marylanders (in millions of
pounds)
(Budget Book 1, Page 697
Fiscal Year 2009 Actual Results Reported: 53.71
Level of Certification: Certified with Qualifications
MDE Response:
MDE concurs with the level of certification. The Department will strenghten controls to
ensure that an independent verification of Discharge Monitoring Reports to the
wastewater treatment plants data recorded into ICIS is documented and retained for
future reference.

--- Page 32 ---
Managing for Results
Performance Measures
Department of Environment
July 2011
Performance Measure:
Water Impaired by Nutrients Per the 303 (d) listing Cycle
(Managing for Results Annual Performance Report Page 49)
Calendar Year 2008 Actual Results Reported: 107
Level of Certification: Certified with Qualification
MDE Response:
MDE concurs with the level of certification. The Department will periodically verify
data received from DNR used to calculate the performance measure. In addition, the
Department will periodically verify that changes made to the waters impaired database by
DNR/RAS staff are verified by supervisory personnel that do not have write access to the
database.

--- Page 33 ---
Managing for Results
Performance Measures
Department of Environment
July 2011
Performance Measure:
Percentage of Marylanders Served by Public Water Systems in Significant Compliance
with Rules Adopted as of 2009
(Budget Book 3 Page 604)
Fiscal Year 2009 Actual Results Reported: 87%
Level of Certification: Factors Prevented Certification
MDE Response:
MDE concurs with level of certification. The Department will strengthen controls to
ensure that adequate documentation supporting the performance measure calculation is
maintained for future reference.

--- Page 34 ---
Managing for Results
Performance Measures
Department of Environment
July 2011
Performance Measure:
Three-Year Average of Days the Eight-Hour Ozone Standard was Exceeded
(Managing for Results Annual Performance Perport Page 51)
Calendar Year 2009 Actual Results Reported: 32.3
Level of Certification: Certified with Qualifications
MDE Response:
MDE concurs with the level of certification. The Department will strenghten controls to
ensure that independent verifications of changes made to the ozone concentration data
collected are performed on a test basis and that independent reconciliations of the ozone
concentration data transferred to the EPA’s national ozone database are performed on a
test basis. However, MDE would like to point out that the current process implemented
has been reviewed and approved by the granting federal agency (EPA) and is considerd
to be the industry standard.

--- Page 36 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture Responses to
Performance Audit Report Audit May, 2011
Recommendations
The following detailed recommendations are among those we made to DNR, MDE and MDA to
help strengthen the quality control processes and improve reporting for the measures we audited.
 Establish procedures to ensure that all relevant data are included in the measure
calculation and that the data, including data obtained from third parties, are reasonable
accurate and complete.
 Retain documentation supporting the reported measure results.
 Accurately submit reported results that are prepared in a manner that is consistent with
clearly written performance measure definitions.
Response
The Maryland Department of Agriculture has already restricted database access to “read
only” for data fields that relate to technical information.
Maryland Department of Agriculture

--- Page 37 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Terry S. Gibson
Senior Auditor
Howard A. Marzolf III, CFE
Staff Auditor