Title: Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission - Prince George's County - Evaluation of Capital Project Management Practices
Date: 01/10/2018
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d39cc9d72404c150a4a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:51:32.768213
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission
Prince George’s County
Evaluation of Capital Project Management Practices
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Overview 5
Organization 6
Capital Improvement Program 10
The General Progress of a Project from Planning to Completion 12
Project Management and Financial Systems 13
Audit Scope, Objective, and Methodology 14
Audit Scope 14
Objective and Methodology 14
Fieldwork and Agency Response 18
Conclusions 19
Findings and Recommendations 22
Capital Planning and Project Management
Finding 1 – Prince George’s County Department of Parks 22
and Recreation (DPR) lacked formal written policies and
procedures for capital project management.
Finding 2 – The annual Capital Improvement Program documents 25
did not contain certain project information to promote clarity and
transparency, and may not have met a certain statutory
requirement.
Finding 3 – DPR had not established a comprehensive approach to 27
documenting project activities and costs, including the retention
of necessary project and contract documents.
Analysis of Selected Project Activities and Related Issues
Finding 4 – The duration of five projects tested was long, ranging from 31
7 to 12 years. According to DPR, there were lengthy periods where
Park Planning and Development staff levels did not keep pace
with increases in its Capital Improvement Program; however, DPR
had not developed workload standards to identify staff resource
needs, especially during fluctuations in project activity.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 5 – Site inspection results were not routinely recorded in the 34
project management system and, for one project, the inspection
documentation was not consistently prepared during the entire
construction phase.
Finding 6 – Many contract change orders did not appear to have 36
been approved in a timely manner. DPR also did not consistently
prepare documentation of its assessment of contractor proposed
change order cost increases or extensions for time of work
performance.
Finding 7 – Contractors frequently did not complete their work within 38
the timeframes specified in their contracts and DPR actions to
hold contractors accountable were not always evident.
Exhibit 1 – Timeline of Project Milestones 40
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Overview
The Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission (M-NCPPC) is a
bi-county agency serving both Montgomery and Prince George’s Counties. It
was established by State Law in 1927. It is empowered to acquire, develop,
maintain, and administer a regional system of parks in the two counties. M-
NCPPC also conducts the recreation program for Prince George’s County. M-
NCPPC’s operations are governed by Division II (Titles 14 to 27) of the Land
Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The governing board of M-
NCPPC is the Commission, which meets monthly and consists of ten board
members (five from each county that serve as their respective county’s
Planning Board). The Prince George’s Planning Board members are appointed
by the Prince George’s County Executive and confirmed by the Prince George’s
County Council.
The major source of funding for M-NCPPC’s services are property taxes levied
in Montgomery and Prince George’s Counties. Each fiscal year, the
Commission is required to prepare capital and operating budgets for each
county’s operations, which are approved by the respective county executive
and county council. During this annual process, the Prince George’s County
Council determines if an increase to the property tax rates is warranted and
will propose any increases.
According to M-NCPPC’s audited financial statements, fiscal year 2016
revenues for Prince George’s County operations totaled $263 million and
expenditures were $261 million, including $31.6 million for capital projects,
which was the focus of our audit. See Table 1 on page 6 for capital project
expenditures for fiscal years 2010 through 2016. Park maintenance and
operation ($113 million) and the County’s recreation program ($64 million)
account for the majority of M-NCPPC - Prince George’s County expenditures.
Also, for fiscal year 2016 there were 1,360 positions budgeted for M-NCPPC
Prince George’s County.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Table 1
Prince George’s County Capital Project Expenditures
Fiscal Years 2010 to 2016
Fiscal Year Park Acquisition Park Development Totals
2010 $8,421,963 $17,842,377 $26,264,340
2011 3,549,184 26,213,628 29,762,812
2012 10,241,423 28,638,793 38,880,216
2013 4,683,059 21,563,971 26,247,030
2014 3,714,098 25,014,156 28,728,254
2015 3,718,374 37,942,868 41,661,242
2016 1,493,422 30,142,743 31,636,165
Total $35,821,523 $187,358,536 $223,180,059
Source: M-NCPPC Audited Financial Statements
Organization
The Commission’s central office staff provides support services for human
resources, finance, internal audit, legal, and information technology to both
counties. Prince George’s County and Montgomery County operate relatively
independent of each other, with their own staff, preparing separate Capital
Improvement Programs (CIP), operating budgets, and managing their own
capital projects.
M-NCPPC – Prince George’s County Department of Parks and Recreation’s
(DPR) CIP is managed by its Park Planning and Development Division (PPD).
PPD has approximately 54 employees and consists of six units as follows:
CIP Budget and Procurement
This unit is in charge of compiling and monitoring the annual CIP budget and
assisting in the procurement of construction-related contracts.
Land Acquisition and Development Review
This unit is in charge of planning the acquisition of land as well as
development of land already owned.
Planning
This unit plans future parks, recreational buildings (such as community
centers), and upgrades to existing parks or buildings.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Architectural
This unit oversees the design and construction of CIP projects for park and
recreation buildings, specifically the project management of contractors
procured to design and construct projects.
Landscape Architectural
This unit oversees the design and construction of parks, playgrounds, and
landscape projects, specifically the project management of contractors
procured to design and construct projects. For many projects, this unit will
provide the landscape architectural design work.
Engineering and Construction Inspection
This unit typically handles the construction portion of a project, including
performing site inspections and monitoring construction contractors. The
inspections performed by this unit are inspections of contractor performance.
They are not regulatory code-compliance inspections, which are performed by
a third-party inspector.
Refer to the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission
Organization Charts on pages 8 and 9.
7

--- Page 10 ---
The Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission
Organization Chart
Montgomery County Prince George's County
Government Government
The Maryland -National
Capital Park and
Planning Commission
Montgomery County Prince George's County
Planning Board Planning Board
Executive Committee
Prince George's County
Montgomery County (Commissioner's Office,
(Commissioner's Office, Planning Department,
Planning Department, Department of Parks
Parks Department) and Recreation -see
following chart)
Human Resources and
Management, Finance
Department, Legal
Department
Note: The County Council and County Executive are part of the Prince George’s County Government.
Source: M-NCPPC fiscal year 2015 Consolidated Annual Financial Report
8

--- Page 11 ---
The Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission
Prince George’s County
Department of Parks and Recreation Organization Chart
Department of Parks and
Recreation
Special
Park Police
Projects
Parks and
Area
Recreation
Operations
Foundation
Administration
Facility
and
Operations
Development
Information
Technology and
Management Communications
Services
Park Planning
and
Development
Architectural
Planning Unit
Unit
Land Acquisition CIP Budget and
and Development Procurement
Unit Unit
Engineering
Landscape
and
Architectural
Construction
Unit
Inspection Unit
Note: Administration and Development and Park Planning and Development are the only areas
expanded since it is where the CIP and capital projects are handled.
Source: Fiscal year 2018 Proposed Budget, Department of Parks and Recreation
9

--- Page 12 ---
Capital Improvement Program (CIP)
Section 18-112 of the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires the Commission to prepare an annual six-year CIP for the Prince
George’s County Executive and County Council. The first year of the CIP is the
capital budget year, while the five outer years are planned CIP projects with
preliminary estimates of funding. According to Section 18-113 of the same
Article, the CIP is required to include:
 a statement of the objectives of the capital program;
 recommended capital projects and a construction schedule;
 an estimate of cost and a statement of all funding sources; and
 all programmed parkland acquisitions, all major park improvement and
development projects, and major acquisitions of equipment.
PPD prepares the CIP, which is effectively a rolling six-year plan, so the
development process begins with the previous CIP. The PPD staff will update
and modify the plan based on multiple factors. PPD evaluates the capital
budget needs for previously approved projects that are underway, previously
approved projects that are intended to begin in the next year, and any new
capital needs. The new capital needs are solicited from the operating
divisions of DPR as well as from public and community groups.
The CIP contains background information related to M-NCPPC – Prince
George’s County, the facilities they run, an assessment of the communities’
needs, the basis for determining needs, highlights of the CIP (major projects),
an overall funding summary, a list of new projects, projects deleted from the
prior CIP, and any renaming of projects. The CIP also describes the funding
sources, which primarily includes State funding (Program Open Space), county
operating funds, and M-NCPPC issued bonds.
Included in the CIP are Project Description Forms (PDFs), which Prince
George’s County uses in the CIPs of all county agencies. Each PDF typically
includes cumulative funding and expenditure data for all of the ongoing
projects located at one site or facility, and thus one PDF can include
information for multiple projects. The PDF includes identifying information
about the site/facility, brief descriptions of the projects, a schedule of planned
future spending based upon current budget projections, expenditures (and
encumbrances) to date on projects, and the expected funding sources. The
M-NCPPC – Prince George’s County CIP for fiscal year 2016 included 168
PDFs of which 26 had funding allocated for fiscal year 2016.
10

--- Page 13 ---
After the CIP is prepared by PPD, it is presented to the Prince George’s County
Planning Board for approval to be included in the Proposed Budget. After
approval, the CIP is included in the M-NCPPC’s Proposed Budget for Prince
George’s County and subsequently, the CIP is submitted to the Prince
George’s County Government for its review and subsequent approval.
Through the budget hearing and deliberation process, the Proposed CIP may
be amended by the County Council and the County Executive. By June 1st of
each year, the budget is adopted by County Council. At which point, the CIP
becomes the authorized CIP by the County Council and the approved work
program for DPR. The PDF form is used as the approval of funding for the
current budgetary year once the CIP is adopted by the Prince George’s County
Council.
Planning for a project typically begins after it is approved in the CIP and is
substantially funded. Planning may not begin until the projects are
substantially funded (unless money was allocated for planning purposes)
since projects may require multiple year funding. For some projects, PPD may
have already begun planning and have a reasonable estimate of funding
needs, however more often the final project scope and funding are not known
at the time the project is first approved in the CIP.
Approved funding sources and uses of funds for fiscal year 2016 are shown in
the following table:
Table 2
Use and Source of Funds
Fiscal Year 2016
Use of Funds Fiscal Year 2016
Land Acquisition $4,740,000
Construction 14,215,000
Total Use of Funds $18,955,000
Source of Funds Fiscal Year 2016
State Program Open Space $2,740,000
M-NCPPC Bond Proceeds 8,320,000
Operating Fund Transfer 6,270,000
Other 1,625,000
Total Funding Sources $18,955,000
Source: FY2016-2021 CIP M-NCPPC- Prince George’s County
11

--- Page 14 ---
The General Progress of a Project from Planning to Completion
Once project planning is initiated for an approved project:
 PPD management assigns a project to a PPD employee, either in the
Architectural Unit or in the Landscape Architectural Unit depending on the
type and the size of the project. The employee will be an architect,
landscape architect, or a project manager within the unit (for our example
below we used an architect).
 The PPD architect and planner will hold meetings with the community
where the project is located to gather their input on the community’s
desires for the project. For example, the community may have input as to
the size of a proposed parking lot or types of lighting needed. With the
assistance of the CIP Budget and Procurement Unit, and after considering
community input and the project’s proposed budget, a request for
proposal (RFP) for architectural services will be created and an
architectural firm will be selected.
 After the architectural contract is awarded, the PPD architect is
responsible for communicating with the architectural firm and monitoring
the contract.
 After the architectural firm finishes the plans, they are presented to the
community for their input. If there are multiple options, community input
is again sought to help ensure the project meets the community’s needs.
Once the plans are finalized the PPD architect, the PPD CIP Budget and
Procurement Unit, and a representative from the PPD Engineering and
Construction Inspection Unit meet to prepare requests for the competitive
construction contract bids.
 After the construction contractor is awarded, a construction schedule is
established, a notice to proceed issued, and work begins. The contractor is
monitored by the PPD architect and by a construction manager from the
PPD Engineering and Construction Inspection Unit.
 The PPD construction manager is responsible for conducting site visits,
informing management of the project’s progress, reviewing and processing
change orders, and ensuring the construction contractor has performed
the required work and the work meets standards specified in the contract.
For certain larger projects, a construction management firm will be hired
to assist with monitoring the construction contractor (site visits), reviewing
12

--- Page 15 ---
change orders, reviewing invoices, and ensuring the construction
contractor is performing according to the contract.
 CIP projects are subject to customary construction and regulatory
permitting by various agencies such as the Department of Public Works
and Transportation, Department of Permitting, Inspections, and
Enforcement, Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission, and Maryland
Department of Environment.
Project Management and Financial Systems
There are two main information systems used by M-NCPPC – Prince George’s
County. The first is a project management system (unique to the Prince
George’s County operations) that is available to record and oversee project
activities and costs. The second is a financial system maintained by the
Commission for the benefit of the two counties’ operations.
The project management system is a flexible-interface, cloud-based,
enterprise construction management program for capital projects that
provides performance data across the project life cycle. Currently, each
project has a separate record within the system to record information
including the name and description of the project, related PDF number, and
those employees involved in the project at DPR. The record can include notes
related to planning work, notes for site visit details from the PPD employee(s)
overseeing the project, construction management firm (if used), and contract
documents (including change orders). This system has the capability to track
costs of the project and budget changes, and create standardized project
inspection forms, daily inspection forms, and project and construction
schedules. The system also allows users remote access capability, thus
allowing updates during site visits.
The M-NCPPC’s financial system is used to record expenditures and revenues
for budgeting and financial reporting purposes. For CIP expenditures, there
are accounting codes assigned to each PDF. Each year any additional funds
that are approved in the CIP are added into the related PDF accounting code.
When contracts are entered into for a project, they are encumbered against
the related PDF. Additionally, an expenditure or contract that exceeds the
approved funding amount will not be processed in the system. This system
also has the capabilities to record expenditures by project rather than by PDF
so that individual project budgets and expenditures can be tracked.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Audit Scope, Objective, and Methodology
Audit Scope
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the project management
practices of the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission’s
(M-NCPPC) capital program in Prince George’s County. The audit was
authorized by Chapter 448 of the Laws of Maryland, 2015, effective October
1, 2015. In accordance with the law, the audit scope and objectives were
approved by the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly.
Our audit focused primarily on the activities of the Architectural, Landscape
Architectural, and Engineering and Construction Inspection Units of the Park,
Planning, and Development Division of the M-NCPPC – Prince George’s
County Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR). It also focused on
selected projects completed after January 1, 2013 or in-progress
(construction/post construction) as of June 10, 2016.
Our audit was performed in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the
audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe
that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Objective and Methodology
Our audit objective was to determine the extent to which capital projects
undertaken by DPR have experienced completion delays or cost overruns and
identify the contributing factors, including those relating to project planning,
management, and monitoring. Due to unanticipated factors, including DPR’s
failure to use and maintain a robust comprehensive project management and
recordkeeping system, it was necessary to alter our approach. Instead of an
overall analysis of project timeliness, delays, and cost overruns, it was
necessary to focus on individual projects due to the lack of centralized and
consistently maintained records. As part of the objective, we reviewed
applicable policies and procedures to obtain an understanding of processes
and project activity.
We obtained an understanding of M-NCPPC Prince George’s County DPR
project planning and management policies and practices by interviewing the
Prince George’s County Planning Board Chair and M-NCPPC employees in
14

--- Page 17 ---
Prince George’s County DPR, and by reviewing available written policies and
procedures. We also reviewed M-NCPPC – Prince George’s County DPR’s
annual Capital Improvement Programs (CIPs) and obtained available reports
of expenditures on projects we selected for testing.
To obtain an understanding of project management best practices, we
interviewed M-NCPPC employees in Montgomery County and reviewed
publications on project management prepared by various national
organizations. We also reviewed the Montgomery County M-NCPPC’s ‘Project
Assignment and Implementation Business Process’ and its CIP.
Due to the lack of reporting capabilities and other factors, we were unable to
obtain a report from DPR of individual projects showing their cumulative
budget and costs, and timelines. Therefore, we were required to alter our
approach by focusing on individual projects. Accordingly, we selected five
projects to test from a list of projects completed from January 1, 2013
through March 16, 2016 and a list of currently ongoing projects. According to
M-NCPPC records, there were 83 Project Description Forms (PDF) with capital
expenditures during fiscal year 2016.
We selected one project involved in litigation, two projects that a member of
the General Assembly had raised concerns about, and two projects for which
DPR available records indicated there were substantial delays. Generally, to
test these five projects, we reviewed capital construction contract project files
that included documents such as contracts, inspection reports, change
orders, and invoices. We also discussed project details with available DPR
staff.
Given our targeted approach for selecting these five projects for testing, we
subsequently performed a limited review of five additional projects. To select
the five additional projects we requested DPR management to identify five
projects that it felt were well managed. In response to that request, DPR
identified five projects that it believed provided good results, see Table 4. To
determine if some of the same issues in the five projects we tested (see Table
3) also existed on the additional five projects, we limited our review to certain
project phases, as well as on issues related to change orders and monitoring
of the main contractors.
Determining Project Duration and Circumstances Contributing to Lengthy
Timeframes
We reviewed available documentation to create timelines from the date the
project was substantially funded to when a temporary use and occupancy
certificate was issued (or June 10, 2016, if the project was not yet
15

--- Page 18 ---
completed). We then used this information to prepare timelines for the
planning, design, and construction phases (which are further described on
page 30) and to determine the reasons for, or circumstances contributing to,
lengthy timeframes.
This information was obtained primarily by reviewing available contracts,
change orders, and contract monitoring documentation for various phases
within the projects, as well as discussions with relevant DPR staff. For the
first two projects we selected, we reviewed most of the contracts related to
the project (projects generally involve multiple contractors). However, due to
the lack of centralized documentation for contracts and contract monitoring,
this approach was deemed impractical because of the inordinate amount of
audit time required, and for each of the remaining three projects we reviewed
activity only for the two main contractors (architectural/engineering firm and
construction contractor).
To determine when the individual projects selected for testing were
substantially funded (and therefore eligible for planning, which would begin
the project timeline), we used the funding schedules in the PDFs for each
applicable project within the CIP to determine when the majority of the
funding was identified (or planning funds were allocated) and deemed July 1
of that CIP’s fiscal year as the substantially funded date. The CIP shows the
current year funding as well as the five subsequent years, due to the size of
many capital projects, the funding is spread out over multiple years. With the
additional years in the CIP, DPR has an estimate of the amount of future
funds a project will receive. DPR may be able to start project planning,
contingent of available staffing. If we were unable to determine when the
projects were substantially funded due to other project activity in the PDF, we
calculated total project time from the date of first action (planning began or
the first request for proposal was issued).
Determining Cost Overruns
To determine any cost overruns for the five projects included in Table 3, we
obtained expenditure reports from M-NCPPC’s financial system for the PDFs
related to the initial five projects tested. We performed certain data filtering
procedures in an attempt to isolate, among all PDF activity, expenditures for
the particular projects selected. This process provided an approximate
expenditure amount for each project. We then reviewed the CIP for multiple
years to determine the funding levels for the PDFs related to the projects
tested. For each, we were able to estimate the funding related to the specific
project based on activity within the PDF. To determine any overall cost
overrun, we compared the total approved funding to the total expenditures for
the project.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Projects Tested and Reviewed
The five projects subjected to our detailed testing had expenditures totaling
$39 million as of June 10, 2016, see Table 3. The additional five projects
selected by DPR and subjected to our limited review had expenditures totaling
$22.4 million, see Table 4.
TABLE 3
Projects Tested in Detail by Office of Legislative Audits
Project Date of
Expenditures Temporary
Location Project Description (Through Use and
6/10/2016) Occupancy
Certificate
Foxhill Park Design and location of a prefabricated $420,596 4/7/2016
restroom building, parking, and
electrical and lighting improvements.
Fairwood Development of a new 30-acre park to $2,444,292 6/26/2012
Park include athletic fields, playground,
picnic shelter, restroom building,
amphitheater, loop trail, and parking.
Southern Development of a new technical and $17,291,128 4/5/2013
Regional recreation center complex that
Technology includes a 36,000 square foot
and building. Building systems include a
Recreation commissioned geothermal well field
Complex and state-of-the-art
telecommunications and security
systems. Site amenities include
sidewalks, parking, regulation
soccer/football fields, and provisions
for a future track.
Kentland Development of a new community $12,292,490 Temporary
Community center. Originally, the project was a Use and
Center renovation, but after a review by an Occupancy
architectural and engineering firm, a Certificate
new building was constructed since was not
the firm determined that it would have issued as of
been more expensive to bring the 6/10/2016
original building up to code.
Palmer Park Renovate the existing gymnasium $6,571,932 9/28/2015
Community including a classroom and fitness
Center room. Add new space that includes
storage, offices, restrooms, and a
gym.
Total Expenditures $39,020,438
Source: M-NCPPC – Prince George’s County Records
17

--- Page 20 ---
TABLE 4
Additional Projects Selected by DPR and Subject to
Limited Review
Office of Legislative Audits Review
Expenditures Final Invoice
Location Project Description (Through Date*
6/10/2016)
College Park College Park Airport $5,198,919 Not approved as
Airport Operations building, a two- of 6/10/2016
story 12,815 square foot
expansion.
Wells-Linson Replace the ice rink roof $5,056,403 4/9/2015
and other additional work to
the building as well as
renovations to the existing
building and pool.
Lincoln Vista New park-recreation $1,386,176 Not approved as
Park building. of 6/10/2016
Walker Mill Splash pad, parking lot $8,981,762 8/26/2015
Regional Park lighting, playground, and
skate park.
Watkins Wizard of Oz themed $1,781,302 6/30/2015
Regional Park - playground at Watkins
Wizard of Oz Regional Park.
Playground
Total Expenditures $22,404,562
* Final Invoice Date represents when a construction contract is closed.
Source: M-NCPPC – Prince George’s County Records
Fieldwork and Agency Response
We conducted our fieldwork from March 2016 to November 2016. M-NCPPC
Prince George’s County DPR’s response to our findings and recommendations
is included as an appendix to this audit report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we
will advise M-NCPPC Prince George’s County DPR regarding the results of our
review of its response.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Conclusions
Due to the lack of complete project documentation, we were unable to
determine the extent to which Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning
Commission (M-NCPPC) – Prince George’s County Department of Parks and
Recreation’s (DPR) capital projects, on an overall basis, have experienced
completion delays or cost increases, which was the objective of the audit. Our
audit did find lengthy timeframes between project initiation and completion
for five projects tested in detail, although the costs for those projects were
within their budgets.
In addition to the project documentation problems, we did identify other
deficiencies in DPR’s administration of its capital program that precluded
effective monitoring of project status and completion. Specifically, there was
a lack of formal policies and procedures governing DPR’s capital planning and
project management operations. Furthermore, DPR’s Capital Improvement
Program (CIP) documents did not contain certain project information to
promote clarity and transparency regarding the scope and status of individual
projects. Finally, DPR did not fully use its project management system to
monitor project activities and costs or to retain critical project and contract
documents. Consequently, documentation was not consistently maintained to
demonstrate that projects were being actively overseen and monitored from
initial planning to construction completion.
Our review of available documentation for five projects, with costs totaling
approximately $39 million, of which two were selected based on legislative
interest, found project timespans ranging from 7 to 12 years, which appeared
to be long. We could not determine if these lengthy timespans met
expectations because project time schedules were not established for any of
these projects. Furthermore, project documentation was sometimes sparse,
which precluded obtaining an understanding of the actual project
management activities occurring at various times throughout the project’s life
cycle. Ultimately, four of these projects were completed within each’s
financial budget and expenditures for the fifth incomplete project was within
budget as of May 2016.
Unlike M-NCPPC – Montgomery County operations, DPR had not established
formal policies governing project planning, construction, and related
monitoring activities. For example, DPR had not formalized the
19

--- Page 22 ---
 planning processes for collecting and maintaining relevant project
background information and community input, defining project scope,
preparing project schedules, and preparing cost estimates;
 project design and construction management policies and procedures for
reviewing design plans and construction schedules, performing
construction site inspections, evaluating change orders, and documenting
project management activities; and
 management oversight of project status.
Project management activities for individual projects could not be effectively
monitored because DPR did not fully use its project management system nor
were any comparable manual processes in place. DPR had not established
guidance stating management’s expectations for project management
documentation in general or how the system and its available functionality
should be used to document project monitoring activities and retain important
project and contract documents. The system was not used to develop project
timelines nor routinely archive project documentation, such as contract and
inspection documents. Consequently, the system’s reporting features, which
could provide project life-cycle information and cost data, was not used for
monitoring and oversight purposes by DPR management and the Prince
George’s County Planning Board.
DPR represented that staffing limitations contributed to delays in starting and
overseeing project work, especially during the period the aforementioned five
projects were active, when the size of the CIP increased dramatically. DPR,
however, had not established workload standards to determine the staffing
resources needed based on the nature and size of proposed projects.
Although staff increases were obtained and certain organizational and
managerial changes were more recently initiated, DPR indicated those latest
efforts have been hampered by employee turnover.
Our review of site inspections performed for the five projects tested disclosed
the inspection results for four projects were not routinely recorded in the
project management system. For one of those four projects, inspection
documentation was also not consistently prepared during the entire
construction phase. The need to centrally record inspection results was
particularly evident in one case in which the inspection reports were lost
because the project manager’s computer had failed.
Many contractor proposed change orders did not appear to have been
approved timely and documentation was not consistently prepared to
20

--- Page 23 ---
evidence that proposed change order cost increases or time of performance
extensions were verified. We noted that for 66 of 74 change orders identified
for the 5 projects tested, with cost increases totaling $4.6 million, the final
approval was secured an average of 46 days after the initial approval of the
DPR project manager. Final approval for 31 change orders occurred after the
time of performance of the contract had expired; yet work continued after that
date.
We also found that contractors frequently did not complete their work within
the timeframes specified in the contracts and DPR’s actions to hold
contractors accountable, such as pursuing liquidated damages as provided
for in contracts, were not always evident. Each primary construction
contractor for the five projects tested had exceeded its contractually
stipulated time of performance for periods ranging from 5 to 27 months (even
after considering time extensions for approved change orders). DPR took
certain actions against three of these contactors, but not the other two
contractors.
Given our targeted approach for selecting the five projects for testing, we also
reviewed selected activities for five other projects with costs totaling $22.4
million that were selected by DPR management. We found similar issues
related to project length, contractors exceeding times of performance, and
DPR delays in approving change orders.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Capital Planning and Project Management
Finding 1
Prince George’s County Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) lacked
formal written policies and procedures for capital project management.
Analysis
DPR had not developed formal written policies and procedures governing its
capital planning and project management operations. Some informal
guidance was developed; nevertheless, staff were not provided with
comprehensive formal guidance for (1) planning projects, including
establishing project schedules and budgets; (2) monitoring construction,
including inspection of work; and (3) documenting project oversight activities.
As identified in our findings pertaining to the projects we reviewed,
information about key project activities, such as the frequency and
thoroughness of inspections (see Finding 5) and the reasons for lengthy
project completion (see Finding 4), was either lacking or was inconsistently
maintained.
Project Planning
DPR did not have capital project planning policies and procedures in place to
formalize the processes of collecting and reviewing relevant background
information and community input, defining project scope, preparing project
schedules (including the related construction), and preparing final cost
estimates. Further, for each of the five projects tested, we found that DPR did
not create an overall project schedule with timelines and milestones for
expected project progress.
Without an overall project schedule, including milestones, which is a critical
planning outcome, DPR’s ability to effectively monitor the timeliness of project
work, readily identify delays, and quickly remediate the related problems to
avoid adverse situations, such as incurring additional costs, was significantly
impaired. It can also be difficult to proactively monitor and hold contractors
accountable for untimely completion of work.
Due to the lack of a schedule for each project, we were unable to determine
the extent to which projects met or exceeded expected milestones and
completion dates, which was integral to our audit objective. Nevertheless, 7
of the 10 projects we tested and reviewed took from 4.8 to 12 years from
when they were substantially funded to when construction was completed (or
22

--- Page 25 ---
June 10, 2016, if the project was not yet completed). For the remaining three
projects we were unable to determine when they were substantially funded.
We calculated the total project time for these three projects from the date of
the first documented action (when planning began or when the first request
for proposal was issued) until construction was complete, which was seven
months to almost eight years.
Monitoring of Design and Construction
DPR did not develop project design and construction management policies
and procedures to formalize the processes of reviewing design plans and the
initial construction schedule, performing construction site inspections,
performing site visits by the construction manager and other key personnel,
and conducting ongoing progress meetings. DPR lacks procedures to guide
architects, construction managers, inspectors, and other personnel in
performing and documenting their monitoring of a project. Additionally, since
there is no standard inspection form; this causes inconsistencies in the
amount and type of information reported by those performing inspections.
While DPR has procedures related to change orders, they do not detail how to
review and approve contractor-proposed change orders for appropriateness,
reasonableness of added costs, and extensions of completion deadlines.
Reporting
Project management best practices state that during a project, progress
should be checked and relevant stakeholders notified of the status and any
issues on a regular basis. However, DPR does not have formal periodic
reporting of project status to upper management and the Prince George’s
County Planning Board. The lack of a formal reporting process makes it
difficult for management to identify issues affecting project timeliness and
costs, and ensure those responsible for resolving problems have taken
appropriate and timely mitigation actions. A contributing factor to the lack of
reporting was DPR’s failure to fully utilize its project management system
(Finding 3).
Post-Completion Analysis
An important aspect to capital project administration, according to project
management best practices, is conducting a review to identify any issues
encountered during the project’s progression from planning to completion,
from which the entity can learn. For example, such reviews could evaluate the
timeliness of project completion and identify the contributing factors, so that
delays can be avoided for future projects. Due to the lack of such a process,
DPR management was unable to provide project specific explanations and
documents regarding the specific circumstances contributing to long
completion timeframes for most of the 10 projects we tested or reviewed.
23

--- Page 26 ---
We found that M-NCPPC – Montgomery County had established written
policies and procedures addressing various aspects of a project (including
those noted above) and the related key steps, identifying who should perform
the step, what the step entails, how it is to be completed, who makes related
decisions, how the step is tracked/monitored, and the period in which it
should be completed. Also, the Government Finance Officers Association’s
Best Practices recommends that policies and processes for capital project
monitoring and reporting be established.
The failure to have written procedures in the areas mentioned above reduces
the assurance that projects will be completed properly and without undo
delays. The lack of written procedures can also result in inconsistent
performance by architects and construction managers, which can increase
project risk, and the failure to prepare and retain project documents that may
be needed for any actions against contractors.
Further, the absence of formal policies, periodic reporting of project activities,
and the failure to fully utilize the project management system (see finding 3)
are fundamental organizational issues that collectively preclude effective
oversight of the capital planning and project management operations by
Prince George’s County Planning Board and DPR executive management.
Consequently, those in authority may not be aware of performance issues or
circumstances contributing to project length.
Based on our observations, the Planning Board appears to rely on DPR
executive management to monitor capital project progression, since there is
no routine and formal mechanism to report project activities to the Board. We
were advised by the Board Chair that the Board received periodic informal
reports on CIP projects from DPR executive management, and the Chair
separately received project updates as part of certain management meetings.
However, there was no indication that the DPR executive management, who
are appointed by the Planning Board, was formally monitoring projects. DPR
executive management advised that it had received verbal and other types of
reports on CIP projects when requested. Routine monitoring of those who are
directly responsible for managing and directing the DPR capital program (that
is the Park Planning and Development group) is necessary to assess
performance and to hold them accountable.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPR, in consultation with the Prince George’s County
Planning Board,
a. develop and implement formal written policies and procedures for capital
planning and project management, including roles and responsibilities for
those involved with planning, construction management, project
monitoring, and construction closeout; and
b. establish performance expectations and reporting mechanisms to monitor
the effectiveness of the capital planning and project management
operations.
Finding 2
The annual Capital Improvement Program (CIP) documents did not contain
certain project information to promote clarity and transparency, and may not
have met a certain statutory requirement.
Analysis
Prince George’s County DPR’s CIP documents did not contain certain project-
specific information to promote clarity and transparency, and the CIP may not
have met a statutory provision that requires the inclusion of construction
schedules. Consequently, within the CIP, it was difficult to distinguish certain
individual projects and related funding and to ascertain the extent of the
project work and the construction timeline.
Information for Individual Projects Was Combined
Individual project information was not presented in the CIP in a manner that
enabled the easy identification of funding for specific projects or the effective
monitoring of project costs and status. Although Project Description Forms
(PDFs), which Prince George’s County requires all applicable County agencies
to use when a CIP is involved, were prepared, these were typically created for
each of DPR’s various sites or facilities that could and frequently did have
several ongoing projects.
In our opinion, DPR should have provided supplemental documents to
distinguish individual projects, since the combining of various project activity
under one PDF makes it difficult to determine the amount of funding
requested or approved for each specific project at a single location, or when
the funding was approved for the specific projects. Funding information for
individual projects, as well as individual project progress and costs to date,
are obscured when multiple projects are simultaneously active under the
same PDF. Regarding the matching of costs and funding, there is a fluidity in
the authorized funding (or budgets) of projects since if one project within the
25

--- Page 28 ---
PDF is going over available funding DPR can reduce the funding of another
project within the same PDF.
For example, the PDFs related to the 10 projects we tested or reviewed
included an additional 22 projects within the same PDFs. We were unable to
determine the approved funding amounts and initial funding dates for 2 of the
10 projects we reviewed, as those 2 related PDFs included 11 of the 22
projects. For the remaining 8 projects, we were able to estimate the funding
amounts since those were the only actively funded projects at that time for
those PDFs, but for one of these, we could not determine the initial funding
date. Despite these issues, we are reasonably assured that overall
expenditures of approximately $39 million for the 5 projects we originally
selected for testing did not exceed the approved funding levels of
approximately $41.5 million as of June 10, 2016.
Project Descriptions Were Vague
Each PDF contains an area for descriptions of the project(s) included;
however, they were brief and lacked details regarding the scope and size of
the planned work. Descriptions that are more complete could help promote,
among stakeholders, a common understanding and consensus on the
planned work, and aid in evaluating funding levels and project duration during
the CIP approval process.
For example, although 4 of the 5 initial projects we tested involved building
expansion or construction, the anticipated size of those facilities was not
included in the related PDFs. Similarly, for 3 projects, the anticipated size of
proposed parking lots was not mentioned. The CIP for other Prince George’s
County government agencies generally provided more detailed information
about their individual projects. For example, PDFs for the school system
identified the size of planned facilities.
Required Construction Schedule Was Absent
DPR did not incorporate construction schedules within the CIP for each PDF.
The Land Use Article, Section 18-113 of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
requires the M-NCPPC – Prince George’s County annual CIP to include a
construction schedule. DPR advised that it has long-used the expenditure
schedule in the PDF as the estimated construction schedule. Therefore, DPR
believes it is in full compliance with the law. Nevertheless, DPR agreed that
adding supplemental information on the estimated schedule would provide
clarification and increased understanding of the status of each project. In our
opinion, it is unclear if such expenditure information in the present form
(which includes unexpended contract obligations, but not project timelines or
key project dates) meets the requirements of the law. The lack of clarity
26

--- Page 29 ---
suggests that the Office of the Attorney General should be consulted on this
matter.
The Government Finance Officers Association Best Practices document
provides guidance for capital project monitoring and reporting. These
practices include clearly documenting the status of projects and basing
projects on detailed project descriptions and accurate expenditure
information. We noted that the CIP for M-NCPPC – Montgomery County
included separate PDFs for each project, which generally included more
information about the project scope than was contained in M-NCPPC – Prince
George’s County’s CIP.
Recommendation 2
We recommend M-NCPPC - Prince George’s County ensure that its CIP
includes
a. supplementary information, as necessary, to identify individual projects
and related funding;
b. detailed project descriptions to provide more information on project scope
and size; and
c. construction schedules that meet the requirements of State law, in
accordance with advice from the Office of the Attorney General.
Finding 3
DPR had not established a comprehensive approach to documenting project
activities and costs, including the retention of necessary project and contract
documents.
Analysis
DPR had not developed formal guidance for staff regarding its expectations
for maintaining key project information, including the use of its project
management system. Consequently, staff did not fully use the system to
effectively monitor project activities and costs, and to electronically retain
important project and contract documents. Instead, we found that staff used
different approaches with varying degrees of completeness to document
project activities.
This situation precluded the use of the system’s reporting features, which
could provide project life-cycle information, for monitoring and oversight
purposes by DPR management and the Prince George’s County Planning
Board. The general lack of a comprehensive approach to maintaining project
information was also the primary reason we were unable to determine the
extent to which capital projects undertaken by DPR have experienced
27

--- Page 30 ---
completion delays or cost increases. It also made it difficult to reliably
determine the reason(s) for individual project delays (see finding 4).
We identified four capabilities of the system that were not used, or were
underutilized by DPR, that individually or collectively could significantly
improve project monitoring effectiveness.
Project Timelines
DPR was not using the project management software to create project
timelines, which allows users to track the project life cycle. The various tasks
for each project from planning to construction closeout can be scheduled into
a ‘snap shot’ of each project. The system organizes the schedule based on
tasks that can be determined by the user. When the timeline feature is
utilized consistently across projects, it allows management to create reports
to determine the current status of projects as well as focus on an individual
project timeline.
The lack of project timelines precluded us from determining the extent to
which project timeframes (planning, design, and construction) exceeded
expectations.
Project Costs
The system contains cost management tools to track, at the project level,
certain financial data such as funding sources, budget changes, commitment
changes, and expenditures incurred. This information can be captured at
various levels (for example, by contract or vendor). However, financial data
was not consistently recorded in the system. For example, expenditure data
was only recorded, on a limited basis, in the system for one of the five projects
we initially selected for testing. DPR’s failure to maintain complete financial
data precluded effective monitoring of expenditures for individual projects
relative to work completed and project timelines.
We also noted that M-NCPPC - Montgomery County was using the
Commission’s financial accounting system to track its individual project
expenditures, but that DPR had not made use of that capability.
Document Retention
DPR did not use the project management system to routinely store project
and construction documents. For example, the system can be used to archive
project documents such as plans and maps, permits, material tests results,
and inspection reports. Similarly, vendor contracts, change orders, vendor
invoices and other contract documents can be retained electronically in an
organized manner.
28

--- Page 31 ---
When gathering information for our review of the 10 projects we had to obtain
documents and information from multiple sources, which varied between
projects. Project information, such as contract details, inspections, and
change orders was maintained mostly in paper files and frequently in multiple
locations; therefore, it was not easily accessible. Each DPR architect and
construction manager decided how the files would be organized and
maintained, which contributed to inconsistencies in methods and incomplete
records. In some cases, documentation and information attributable to
projects managed by former employees could not be located.
Standardized Forms
DPR was not using the system’s form building feature that allows users to
create customizable forms that would be useful for standardizing project
inspection activities and results. There was no standardized form or checklist
created that specified the information to be gathered during project
inspections. Therefore, inspectors decided the content of inspection reports,
which created inconsistencies in the inspection documentation (Finding 5).
The Government Finance Officers Association Best Practices document states
that capital projects’ financial and project activity should be regularly
monitored. It also states that systems should be planned and designed to
collect, store, and analyze project data to report results that should include
appropriate technological solutions for project accounting, scheduling, and
reporting as well as a process for controlling and managing project changes.
It also states that agencies should strive for consistency and standardized
language when compiling information from various sources.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPR
a. fully utilize the project management software system to establish timelines
and monitor individual project progress and costs, and to electronically
retain important project and contract documents;
b. develop a system user manual containing management’s expectations of
how the system and its available capabilities and functionality should be
used; and
c. use the system’s form building capabilities to standardize information
gathering for critical functions, such as inspections.
29

--- Page 32 ---
Analysis of Selected Project Activities and Related Issues
Background
We reviewed available documentation for five projects to identify timeframes
for three phases of each project (that is, project planning, design, and
construction) to try to determine the reasons for, or circumstances
contributing to, project timeframes that appeared to be lengthy. For five
additional projects selected for us by DPR, we only reviewed the timeframes
for a portion of the planning and construction phases.
For the purposes of our review of individual projects, we defined the various
project phases as follows:
Project Planning – the timeframe from the date the project was substantially
funded to the date the architectural/engineering (A/E) firm was given the
notice to proceed (NTP) on design. During this period, DPR gathers and
prepares necessary information, such as a concept design, to issue a request
for proposal for A/E firm services, selects an A/E firm to design the project,
and instructs the firm to begin work.
Design – the timeframe between the date the selected A/E firm was issued a
NTP for design work to the date the construction NTP was issued. During this
phase, various permits are obtained, the A/E plans and specifications are
accepted so that an invitation for bids can be issued and a construction
contractor can be selected.
Construction – the timeframe between the date the construction NTP was
issued to the selected construction contractor to the date the temporary use
and occupancy certificate was issued by the local government indicating
substantial completion.
For many of these projects, there were multiple A/E firms and contractors.
Our analysis of project timeframes typically focused on the A/E firm primarily
responsible for project design and the main construction contractor.
30

--- Page 33 ---
Finding 4
The duration of the five projects initially tested was long, ranging from 7 years
to 12 years. According to DPR, there were lengthy periods where Park
Planning and Development (PPD) staff levels did not keep pace with increases
in its CIP; however, DPR had not developed workload standards to identify
staff resource needs, especially during fluctuations in project activity.
Analysis
The duration of the five projects we tested appeared to be long, with time
periods from the dates of substantial funding to completion ranging from 6.8
years to 12 years for four of the projects.1 The extent to which the projects’
durations exceeded expectations could not be determined since schedules
were not established when projects were initiated. Furthermore, project
documentation was sometimes sparse, which precluded obtaining a full
understanding of project activities occurring at various times over those
extended periods (see Finding 3).
As discussed later in this finding, DPR represented that PPD staffing
limitations contributed to delays in starting and overseeing project work. Also,
we noted instances in which contractors exceeded their contractually required
timeframes for design (engineering) or construction work, and DPR did not
timely supply information to contractors. For two large projects, project
duration also appeared to be affected by dramatic scope changes and the
need to secure additional funding over multiple years after the initial
approvals in the CIP.
After reviewing the available project documentation, we offer the following
observations in an attempt to provide some insight on the planning, design,
and construction timeframes.
Project Planning
The planning phase for 4 of 5 projects ranged from 30 months (2.5 years) to 6
years as measured from the date the projects were substantially funded (as
described in the Audit Scope, Objective, and Methodology section) until the
design NTP was given to the architectural/engineering (A/E) firms. We were
unable to determine the length of the planning phase for the fifth project
since documentation to substantiate when funding was available could not be
located (see finding 2). For this project, we noted that the A/E firm’s NTP was
issued almost 8 months after the RFP for A/E services was issued.
1 A listing of the five projects, with descriptions, costs, and Office of Legislative Audits
determined timelines can be found in Exhibit 1 “Timeline of Project Milestones.” For one of
the five projects, total project duration could not be calculated, since we were unable to
determine from the available records the date when the project was substantially funded.
31

--- Page 34 ---
For 3 of the 4 projects, we could not determine when DPR had actually started
work on the projects, such as developing concept plans and obtaining any
community input, and therefore, the actual duration of the initial portion of the
planning phases was unknown. The earliest documentation available for each
of these projects was the date the request for proposals (RFP) was issued for
A/E firms, which occurs later in the planning process. From the dates of
substantial funding until RFP issuance, it took between 2.5 to 5.3 years for
these 3 projects. For the fourth project, available documentation suggests
that DPR started project planning within two months after substantial funding
was obtained. Nevertheless, it took 2.5 years to issue an RFP for A/E
services, with lengthy periods of no apparent significant activity between
events, such as completion of the concept plan, holding two community
meetings, and certain site work.
Design
The design phase for the 5 projects ranged from 2 years to 8 years as
measured from the dates the A/E firms were given NTP with design until the
dates construction contractors were given NTP. For two projects with design
phases lasting 2 years and 2.5 years, available documentation indicated that
certain A/E firms on the projects exceeded their contractually required design
delivery timeframes. For one of these projects, two A/E firms exceeded
certain timeframes by 5 months and 16 months, although some portion of
these timeframes were attributable to DPR delays in delivering certain project
information. For the other project, an A/E firm submitted design plans 6
months late. Additional delays were attributable to having to select a second
construction contractor because the original contractor removed itself from
the project because the NTP was not issued by DPR within 90 days of the
contract award.
For three projects, the design phases lasted 2.8 years, 5.5 years, and 7.8
years, respectively, during which numerous A/E change orders related to
design work were being processed. We could not determine for these three
projects whether design delivery timeframes had been established and
exceeded; nevertheless, the timeframes for the design phases for two of
these projects appear lengthy. For example, although one project was initially
planned as a facility renovation, the A/E firm determined that due to the
excessive costs to address current building codes a new community center
should be built instead. This decision was finalized 15 months after the NTP.
After the change order for the new design was executed, eight other A/E
change orders were processed over 4.25 years primarily relating to additional
project design changes, which all contributed to the 7.5 years design phase.
32

--- Page 35 ---
Construction
For the five projects tested, with combined construction contractor payments
totaling $30.3 million, we noted that contractors exceeded their contractually
required time of performance (TOP), considering the original contract term
and any change orders. As of June 2016, four of the five projects tested were
deemed completed since temporary use and occupancy certificates were
issued. The duration of the construction phases for these projects (from
contractor NTP to issuance of temporary use and occupancy certificates)
ranged from 16 months to 37 months. The fifth project was still in progress
two years after the construction NTP was issued.
The construction related time overruns identified for each project ranged from
3.9 months to 21.8 months.2 We were unable to identify the cause(s) for
delays on two projects (based on the existing project records) and the delay
on a third project appeared to relate to contractor performance issues. The
delays on the two remaining projects appeared to be attributable to change
orders that did not expand the TOP. For example, the primary contractor for
one project, with payments totaling $12.2 million, exceeded its TOP (14.8
months) by 21.8 months. While some change orders were approved by DPR
after the TOP period elapsed, those change orders generally did not include
additional TOP days. Further, many change orders proposed by the contractor
for additional costs were not adequately reviewed by DPR (see Finding 6).
Review of an Additional Five Projects Selected by DPR
Our review of certain aspects of the five projects selected by DPR identified
issues regarding certain planning and construction activities, similar to those
found from our initial test of five projects. Regarding planning, we attempted
to determine how long it took DPR to begin its planning (marked by the
issuance of the request for proposals or RFP) after substantial funding was
obtained and found, similar to the initial five projects, substantial gaps
between the two events for two projects. From the estimated dates of
substantial funding until RFP issuance, it took 12 and 28 months,
respectively, for these two projects with collective budgets of $7.7 million.
For the construction phase, we determined whether the main construction
contractors met TOP requirements. For three of the five projects, we noted
that construction contractors exceeded their contractually required TOP,
considering the original contract term and any change orders. As of June
2016, the contractors for these projects, with costs to date of $6.4 million,
exceeded their TOP by 9.2, 11.2, and 15.9 months. Further, two of these
2 In most cases, these delays are shorter than the actual overrun time since contractors may
need to perform additional work after temporary use and occupancy certificates are issued.
33

--- Page 36 ---
three projects had not been completed at that time; therefore, the excess
time could be higher if subsequent change orders have not increased the
TOP.
DPR Attributed Lengthy Active Project Periods to Staffing Issues
DPR believes that insufficient staffing levels in PPD have contributed to past
project delays; however, since DPR has not developed workload standards to
determine the staffing resources needed based on the nature and size of
proposed projects, we were unable to assess the reasonableness of this
assertion. The lack of workload standards, coupled with the lack of project
schedules, makes it difficult to manage projects to ensure timely completion,
especially when there are fluctuations in project activity.
DPR indicated staff resources did not keep pace with the significant increases
in its capital budget. We were advised that from fiscal years 2003 to 2010,
DPR’s capital budget appropriation increased from $12 million to $99 million.
During that period, additional PPD staff positions were received, primarily
during fiscal year 2009 when 9 positions were added; however, DPR indicated
that while helpful, that staffing was not fully adequate. DPR also indicated
that certain organizational and managerial changes were initiated in fiscal
year 2015, but those efforts have been hampered by turnover.
Finally, in the last few years, DPR has contracted for project management
services to help manage larger projects as well as hired contractual staff to
manage projects. We were advised these actions have been beneficial but
supervision of contractors and its staff remains a concern, since there are
limits to the number of projects the supervisors can effectively oversee.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPR develop staffing workload standards to determine
the necessary resources for properly administering and overseeing projects
and that this information be used for strategic planning of project work and
deploying staff resources.
Finding 5
Site inspection results were not routinely recorded in the project management
system and, for one project, the inspection documentation was not
consistently prepared during the entire construction phase.
Analysis
The results of site inspections for four projects tested were not routinely
recorded in the project management system, and for one of the four projects,
34

--- Page 37 ---
inspection documentation was not consistently prepared. For the fifth project
tested, inspection documentation was consistently prepared and recorded in
the system. As previously mentioned, DPR had not established formal policies
and procedures for project recordkeeping, including conducting and
documenting inspections, and reviewing the results by supervisors.
Recording of all inspection results in the project management system not only
would provide a central repository for this essential project documentation,
but can also enhance document security. For one project, inspection
documentation, which for the majority of the documentation was only
maintained on the construction manager’s computer, was lost when this
computer failed. Two other projects that had site inspections performed by a
third party, the reports were prepared using standardized paper forms, but
were not recorded in the system.
For the remaining project there were no documented site visits until October
2015 although the construction NTP was issued in December 2014. During
that time, there were certain contractor performance issues, including the
improper installation of a sewer line for a restroom, which was identified in
March 2015, but not corrected until 7 months later. From October 2015
through June 2016, there were 14 documented site visits for this project. The
frequency or timing of these visits may not have been sufficient as additional
installation problems were identified that PPD required the contractor to
rectify, thus extending the project completion date. Although the inspection
results for these 14 site visits were documented in the project management
system, the information recorded varied in detail. Some notes only provided a
brief description of work completed, while others included more informative
details (such as weather, number of or identity of the workers on site,
completed items, and items in progress). Finally, there was no indication that
the project manager’s supervisor monitored the performance of the
inspection activity.
Maintaining consistent and thorough documentation of site visits is an
important method of recording progress for management as well as a tool to
document any issues related to contractor performance in terms of quality,
costs, and timeframes. Such reports can also be used by management to
help ensure inspectors are performing their duties timely and appropriately,
and are making good project management decisions.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DPR specify in its policies and procedures
a. the desired frequency of site inspections;
b. the information to be recorded for each inspection;
35

--- Page 38 ---
c. the method for retaining inspection results, such as within the project
management system; and
d. the process for supervisory review of inspection results.
Finding 6
Many contract change orders did not appear to have been approved in a
timely manner. DPR also did not consistently prepare documentation of its
assessment of contractor proposed change order cost increases or
extensions of time for work performance.
Analysis
Many DPR change orders for the five projects we tested did not appear to
have been approved in a timely manner. Also, DPR did not consistently
prepare documentation to evidence its verification of contractor proposed
cost increases or extensions of time for work performance. As previously
mentioned in Finding 1, DPR had not established comprehensive policies and
procedures for processing change orders, such as delineating the
requirements for reviewing, documenting assessments of, and approving
change orders, including the targeted timeframe for the entire process.
For the five projects we selected for testing, DPR had processed 74 change
orders from March 2008 through June 2016 totaling $4.8 million, including
32 change orders totaling $3.7 million that increased the time or contract
amount by 20 percent or more or were greater than $75,000. Our review of
these 74 change orders for general timeliness of approval and the 32 that we
specifically reviewed in detail disclosed the following:
 The processing of change orders from initial approval by the DPR architect
or the engineering and construction manager to final approval by the M-
NCPPC Executive Director in many cases took longer than 14 days3. Only
8 of the 74 change orders (valued at $250,000) were approved within 14
days. For the remaining 66 change orders valued at $4.6 million, it took
an average of 46 days to obtain all approvals. Final approval for most (48)
of these change orders took longer than one month, including three
instances that took 3.5, 3.5, and 9.6 months to obtain all DPR and M-
NCPPC approvals.
3 Since there was no DPR time standard for the approval of change orders, nor any identified
industry standard, we judgmentally used the 14 day period for assessing timeliness. The
actual time to process change orders was likely much longer than the periods we identify in
this finding since they do not include the period from when contractor’s change order
proposal was submitted, a date that was not consistently recorded or tracked by DPR, until
it was initially approved by the DPR architect or construction manager.
36

--- Page 39 ---
According to DPR staff, a contributing factor for the extensive time in
processing change orders is the multiple levels of approvals (up to 14)
needed for every change order. We were unable to determine the impact
of the length of time taken to approve change orders or whether work
began prior to approval or after approval due to the lack of available
records. However, untimely processing of change orders could lead to
delays in project progress and issues during payment if the related change
order is not approved or is revised during the approval process.
 Final approval for change orders occurred after the TOP of the contract
had expired; yet work continued after that date. Specifically, 31 of the 74
change orders included in our review were approved after the TOP for the
contract had expired (averaging 11 months after the approved completion
date).
 The DPR architects and the engineering and construction managers did
not always document their efforts to assess whether change orders
proposed by A/E firms or construction contractors to increase TOP or costs
were appropriate or consistent with industry practices. Those DPR
employees’ review of change orders typically only included a statement
stating that it was reviewed for merit and pricing and found to be in
accordance with standard industry pricing, without support showing how
they had arrived at these conclusions. In contrast, we noted that a third
party construction manager hired by DPR to oversee one project had
prepared documentation regarding the review of proposed change orders
and cost negotiations with the contractor.
We determined that for 16 of the 32 change orders reviewed in detail,
there was no documentation that DPR formally assessed the
reasonableness of the days added to either the A/E firms’ or contractors’
TOP. The 16 change orders related to all 5 projects and resulted in the
collective addition of 148.9 months, an average of 9.3 months per change
order. Twelve of these 16 change orders were executed with A/E firms
and were primarily associated with changes in project design work.
Unreasonable TOP periods can unnecessarily extend the project schedule.
In addition, the DPR architects and the engineering and construction
managers did not maintain evidence that proposed change order costs for
20 change orders totaling $1.3 million were verified. For example, DPR
did not document its assessment as to the reasonableness of additional
hours A/E firms had proposed to perform additional work. For the one
project reviewed (unrelated to the 20 change orders) in which DPR
contracted with a third party construction manager, we noted that this
37

--- Page 40 ---
individual provided DPR with its detailed research in verifying increases in
construction change order prices and TOP.
 Of the five projects selected by DPR for our review, we found similar issues
regarding the timeliness of processing change orders. For 11 of 15
change orders processed for four of these projects totaling $957,000 (no
change orders were processed on the other project), the approvals
occurred after 14 days, including 9 change orders that took longer than
30 days to approve. The average approval time for the 11 change orders
was 66 days. Also, change orders were often approved after the date
specified for completion of the work that was the subject of the change
order. Specifically, 10 of the 15 change orders included in our review
were approved after the original budgeted time for the contract had
expired (averaging 8 months after expiration).
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DPR
a. describe in its change order policies and procedures the steps to be taken
for reviewing change order proposals for reasonableness and the
documentation to be maintained to demonstrate that changes to TOP and
contract costs were deemed appropriate, and
b. determine the targeted timeframe for obtaining final change order
approvals that also considers the necessity of all currently required levels
of approval and helps ensure that approvals occur before the original TOP
subject to the change order ends.
Finding 7
Contractors frequently did not complete their work within the timeframes
specified in their contracts and DPR actions to hold contractors accountable
were not always evident.
Analysis
Contractors frequently did not complete their work within the timeframes
specified in the contracts and DPR’s actions to hold contractors accountable,
such as pursuing liquidated damages as provided for in contracts, were not
always evident. DPR had not formally developed guidelines regarding the
progressive steps to be taken to address untimely contractor work
performance.
Specifically, there was no indication that actions were taken with respect to
untimely performance for two construction contractors or three A/E firms
commented upon in Finding 4 with design excess time ranging from 5 months
38

--- Page 41 ---
to 23 months. The expenditures for these five contractors totaled $12.7
million as of June 2016. We did note, based on available documentation, that
DPR took legal actions regarding the performance of the other 3 construction
contractors identified in Finding 4 for which TOP was exceeded by 4
contractors for periods ranging from 5 months to 22 months. The legal action
included assessing liquidated damages against 3 of the contractors with
delays for poor and late performance.
The contract documents for A/E and construction work provide the number of
calendar days from the notice to proceed date until the final completion of
work date. The contract documents further state that M-NCPPC may deduct
from the final payment any liquidated damages, but not as a penalty, for each
calendar day delay after the final completion date of the work.
Untimely project work can ultimately delay the delivery of the final project, add
unnecessary costs, affect overall workload, and deprive the public of facilities
for longer than necessary. Holding contractors accountable for significant
untimely performance would help ensure more timely completion of work on
current and future projects, and the assessment of liquidated damages
provides DPR the ability to recover costs/losses attributable to untimely
performance.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DPR
a. develop formal guidelines regarding the progressive steps to be taken to
address untimely contractor work performance, and
b. assess liquidated damages for untimely or non-performance or document
why assessment of liquidated damages is not appropriate.
39

--- Page 42 ---
Exhibit 1
Timeline of Project Milestones
Date Months
Architectural/ Months Temporary Between Total Time to Complete
Total Project Engineering Between Months Notes Use and Construction the Project
Expenditures Date Project (A/E) Notice to Funding Between A/E Related to Occupancy NTP and (Substantially funded to
Project and (through Substantially Proceed (NTP) and Notes Related to the Construction and Lapse of (U & O) Temporary Notes Related to the Temporary
Description 6/10/2016) Funded Issued Planning Lapse of Time NTP issued Construction Time Issued U & O Lapse of Time U & O)
Two A/E firms
Foxhill Park- exceeded their Primary contractor exceeded
Restroom contractually its TOP by 9.2 months, during
building, required this time there were several
$ 420,596 7/1/2009 4/12/2012 33.9 . 11/21/2014 31.8 4/7/2016 16.8 6.8 Years
electrical and design delivery contractor performance
lighting timeframes by issues, which required
improvements 5 and 27 attention.
months.
During this time available
documentation indicated
that almost 10 months
Primary construction
elapsed between the
An A/E firm contractor exceeded its TOP
Fairwood Park - completion of the
submitted by 4.9 months. Due to a lack New park $ 2,444,292 7/1/2005 9/28/2008 39.5 concept plan drawing and 9/20/2010 24 6/26/2012 21.5 7 Years
design plans 6 of documentation, the
development a community meeting.
months late circumstances attributing to
There was another delay
the delay were not available.
of 9 months between a
community meeting and
issuance of the A/E RFP.
Primary construction
contractor exceeded its TOP
Southern
by 21.8 months. While some
Regional
change orders were approved
Tech/Rec 7/1/2001 6/11/2007 72.4 4/5/2010 34.3 4/5/2013 36.5 11.8 Years
$ 17,291,128 by DPR after the TOP period
Complex - New
elapsed, those changes
complex
orders generally did not
include additional TOP days.
Kentland This project was still under
Community construction as of June 10,
Center - New 7/1/2004 12/23/2006 30.2 7/14/2014 92 * 23.2 2016, as of that date the 12 Years
$ 12,292,490
community contractor had exceeded their
center TOP by 3.9 months.
We were
Palmer Park unable to
Community determine Primary construction Unable to determine when
Center - Code when the 8/2/2007 n/a 3/26/2013 68.8 9/28/2015 30.5 contractor exceeded its TOP project was substantially
$ 6,571,392
compliance/ project was by 18.4 months. funded.
renovation initially funded
(finding 2).
40

--- Page 44 ---
On behalf of the M-NCPPC Department of Parks and Recreation, Prince George’s County (DPR), I
thank you and your legislative audit team for the professionalism and thoroughness with which they
conducted the evaluation of our capital projects management practices. The draft report contains
insightful analyses and recommendations that will enhance DPR’s management of the capital
improvement program (CIP).
Overall, it is reassuring that the audit concluded that the capital projects tested were completed
within budget. With a workload of 168 approved projects totaling more than $600 million in
cumulative budget authority, DPR strives to manage each CIP project within budget. We are
pleased to see that we achieved this.
At the same time, we recognize that the total time to complete some projects is lengthy, as
identified in the audit. As the audit illustrates, most of the time spent on projects occurs before the
construction phase begins. In our experience, the length of time to complete a project is influenced
by many factors, which can be unique to each project. Throughout a project, DPR works closely
with Prince George’s County Councilmembers, State Delegates and Senators, and community
groups to deliver CIP projects that meet the community’s needs. Often the process evolves and
shifts organically from gathering fluid community ideas, creating a concept, developing a design,
securing sufficient budget appropriation, competitively bidding a contract, and eventually
construction. Once, we have achieved final stakeholder consensus and funding for the design and
construction, the time to complete a project is much shorter than the 7 to 12 years identified in the
audit report.
For the five projects that received detailed testing, the average time from construction to
completion was just over two years. Given the size and complexity of some of the projects tested,
DPR does not find this construction duration to be unreasonable; but, we recognize that there are
opportunities to improve and enhance the management of projects so that they are delivered as
efficiently and effectively as resources allow, including the challenge of aligning the expectations of
stakeholders with timely delivery.
Accordingly, the audit recommendations to enhance the management controls for the CIP will be
instrumental in helping DPR manage a demand for CIP projects that exceeds its capacity to deliver.
The size of the CIP reflects DPR’s success as a nationally acclaimed agency that has been awarded
the Gold Medal for Excellence in Parks and Recreation by the National Recreation and Parks
Association six times, more than any other parks and recreation agency in the United States. This
success is the direct result of the strong public support and demand for park and recreation
services, which are supporting a high-quality of life for the residents of Prince George’s County.
Enhancing our policies and procedures to achieve better project planning, scheduling, monitoring,
and reporting is a sound and prudent approach. Therefore, in conclusion, we agree with the seven
findings and recommendations of the audit report. Below is the specific response and action plan
for each one.

--- Page 45 ---
Finding 1
Prince George’s County Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) lacked formal
written policies and procedures for capital project management.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DPR, in consultation with the Prince George’s County Planning
Board,
a. develop and implement formal written policies and procedures for capital
planning and project management, including roles and responsibilities for those
involved with planning, construction management, project monitoring, and
construction closeout; and
b. establish performance expectations and reporting mechanisms to monitor the
effectiveness of the capital planning and project management operations.
DPR agrees.
a. DPR is currently developing policies and procedures.
b. Performance expectations and reporting requirements will be incorporated
into the policies and procedures.
Full implementation of recommendation 1 is planned to take place within the
next 12 to 18 months.
Finding 2
The annual Capital Improvement Program (CIP) documents did not contain certain
project information to promote clarity and transparency, and may not have met a
certain statutory requirement.
Recommendation 2
We recommend M-NCPPC - Prince George’s County ensure that its CIP includes
a. supplementary information, as necessary, to identify individual projects and
related funding;
b. detailed project descriptions to provide more information on project scope and
size; and
c. construction schedules that meet the requirements of State law, in accordance
with advice from the Office of the Attorney General.
DPR agrees.
a. DPR is currently developing supplemental information to increase
understanding and documentation on individual projects.
b. The supplemental information being developed will include more detailed
descriptions on scope and size of projects.
c. Project and construction schedule information will be enhanced and updated
as necessary in the supplemental PDF information.
Full implementation of recommendation 2 is planned by the end of 2018.

--- Page 46 ---
Finding 3
DPR had not established a comprehensive approach to documenting project
activities and costs, including the retention of necessary project and contract
documents.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DPR
a. fully utilize the project management software system to establish timelines and
monitor individual project progress and costs, and to electronically retain
important project and contract documents;
b. develop a system user manual containing management’s expectations of how the
system and its available capabilities and functionality should be used; and
c. use the system’s form building capabilities to standardize information gathering
for critical functions, such as inspections.
DPR agrees.
a. DPR utilizes a commercial software product for project management. We are
currently establishing standard operating procedures to ensure the
consistent use by project managers and management.
b. Standard operating procedures and a manual will be developed.
c. Once standard operating procedures are in place, DPR will focus on
maximizing the functionality of a commercial software product to create
efficiency and standardization.
DPR will be prioritizing the order of implementation of audit recommendations.
Full implementation of recommendation 3 is planned within 18 months.
Finding 4
The duration of the five projects initially tested was long, ranging from 7 years to 12
years. According to DPR, there were lengthy periods where Park Planning and
Development (PPD) staff levels did not keep pace with increases in its CIP; however,
DPR had not developed workload standards to identify staff resource needs,
especially during fluctuations in project activity.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DPR develop staffing workload standards to determine the
necessary resources for properly administering and overseeing projects and that this
information be used for strategic planning of project work and deploying staff
resources.
DPR agrees with the need to establish workload standards. Such standards will
assist with managing the demands of project delivery. DPR is in the process of
establishing a comprehensive work program for prior approved CIP projects and
future planned projects. Full implementation of recommendation 4 is planned by the

--- Page 47 ---
end of 2018. However, the time to deliver a project is influenced by many factors,
some out of the direct control of DPR, such as permitting. In addition, the time to
deliver a project is influenced by the participatory process used where input is
received from many stakeholders, and may change over time. Once project scope is
finalized and the construction contract is bid, the time to complete a project averages
about two years.
Finding 5
Site inspection results were not routinely recorded in the project management
system and, for one project, the inspection documentation was not consistently
prepared during the entire construction phase.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DPR specify in its policies and procedures
a. the desired frequency of site inspections;
b. the information to be recorded for each inspection;
c. the method for retaining inspection results, such as within the project
management system; and
d. the process for supervisory review of inspection results.
DPR agrees. The policies and procedures developed to implement recommendation
1 will specifically address recommendation 5 items (a), (b), (c), and (d).
Finding 6
Many contract change orders did not appear to have been approved in a timely
manner. DPR also did not consistently prepare documentation of its assessment of
contractor proposed change order cost increases or extensions of time for work
performance.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DPR
a. describe in its change order policies and procedures the steps to be taken for
reviewing change order proposals for reasonableness and the documentation to
be maintained to demonstrate that changes to TOP and contract costs were
deemed appropriate, and
b. determine the targeted timeframe for obtaining final change order approvals that
also considers the necessity of all currently required levels of approval and helps
ensure that approvals occur before the original TOP subject to the change order
ends.
DPR agrees.
a. The M-NCPPC Finance Department has a Purchasing Manual that includes
general policies and procedures for change orders, which is followed by DPR.
DPR has undertaken a review of its internal actions to process a change

--- Page 48 ---
order and is in the process of finalizing department policies specific to the
processing of change orders for CIP projects.
b. Time standards to monitor the efficient processing of change orders will be
developed.
Full implementation of recommendation 6 is planned by late 2018.
Finding 7
Contractors frequently did not complete their work within the timeframes specified in
their contracts and DPR actions to hold contractors accountable were not always
evident.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DPR
a. develop formal guidelines regarding the progressive steps to be taken to address
untimely contractor work performance, and
b. assess liquidated damages for untimely or non-performance or document why
assessment of liquidated damages is not appropriate.
DPR agrees.
a. Project management guidelines will be developed to include procedures for
the consistent escalation of contract compliance measures.
b. DPR does assess liquidated damages. However, opportunities exist to
improve the documentation regarding the associated decision making process
to assess. DPR will evaluate the current process to ensure appropriate action
is being taken and documented.
Full implementation of recommendation 7 is planned by the end of 2018.

--- Page 49 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Lisa M. Beers, CFE
Senior Auditor
Matusala Y. Abishe
Amanda M. Jones
Staff Auditors