Title: Department of Transportation - Motor Vehicle Administration - Follow-up Review
Date: 01/16/2009
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b73
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:05:27.272978
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Follow-up Review
January 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 16, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA), as of July 1, 2008, to
address the findings in our October 19, 2007 audit report. In that report, we
concluded that MVA’s fiscal accountability and compliance rating was
unsatisfactory.
We performed certain procedures to evaluate the corrective actions taken by
MVA. Specifically, we selected 12 of the 25 findings from our audit report and
reviewed MVA’s progress. Our review disclosed that MVA had made some
progress in resolving the audit findings reviewed:
Number of
Implementation Status
Findings
Corrected 3
Substantial Progress 5
In Progress 2
Minimal Progress 2
No Progress 0
Status Not Determined (item not selected for review) 13
MVA had initiated corrective action on all 12 findings reviewed, and had
established a corrective action plan, which included timelines and processes to
monitor the implementation of the plan, for all 25 findings from our audit report.
Nevertheless, most of the actions were still in progress, as the findings will
require extensive time and effort to resolve. If MVA continues on this course for
all findings and, if other areas do not deteriorate, our next audit should result in an
improved accountability and compliance rating.

--- Page 4 ---
The status of each of the 12 findings we reviewed is identified in Exhibit 1, which
also includes MVA’s self-assessment of the implementation status for all 25 report
findings. Exhibit 2 describes, in detail, the status for the 4 findings we determined
that MVA had not corrected or substantially addressed. The Department’s
response is included as an appendix to this report.
We will review the status of all of the audit findings during our next audit of
MVA. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by MVA during
this review.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1: Status of Findings in October 19, 2007
Audit Report
Status Based on Status as
Auditor’s Review as Determined by
Prior Finding
of MVA as of
July 2008 July 2008
Ignition Interlock Program (IIP)
1. MVA policies and procedures were not sufficient
In Progress Substantial Progress
to address IIP violations.
2. MVA did not ensure that certain individuals
assigned to IIP had the device installed and that it Minimal Progress In Progress
was notified of all violations.
Driver Licensing
3. Procedures and controls over driver licensing
N/A Substantial Progress
transactions were not sufficient.
4. MVA lacked comprehensive procedures to ensure
the driver’s license database included complete and
Corrected Corrected
accurate social security numbers and to identify
possible fraudulent licenses.
License Suspensions and Revocations
5. Driver’s license suspensions and revocations were
not always processed timely. Substantial Progress Corrected
6. MVA did not take adequate steps to suspend the
driver’s licenses of certain individuals repeatedly
Corrected Corrected
in arrears in making child support payments.
7. MVA needs to address excessive delays in the
judicial process, which resulted in penalties being
N/A Corrected
postponed for extended periods (Policy Issue).
Vehicle Titling and Registration
8. MVA allowed vehicle dealerships to issue
temporary registration tags to ineligible
N/A Corrected
individuals, in violation of state laws.
9. MVA waived dealership fines totaling
approximately $824,000 without a review of the
N/A Substantial
related documentation, and system reports were not
adequate to identify certain other late payments.
Page 1 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
Note: Shaded findings are more fully described in Exhibit 2.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 1: Status of Findings in October 19, 2007
Audit Report
Status Based on Status as
Auditor’s Review as Determined by
Prior Finding
of MVA as of
July 2008 July 2008
10. Audits of licensed vehicle dealerships were not
Substantial Progress Corrected
comprehensive to ensure collection of proper fees.
Insurance Compliance
11. MVA did not take timely action when lapses in
vehicle insurance coverage were identified and
N/A Substantial Progress
procedures were not in place to ensure such lapses
were properly processed.
12. MVA failed to assess and pursue recovery of
uninsured motorist penalties in a timely manner and
Substantial Progress Corrected
related waivers were not always issued in
accordance with state regulations.
Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program (VEIP)
13. MVA lacked adequate controls over waivers of
inspections and late fee penalties granted to vehicle
Corrected Corrected
owners.
Information Systems Security and Control - Mainframe
Applications
14. Access and monitoring controls over critical
Substantial Progress Corrected
mainframe production files need improvement.
Information Systems Security and Control - eMVA Store
15. MVA’s contract for hosting the MVA website and
the eMVA Store did not include provisions for
N/A Substantial Progress
periodic audits of online security, resulting in
potential vulnerability of sensitive information.
16. Sensitive personal and financial information of
eMVA Store customers was unnecessarily stored in In Progress Corrected
clear text on eMVA Store servers.
17. Security measures to protect critical eMVA store
N/A Substantial Progress
application servers were not adequate.
18. Critical software, which supported the eMVA Store,
N/A Corrected
was out of date.
Page 2 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
Note: Shaded findings are more fully described in Exhibit 2.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Exhibit 1: Status of Findings in October 19, 2007
Audit Report
Status Based on Status as
Auditor’s Review as Determined by
Prior Finding
of MVA as of
July 2008 July 2008
19. Monitoring and control over critical eMVA Store
N/A Substantial Progress
components were not adequate.
20. Access to the eMVA Store critical servers and
Substantial Progress Corrected
database was not properly restricted.
21. Controls over the use of a third party to process
Minimal Progress Corrected
eMVA Store credit card payments were inadequate.
Cash Receipts
22. Procedures and controls over collections need
N/A Substantial Progress
improvement.
Fraud Investigations
23. MVA did not always sufficiently investigate
instances of possible fraudulent activity by MVA
N/A Corrected
employees.
Purchases and Disbursements
24. Proper internal controls were not established over
N/A Corrected
purchasing and disbursement transactions.
Equipment
25. MVA did not complete physical inventories or
N/A Substantial Progress
investigate missing equipment, as required.
Page 3 of 3
N/A – Not applicable since we did not review the implementation status of this finding
Note: Shaded findings are more fully described in Exhibit 2.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Exhibit 2
Status of Findings for
Which Corrective Action Was Deemed to be
“In Progress” or “Minimal Progress”
Ignition Interlock Program (IIP)
Prior Finding 1
MVA policies and procedures were not sufficient to address IIP violations.
As a result, MVA failed to take appropriate follow-up action for certain
individuals who violated the terms of the program.
Background
Beginning in 1988, State law allowed the use of an ignition interlock device as an
additional penalty to help prevent individuals convicted of alcohol-related driving
violations from driving while intoxicated. Furthermore, in 1996, the Maryland
Ignition Interlock Program (IIP) was established to formalize the monitoring
process. Drivers are enrolled in the program as a result of a court order,
administrative hearing order, or MVA Medical Advisory Board (MAB)
recommendation, or may voluntarily enroll in the program in lieu of and/or in
conjunction with a reduced driver’s license suspension or revocation.
IIP enrollees are required to have an interlock device installed in their vehicles by
a certified vendor approved by MVA. The device is designed to prevent the
individual from driving while intoxicated by requiring them to breathe into the
device prior to starting the vehicle and at periodic intervals (retests). The
interlock device records all attempts made by the driver to start the vehicle, blood
alcohol content levels, attempts to circumvent the interlock device, and refusals to
perform the required retests. These data are electronically uploaded during each
enrollee’s mandated monthly visits to the interlock vendor, which then reports the
information to MVA. These monthly reports are reviewed by IIP caseworkers to
determine whether significant violations have occurred.
State law and MVA policies and procedures generally provide for MVA to
administer the program, which includes monitoring IIP enrollee compliance. In
addition, the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services – Division of
Parole and Probation has certain monitoring responsibilities for individuals
ordered by the courts to enroll as a condition of probation (such as monitoring
individuals for compliance with parole conditions).
6

--- Page 9 ---
Prior Report Recommendation 1
1. We recommended that MVA modify its policies and procedures to ensure the
proper identification and follow-up of IIP violations. Specifically, we
recommended that the procedures specify that progressively severe corrective
action (for example, warning letters, extension of the term of the IIP,
suspension or revocation of the driver’s license) be taken in response to the
severity and frequency of the violations.
2. In addition, we recommended that the procedures require the flagging of the
driving records of individuals in the IIP to automatically notify the IIP unit of
pertinent license activity that may constitute a violation of the IIP.
3. We also recommended that the procedures include provisions for the
monitoring of violation reports of court-ordered IIP participants, and that the
Department of Parole and Probation (DPP) be notified of the results of such
monitoring for these participants.
4. Finally, we recommended that MVA monitor the IIP to ensure that these
policies and procedures are adhered to.
Status – In Progress
1. MVA modified its IIP policies and procedures to help ensure the proper
identification and follow-up of IIP violations. MVA advised that these
policies and procedures were implemented as of October 17, 2007. The
procedures specify, for example, that a warning letter is to be sent to program
participants each time a monthly activity report shows a program violation,
and that, after the fourth violation, the individual shall be removed from the
program or referred back to the Medical Advisory Board or the Courts, as
applicable. However, our test of 15 individuals in the IIP after October 17,
2007 disclosed that these procedures were frequently not followed.
Specifically, required follow-up action, such as issuance of warning letters,
was not taken for 12 of the 15 individuals tested. For example, one individual
who had at least one program violation in each of 12 months examined
received three warning letters during the year. This individual was not
removed from the program and was subsequently notified of successful
completion of the program.
2. The IIP policies and procedures were also modified to require the flagging of
the driving records of individuals in the IIP to automatically notify the IIP unit
of pertinent license activity that may constitute a violation. The
aforementioned test of 15 individuals in the IIP disclosed that their records
had been properly flagged.
7

--- Page 10 ---
3. Furthermore, MVA modified its IIP policies and procedures to specify
provisions for monitoring violations of court-ordered participants and that
DPP be notified of the results of such monitoring efforts. Our review of five
individuals referred by the courts disclosed that DPP was notified of the
results of MVA monitoring of the participants. MVA advised us that it is
currently attempting to develop a Memorandum of Understanding with DPP
to better define the roles and responsibilities for monitoring court-ordered
participants.
4. For quality assurance purposes, the IIP unit management reviews randomly
selected IIP cases for adherence to established policies and procedures.
However, our examination of 10 reviewed cases disclosed that follow-up
action, such as investigating missing warning letters and monthly activity
reports, was not completed for 8 of these cases.
Ignition Interlock Program (IIP)
Prior Finding 2
MVA did not ensure that individuals who were assigned to the IIP by the
Medical Advisory Board (MAB) had the device installed, and MVA did not
have procedures to ensure that it was notified of all IIP violations.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
1. We recommended that MVA establish procedures to ensure that the interlock
device is installed in the vehicles of all individuals assigned to the IIP by
MAB, and that it take appropriate follow-up action when individuals fail to
have the interlock devices installed, as required.
2. We also recommended that MVA establish procedures to ensure that it
receives, from the applicable vendor, a monthly report of interlock activity for
each enrollee.
Status – Minimal Progress
1. MVA advised us that program case managers are responsible for ensuring that
the interlock device is installed for individuals referred to the IIP by MAB,
and for taking appropriate follow-up action, such as referring the case back to
MAB when installation does not occur within 30 days of when the interlock
installation agreement was prepared. However, these procedures were not
formally documented. (The interlock installation agreement documents the
driver’s agreement with the provisions of the program, including having an
ignition interlock device installed.)
8

--- Page 11 ---
Furthermore, our test of 10 cases in which the individual had been assigned to
the IIP by MAB since August 1, 2007, and the interlock device had not been
installed within 30 days, disclosed a lack of adequate follow-up in 6 of those
cases. Specifically, MAB was not notified in a timely manner of the failure to
install. In 5 of those cases, MAB was notified approximately 100 to 300 days
after MVA had received the installation agreements. In one case, although the
device was eventually installed, this occurred 98 days after receipt of the
installation agreement, and MAB had not been notified.
2. Although MVA had established written follow-up procedures for instances in
which monthly activity reports are not received, our review disclosed that the
action called for by those procedures was frequently not taken. For example,
our review of 10 cases selected by management for random review, disclosed
6 with 21 missing monthly reports (out of 50 reports due for the period
reviewed), but no follow-up letters regarding the missing reports had been
sent to the individuals, as required. Furthermore, our separate test of 15
individuals in the IIP disclosed that 9 also had missing monthly reports, but no
follow-up action had been taken.
Information Systems Security and Control – eMVA Store
Prior Finding 16
Sensitive personal and financial information of eMVA Store customers was
unnecessarily stored in clear text on eMVA Store related servers.
Prior Report Recommendation 16
We recommended that MVA work with its service provider to ensure that
customers’ sensitive information is adequately secured. Specifically, the service
provider should remove existing sensitive customer information from its systems,
or should encrypt and appropriately protect all such sensitive information, and/or
retain only partial information.
Status – In Progress
The sensitive personal and financial information that was unnecessarily stored in
clear text on an eMVA Store server was eMVA Store customer names and related
credit card and bank account information and driver’s license numbers. Our
follow-up review disclosed that MVA was securing customer credit card data by
retaining only partial information (12 of the 16 stored credit card number
characters were masked out on each record). Although customer bank account
numbers stored in daily application logs were encrypted, the related encryption
key was retained on this server. If this server was compromised, the encryption
9

--- Page 12 ---
key could be discovered and used to decrypt the bank account numbers. At the
time of our testing in July 2008, we estimated that approximately 8,200 records
containing customer bank account information were stored on this server. In our
audit report dated October 19, 2007, we estimated that approximately 42,500
records containing customer bank account information were stored on the related
server.
Although customer names and associated driver’s license numbers for 21,598
individuals were stored in clear text on another eMVA Store server, this is a
reduction from our October 19, 2007 audit report. Specifically, in that report, we
estimated that customer names and driver’s license numbers for 468,000
individuals were stored on the server.
Prior Finding 21
Controls over the use of a third party to process eMVA Store credit card
payments were inadequate.
Background
Payments to the eMVA Store can be made via credit card. MVA and its eMVA
Store use a nationally recognized third party to process all credit card
transactions.
Prior Report Recommendation 21
1. We recommended that MVA use separate accounts for application (that is,
credit card) processing and for service management.
2. Additionally, we recommended that the service management and application
processing accounts and passwords not be stored on a publicly accessible
server or in clear text.
3. We also recommended that MVA notify the third-party firm processing credit
cards of the specific Internet addresses that should have access to the service
management account.
4. Finally, we recommended that MVA amend the service management option to
prevent the processing of refunds for the eMVA Store.
Status – Minimal Progress
1. The MVA established separate third party service provider accounts for
application (credit card) transaction processing and service management.
2. Although the newly-created service management account was not stored on a
publicly accessible server, the eMVA Store application’s account and
10

--- Page 13 ---
password used for transaction processing was stored on a publicly accessible
server in a clear text format.
3. The MVA had not notified the third party firm processing credit cards of the
specific Internet addresses that should be permitted to access the service
management account.
4. The MVA had not amended the service management option to prevent the
processing of refunds for the eMVA Store.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a follow-up review of the actions taken by the Department of
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) as of July 1, 2008 to
address the findings in our October 19, 2007 audit report. In that report, we
concluded that MVA’s fiscal accountability and compliance rating was
unsatisfactory.
The purpose of our review was to determine the status of MVA’s corrective
actions to address certain of our audit findings. This review was conducted based
on our long-standing practice of performing a follow-up review whenever an
agency receives an unsatisfactory rating in our fiscal compliance audit report.
The rating system was established, in accordance with State Government Article,
Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, for the purpose of
determining an overall evaluation of an agency’s fiscal accountability and
compliance with State laws and regulations.
Our review consisted of obtaining the July 2008 status report from MVA
(describing the level of implementation of each prior audit report
recommendation), performing tests and analyses of selected information, and
holding discussions with MVA personnel as we deemed necessary to determine
the status of MVA’s corrective actions to address selected findings from our
October 19, 2007 audit report. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Had we
conducted an audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. Our review was conducted primarily during July through September
2008.
The Department of Transportation’s response to our follow-up review, on behalf
of MVA, is included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State
Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will
advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its response.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Follow Up Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2004 to November 30, 2006
Ignition Interlock Program (IIP)
Prior Finding 1
MVA policies and procedures were not sufficient to address IIP violations. As a result,
MVA failed to take appropriate follow-up action for certain individuals who violated the
terms of the program.
Prior Report Recommendation 1
1. We recommended that MVA modify its policies and procedures to ensure the proper
identification and follow-up of IIP violators. Specifically, we recommended that the procedures
specify that progressively severe corrective action (for example, warning letters, extension of the
term of the IIP, suspension or revocation of the driver’s license) be taken in response to the
severity and frequency of the violations.
2. In addition, we recommend that the procedures require the flagging of the driving records of
individuals in the IIP to automatically notify the IIP unit of pertinent license activity that may
constitute a violation of the IIP.
3. We also recommend that the procedures that MVA include provisions for the monitoring of
violation reports of court-ordered IIP participants and that the Department of Parole and
Probation (DPP) be notified of the results of such monitoring for these participants.
4. Finally, we recommended that MVA monitor the IIP to ensure that these policies and
procedures are adhered to.
Status - In Progress
Follow-up Response:
The Administration partially concurs with this assessment. The MVA agrees that a proportion of
the cases reviewed in accordance with this report did not fully comply with the recently enacted
policies and procedures. Overall, policies requiring consistent communication with program
participants were generally followed.
1. In the audit status report, it was noted procedures were not followed for 12 of the 15 reviewed
cases especially in the area of issuance of warning letters. During the implementation of the
revised procedures for interlock cases, the manual review of interlock data for over 5,300
program participants resulted in an increase in case processing time. As such, the issuance of
correspondence pertaining to interlock violations was moderately delayed. This issue was
largely addressed following the implementation of the Administration’s new Interlock
Monitoring System (IMS) on November 7, 2008. Now, all data is received electronically from
1

--- Page 17 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Follow Up Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2004 to November 30, 2006
the Ignition Interlock Vendors, reviewed upon acceptance and pertinent correspondence issued to
the customer.1
In addition, a portion of the interlock correspondence referenced in the report provided violation
information for more than one program monitoring period. This resulted in participants being
informed of multiple periods of violations in one correspondence. This issue was addressed
through a memorandum to IIP staff in April of 2008. This memo clarified that a participant
should receive a separate correspondence for each monitoring period where a violation was
recorded.
2. We will continue to flag individuals in the program so we can notify the IIP unit of possible
violations of the program.
3. We will continue to monitor court order participants and notify DDP of the results of the
monitoring.
4. In regards to the supervisor audit review, we would like to note that in five of the eight cases,
comments provided by the reviewing manager to IIP staff were intended to highlight appropriate
action to be taken at the next review of that participant’s case. As such, all recorded comments
may not have been fully completed at the time of review by Legislative Audit staff.
1
Auditor’s Comment: MVA’s response refers to an automated Interlock monitoring system which was
implemented in November 2008. Our follow‐up review did not include an evaluation of this system
because it was implemented after our review had been completed. Accordingly, it will be evaluated
during our next fiscal compliance audit of MVA.
2

--- Page 18 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Follow Up Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2004 to November 30, 2006
Prior Finding 2
MVA did not ensure that individuals who were assigned to the IIP by the Medical Advisory
Board (MAB) had the device installed and MVA did not have procedures to ensure that it
was notified of all violations.
Prior Report Recommendation 2
1. We recommend that MVA establish procedures to ensure that the interlock device is installed
in the vehicles of all individuals assigned to the IIP by MAB and that it take appropriate follow-
up action when individuals fail to have the interlock devices installed, as required.
2. We also recommend that MVA establish procedures to ensure that it receives, from the
applicable vendor, a monthly report of interlock activity for each enrollee.
Status - Minimal Progress
Follow-up Response:
1. The MVA diligently followed through with our response to the recommended improvements
and is providing the following status update for this audit cite.
In the 2007 Legislative Audit Report, the MVA indicated that it would establish a process for the
follow-up of individuals referred by the MAB who fail to have the interlock device installed
within 30 days. Subsequent to that report, a process was established whereby the case is
monitored through the IIP’s existing Document Workflow System. It is important to note that
numerous factors (lack of a vehicle, outstanding suspensions, etc.) can impact why an individual
may not have a device installed within 30 days of referral by the Medical Advisory Board. In
addition, policies and procedures currently exist that prevent an individual from obtaining a
license, or accruing credit for their interlock restriction, until both the device is installed and the
restricted license issued. This practice is meant to deter the inadvertent issuance of a restricted
or unrestricted license.
The MVA believed that the process changes, which were implemented, addressed the original
audit recommendation. Based on discussions with the auditors during the follow-up review, the
MVA agreed to and implemented additional procedures in September of 2008 to establish
specific periods at which the Administration would correspond with the customer.
2. Finally, comment was made regarding the failure of the IIP to ensure that all vendor reports
are received from interlock program providers. While the Administration does not contest that
previously some vendor reports may not have been provided to the MVA, significant effort has
been made to correct this issue. The original response provided by the MVA stated that the
3

--- Page 19 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Follow Up Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2004 to November 30, 2006
current process for ensuring receipt of these reports relies completely on manual verification for
the more than 5,300 participants each month. In order to improve the reliability of this process,
an automated data and monitoring system was developed to record the receipt of reports.
Effective November 7, 2008, the Administration activated the Interlock Monitoring System, an
automated business system capable of verifying receipt of vendor reports and providing
appropriate notification when a report was not provided. In addition, the system is able to
initiate a review of interlock device data, and provide notification to the customer should a
violation of program rules occur. The MVA also promulgated regulations governing the
business rules of the program for both vendors and participants. These regulations became final
on November 3, 2008. The MVA believes that the effort and progress of the IIP monitoring
system, one of the first fully automated systems in the country, should be considered in the status
of this audit cite.2
2
Auditor’s Comment: MVA’s response refers to an automated Interlock monitoring system which was
implemented in November 2008. Our follow‐up review did not include an evaluation of this system
because it was implemented after our review had been completed. Accordingly, it will be evaluated
during our next fiscal compliance audit of MVA.
4

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Follow Up Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2004 to November 30, 2006
Prior Finding 16
Sensitive personal and financial information of eMVA Store customers was unnecessarily
stored in clear text on eMVA Store related servers.
Prior Report Recommendation 16
We recommend that MVA work with its service provider to ensure that customers’ sensitive
information is adequately secured. Specifically, the service provider should remove existing
sensitive customer information from its systems or should encrypt and appropriately protect all
such sensitive information and/or retain only partial information.
Status - In Progress
Follow-up Response:
On July 30, 2008, the service provider implemented a process to encrypt all necessary files and
logs and to remove all unnecessary files and logs. The encryption key was hard coded into the
application, which is on a separate server behind the external firewall and within the DMZ.
The customer names and associated drivers license numbers mentioned above are stored in a
database table on a server that is not directly accessible from the Internet. MVA is currently
testing the use of a third party encryption product to encrypt the contents of the database server.
If successful, the product will be applied to the production server mid-January, 2009.
5

--- Page 21 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Motor Vehicle Administration
Follow Up Audit Responses
Report Period January 1, 2004 to November 30, 2006
MVA E-commerce
Prior Finding 21
Controls over the use of a third party to process eMVA Store credit card payments were
inadequate.
Prior Report Recommendation 21
1. We recommended that MVA use separate accounts for application (that is, credit card)
processing and for service management.
2. Additionally, we recommend that the service management and application processing
accounts and passwords not be stored on a publicly accessible server or in clear text.
3. We also recommend that MVA notify the third-party firm processing credit cards of the
specific Internet addresses that should have access to the service management account.
4. Finally, we recommend that MVA amend the service management option to prevent the
processing of refunds for the eMVA Store.
Status - Minimal Progress
Follow-up Response:
1. The MVA has established separate third party service provider accounts for application
(credit card) transaction processing and service management.
2. The application processing credentials needed by the application to process PayPal
transactions has now been encoded and is not readable without decoding. The decoding logic
was written into the application, which resides on a separate server.
3. As of July 30, 2008, access to both Pay Pal service and management accounts are restricted to
specific IP addresses. MVA did provide specific IP addresses to the third party vendor. The third
party vendor created separate application and service management accounts and then restricted
the application account access to specific IP addresses.
4. As of July 30, 2008, the role of the service management account has been modified to
completely disallow refunds.
6

--- Page 22 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Audit Manager
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Terry S. Gibson
Senior Auditor
Albert E. Schmidt, CPA
Information Systems Senior Auditor
David O. Mauriello
Staff Auditor