Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2017
Date: 01/24/2018
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3bcc9d72404c150ab3
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:01:59.544771
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2017
January 2018
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 4
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 5
Findings 6
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1 – Federal fund revenues totaling approximately $6.8 million 7
recorded by one agency at fiscal year-end are not likely to be recovered.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2 – One agency improperly recorded expenditures totaling 8
$528,000 to retain general fund appropriations for the procurement of
future goods and services.
Encumbrances
Finding 3 – One agency improperly encumbered $931,000 in 8
unused State grant funds that should have been reverted to the State’s
General Fund at year-end.
Deferred Revenues
Finding 4 – One agency improperly deferred special fund revenues 9
totaling $2.8 million.
Other Liabilities
Finding 5 – Three agencies or departments reported a total of $61.7 10
million in unprovided for general fund payables or other general fund
liabilities as of June 30, 2017, although funding appears available for
$8.9 million of the amount reported by one agency.
Finding 6 – One agency underreported its unprovided for general fund 11
payables to the General Accounting Division by $2.6 million.
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2017 Closeout Review Findings by 13
State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of June 30, 2017 Unprovided for General Fund 14
Payables and Other Liabilities Reported to the General Accounting
Division
3

--- Page 6 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closeout transactions that have not been previously recorded in the
State’s accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR).
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the CAFR. In its
audit report dated December 15, 2017, applicable to the fiscal year ended June 30,
2017, the firm stated that the State’s financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position of the State of Maryland as of
June 30, 2017, and the respective changes in the financial position and cash flows,
for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (referred to as GAAP).
The State’s CAFR states that, on a budgetary basis, the General Fund had an
unencumbered balance of approximately $258.6 million as of June 30, 2017. This
represents a decrease of approximately $125.9 million from the balance reported
at the preceding fiscal year-end ($384.5 million). The CAFR also states that the
State Reserve (primarily the Revenue Stabilization Account) balance totaled
$861.5 million as of June 30, 2017.
The budgetary General Fund balance does not reflect the effect of year-end
GAAP adjustments made to the State’s financial statements that were prepared on
a modified accrual basis of accounting. Certain GAAP adjustments, if recognized
on the budgetary basis, would have reduced the unencumbered budgetary General
Fund balance of $258.6 million. For example, two GAAP adjustments reduced
the Fund balance by $1.1 billion for income tax collections that that are owed to
local jurisdictions as of June 30, 2017. These adjustments were a total of $290.3
million greater than similar adjustments made for the fiscal year 2016 CAFR.
Other GAAP adjustments totaling $61.7 million were made for general fund
liabilities incurred by State agencies during fiscal year 2017 for which general
fund appropriations were not available to finance the expenditures at the time the
adjustments were reported (see Exhibit 2).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2017. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2017, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies and to determine if other significant liabilities existed at fiscal year-end.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions, based on our
assessment of risk and materiality, for 18 Departments and independent agencies
to ascertain if the transactions were properly supported and made in accordance
with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies and to determine
if other significant liabilities existed at fiscal year-end. We reviewed, on a limited
basis, transactions processed subsequent to June 30, 2017 to determine if the
transactions were properly recorded (such as charged or credited to the proper
fiscal year).
As part of our current review, we contacted various officials of State agencies.
Our review excluded public colleges and universities and transactions processed
through the Transportation Trust Fund because the related financial activity does
not involve the State’s General Fund and/or because agencies have the authority
to retain unspent funds at year-end. Our conclusions for the aforementioned
objective are contained on page 7 of this report.
We also assessed the status of the six issues (appearing in five findings) identified
in our January 25, 2017 report entitled Statewide Review of Budget Closeout
Transactions for Fiscal Year 2016. We determined four of the six issues were
resolved. The remaining two issues are repeated in this report (see Exhibit 1).
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. We advised the appropriate agencies of our findings. Formal responses
were not requested since this report contains no recommendations. Our fieldwork
was conducted during the period from October 2017 to January 2018.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that five departments or agencies were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions were not properly recorded, could not be
substantiated, or did not comply with budget closeout requirements. Additionally,
we determined that three agencies or departments had significant payables or
liabilities at June 30, 2017 that may require general funds.
Revenue Transactions
One agency recorded unsubstantiated revenues to offset federal fund deficits.
Specifically, the agency recorded federal fund revenues totaling approximately
$6.8 million to cover expenditures even though the revenues are not likely to be
recovered. To the extent these funds are not received, general funds will likely be
required to eliminate the deficits resulting from these transactions.
Expenditure Transactions
One agency improperly recorded general fund expenditures totaling $528,000 to
retain the related general fund appropriation. Specifically, the expenditures
recorded did not represent fiscal year 2017 expenditures that had not been paid as
of the fiscal year-end, but were instead recorded to retain appropriations for the
future procurement of goods or services.
Encumbrances
One agency improperly encumbered $931,000 in unused State grant funds that
should have been reverted to the General Fund at the close of fiscal year 2017.
Deferred Revenues
One agency improperly deferred special fund revenues totaling $2.8 million rather
than recording accrued expenditures or encumbrances to retain the funds or
reverting the funds to the General Fund.
Other Liabilities
Three State agencies or departments reported a total of $61.7 million in
unprovided for general fund payables or other general fund liabilities as of June
30, 2017. For example, one agency, which had a similar issue in our two
preceding closeout reports, may require general funds of approximately $34.2
million to cover an unfunded liability attributable to the disallowance of certain
claims. Furthermore, one other department had underreported its unprovided for
6

--- Page 9 ---
general fund payables, as it only reported approximately $900,000, but should
have reported an additional $2.6 million.
According to an opinion of the Attorney General, unprovided for payables are not
a violation of State law if the General Assembly enacts a budget bill for the
subsequent year containing an appropriation that can be used to fund these
expenditures.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
Federal fund revenues totaling approximately $6.8 million recorded by one
agency at fiscal year-end are not likely to be recovered.
Analysis
The Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation (DLLR) had
unsubstantiated accrued federal fund revenues totaling $6.8 million. These
accrued revenues related to the recovery of DLLR’s indirect costs to administer
certain federal programs. Consequently, general funds (such as a deficiency
appropriation) may be needed to the extent federal funds are not available for
DLLR’s indirect costs.
Accrued federal fund revenues totaling $10.1 million were reported by DLLR
during the fiscal year 2017 closing process for indirect cost recoveries related to
fiscal years 2014 through 2017. However, DLLR could not initially provide
documentation supporting how this amount was derived. Subsequent to our
inquiries, DLLR researched its grant activity and made correcting accounting
entries that increased the amount of accrued federal funds for indirect costs due
by $2 million. These correcting entries related to a portion of $3.5 million in
federal funds held by DLLR but not yet distributed. DLLR originally believed
this $3.5 million related to prior year indirect cost recoveries and reduced the
federal funds revenue accrual by that amount. Subsequently, DLLR determined
that $2 million of the $3.5 million was unrelated to indirect costs and
consequently, the total amount of indirect costs due for reimbursement should
have been $12.1 million as of June 30, 2017.
Based on information received from the U.S. Department of Labor (USDL), $6.8
million of the $12.1 million accrued federal fund indirect cost revenues will likely
7

--- Page 10 ---
not be reimbursed (USDL correspondence does indicate that reimbursement for
$5.3 million of these costs should be obtained by DLLR).
The recordation of unsubstantiated federal fund revenues was previously
disclosed in our Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal
Year 2016 dated January 25, 2017 and our fiscal compliance audit report of the
DLLR’s Office of the Secretary dated August 7, 2017.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2
One agency improperly recorded expenditures totaling $528,000 in order to
retain general fund appropriations for the future procurement of goods and
services.
Analysis
The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) improperly recorded general
fund expenditure accruals totaling $528,000. This practice violated GAD’s yearly
closing instructions since the expenditure accruals did not represent actual
expenditures for goods or services received during fiscal year 2017 that remained
outstanding (or unpaid) as of fiscal year-end. Documentation provided by MDOA
management indicated the intended uses for the related appropriations were to
procure goods and services in future fiscal years for operational needs, such as a
vehicle, office furniture, equipment and software, as well as potential future
moving expenses. Consequently, the unspent appropriation should have been
cancelled with the related funds being reverted to the State’s General Fund.
Encumbrances
Finding 3
One agency improperly encumbered $931,000 in unused State grant funds
that should have been reverted to the State’s General Fund at year-end.
Analysis
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) improperly
encumbered unused State grant funds totaling $931,000 that should have been
reverted to the General Fund. State grant funds awarded to local school systems
that were subsequently returned to MSDE were not properly accounted for and
reverted as part of the fiscal year 2017 closing process.
8

--- Page 11 ---
We were advised by MSDE management that these returned funds, which were
received prior to the end of the fiscal year, were most likely due to MSDE audit
findings and in the past would have been recorded as revenue so the funds would
be reverted immediately and not create an available grant balance. However, the
funds returned were instead recorded as a reduction of expenditures for the
respective grants and improperly increased the grant balance by the amount of
funds returned, which were then encumbered at fiscal year-end. These
encumbrances were not cancelled prior to the completion of the fiscal year closing
process resulting in the related unspent appropriation being improperly retained.
Audits are conducted by MSDE to review the propriety of expenditures that were
reimbursed with the related grant funds. Grant funds that were paid to reimburse
any ineligible expenditures identified through these audits were required to be
returned to MSDE.
During fiscal year 2018, MSDE took action to cancel most of these encumbrances
but, as of January 4, 2018, the unspent general fund appropriation had not been
cancelled.
Deferred Revenues
Finding 4
One agency improperly deferred special fund revenues totaling $2.8 million.
Analysis
The Department of General Services (DGS) recorded special fund deferred
revenues totaling approximately $2.8 million, but could not provide supporting
documentation to justify the recordation as deferred revenue. DGS management
was able to provide explanations for some of these funds to be retained at year-
end (such as unpaid obligations related to fiscal year 2017); however, none of the
explanations justified these amounts being recorded as deferred revenues. GAD
fiscal year-end closing instructions state that deferred revenue should be recorded
only when revenue has been collected in the fiscal year, but will not be earned and
recognized until the next fiscal year. The instructions further require that all fund
balances carried over to the next fiscal year be done so in accordance with State
statute, regulation, or policy.
Subsequent to our inquiries, DGS determined that certain of these transactions
related to the payment of fiscal year 2017 obligations ($1.5 million) which, if true,
should have been reported as an accrual or encumbrance, and that certain amounts
($1.3 million) should have been reverted to the General Fund.
9

--- Page 12 ---
For example, $1.6 million of these deferred revenues related to proceeds from its
sale of surplus State property. State law does not specify that special fund
revenues from these sales proceeds are to be retained in a non-lapsing fund, nor
dedicate the revenues collected for any specific purpose. Accordingly, DGS did
not have legal authority to retain the sales revenues (in excess of related charges
incurred) collected during the year. Instead of reverting these to the General
Fund, DGS retained the sales proceeds by classifying them as deferred revenues.
DGS management explained the proceeds were recorded as deferred revenue due
to the potential refund of some of these proceeds in fiscal year 2018; the
transactions were subsequently resolved and approximately $900,000 is to be
reverted to the State’s General Fund.
Other Liabilities
Finding 5
Three agencies or departments reported a total of $61.7 million in
unprovided for general fund payables or other general fund liabilities as of
June 30, 2017, although funding appears to be available for $8.9 million of
the amount reported by one agency.
Analysis
Three agencies or departments reported a total of $61.7 million in unprovided for
general fund payables or other general fund liabilities as of June 30, 2017 (see
Exhibit 2), although funding appears to be available for $8.9 million of the
amount reported by one agency. With the exception of the $8.9 million, the
expenditures related to these liabilities may have to be funded with subsequent
year appropriations (or through a deficiency appropriation).
For example, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) reported unprovided
for general fund payables and other general fund liabilities totaling $58.2 million
at June 30, 2017, including a liability to the federal government of approximately
$34.2 million for disallowed claims related to Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA) residential add-on services. Funding sources to pay this
liability have not been identified. MDH reported the potential liability to GAD
and, GAD recorded a decrease to the General Fund in the State’s fiscal year 2017
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report to recognize these disallowances. The
claims were disallowed by the federal Department of Health and Human Services
– Office of the Inspector General in its June 2015 audit report, which
recommended that DDA refund the overbilled amount to the federal government.
DDA is disputing the disallowed claims. These disallowed federal fund claims
were also commented upon in our two preceding budgetary closeout reports.
10

--- Page 13 ---
MDH also reported a $24.0 million liability to GAD related to estimated
unprovided for general fund payables at fiscal year-end. Specifically, MDH
indicated that based on its estimates, general fund appropriations would not be
sufficient to cover outstanding Medicaid provider reimbursements for claims
incurred during fiscal year 2017. The $24.0 million payable consisted of two
Medical Care Programs Administration programs related to the reimbursement
of Medicaid claims for medical providers ($8.9 million) and for behavioral health
providers ($15.1 million), which are accounted for separately. Our review
disclosed that, based on current Medicaid expenditure projections (as of
December 2017), sufficient appropriations were available at year-end to fund any
outstanding fiscal year 2017 claims by medical providers and that the $8.9 million
unprovided for payable, originally projected, will not occur. This situation has
been confirmed by GAD. However, there is still projected to be an unprovided
for payable for claims related to the reimbursement of behavioral health
providers. Consequently, general funds (such as a deficiency appropriation) may
be needed to cover any outstanding fiscal year 2017 claims for this program.
Finding 6
One agency underreported its unprovided for general fund payables to the
General Accounting Division by $2.6 million.
Analysis
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) did not report to GAD an
unprovided for general fund payable totaling approximately $2.6 million, as
required by the GAD fiscal year-end closing instructions. Specifically, DoIT only
reported approximately $900,000 in unprovided for payables at year-end;
however, we determined that DoIT’s actual unprovided for payables were
underreported.
The additional $2.6 million in unprovided for general fund payables related to a
retroactive compensation payment that was approved by the Board of Public
Works (BPW) on July 26, 2017 for services provided in connection with
eMarylandMarketplace, the State’s online procurement system, for the period
from January 2016 through July 2017. DoIT management explained that since
the compensation to be paid to the vendor was not finalized until July 2017, they
considered the payment to be a fiscal year 2018 expenditure. Therefore, it did not
consider it necessary to report the unprovided for payable as required by the
closing procedures. However, according to our review of available supporting
documentation from the vendor, the total payment amount approved by BPW of
approximately $3.6 million related to services provided prior to June 30, 2017.
Since DoIT had received approximately $1.0 million in related revenues to
11

--- Page 14 ---
partially offset the cost of this compensation payment, a general fund
appropriation (or a deficiency appropriation) may be required to cover the
remaining $2.6 million of these fiscal year 2017 expenditures.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2017 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Finding
Agency Finding Description
Number
1* Recovery of $6.8 million in recorded
Department of Labor,
federal fund revenues is not likely.
Licensing, and Regulation
2 Expenditure accruals totaling $528,000
were recorded to retain general fund
Department of Aging appropriations for the procurement of
future goods and services.
3 Unused State grant funds totaling $931,000
Maryland State were improperly encumbered instead of
Department of Education being reverted to the State’s General Fund.
4 Special fund revenues totaling
Department of General approximately $2.8 million were
Services improperly recorded.
5* Unprovided for general fund payables and
liabilities of approximately $52.8 million
Maryland Department of
may have to be funded with State general
Health
funds.
6 An unprovided for general fund payable
Department of Information
totaling $2.6 million was not reported, as
Technology
required.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
13

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of June 30, 2017 Unprovided for General Fund Payables
and Other Liabilities Reported to the General Accounting
Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Unprovided for General
Fund Payables / Other
Liabilities
As of June 30, 2017
Maryland Department of Health $58,214,000
Office of the Public Defender 2,580,000
Department of Information Technology 903,000
Total $61,697,000
14

--- Page 17 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Audit Managers
Tu N. Vuong, CPA
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditors
Christopher J. Fowler
Charles H. Hinds IV, CPA
James J. Podhorniak, CPA, CFE
Monica G. Pressley
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors