Title: St. Mary's County Public Schools
Date: 09/21/2015
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d38cc9d72404c150a36
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:48:15.253225
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
May 2021
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. (Senate Chair) Delegate Carol L. Krimm (House Chair)
Senator Malcolm L. Augustine Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Adelaide C. Eckardt Delegate Mark S. Chang
Senator George C. Edwards Delegate Nicholas P. Charles II
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate Keith E. Haynes
Senator Benjamin F. Kramer Delegate David Moon
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate April R. Rose
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Geraldine Valentino-Smith
Senator Craig J. Zucker One Vacancy
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 ꞏ 301-970-5900 ꞏ 1-877-486-9964 (Toll Free in Maryland)
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 ꞏ 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 17, 2021
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D., Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Carol L. Krimm, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the St. Mary’s
County Public Schools (SMCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The
objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether SMCPS’ procedures and controls
were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its
policies provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
Our audit disclosed a limited number of reportable conditions. Specifically, we
identified certain security and control risks that existed within SMCPS’ computer
network. For example, sensitive personally identifiable information was
maintained without adequate safeguards and identification, and its computer
network was not properly secured. In this regard, certain servers were located in
SMCPS’ internal network rather than being isolated in a separate protected zone
to minimize security risks.
In addition, SMCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive
and were not always consistently used when obtaining goods and services under
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements. Furthermore, we
identified certain practices, which, if implemented, could provide opportunities
for achieving cost savings in student transportation. Specifically, we found that
certain components of the payments to bus contractors did not reflect actual costs
or could not be supported, resulting in potentially higher payments than necessary
for student transportation services.

--- Page 4 ---
Finally, based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 11 of the 14
findings contained in our preceding audit report. We call your attention to our
determination that SMCPS satisfactorily addressed 10 of the 11 prior findings we
reviewed. The remaining finding is repeated in this report.
We conducted our audit fieldwork from April 20, 2020 to December 28, 2020.
Our fieldwork was conducted during a period in which the local education
agencies were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis. Specifically,
beginning on March 16, 2020, the State Superintendent of Schools decided to
close school and administrative buildings to employees and the public for a two-
week period. This was eventually extended for the remainder of the 2019-2020
school year with limited access by certain employees. All SMCPS facilities were
open during the entire period of our fieldwork and, as a result, the objectives and
scope of our audit were not impacted. To the extent that the COVID-19 crisis
continues to impact SMCPS operations, certain recommendations in this report
may need to be adjusted to ensure proper controls under the modified operations.
SMCPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
reviewed the response and noted general agreement to our findings and related
recommendations, and while there are other aspects of SMCPS’ response which
will require further clarification, we do not anticipate these will require the Joint
Audit and Evaluation Committee’s attention to resolve. Finally, we have edited
SMCPS’ response to remove certain vendor names or products and certain
detailed information regarding information systems security, as allowed by our
policy.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
SMCPS and its willingness to address the audit issues and to implement
appropriate corrective actions.
Respectfully submitted,
Gregory A. Hook, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 6
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Federal Funds 10
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – St. Mary’s County Public School’s (SMCPS) procurement 11
policies did not incorporate certain requirements of State law and
recognized best practices when participating in intergovernmental
cooperative purchasing agreements.
Human Resources and Payroll 13
Equipment Control and Accountability 14
Information Technology
Finding 2 – Sensitive personally identifiable information was 15
maintained without adequate safeguards and being identified.
Finding 3 – Certain servers were improperly located within the internal 15
network, and security settings for SMCPS’ password controls for
network authentication were not adequate.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 16
Transportation Services
 Finding 4 – Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors did not 18
reflect actual costs or could not be supported resulting in potentially
higher payments than necessary for student transportation services.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Food Services 19
School Board Oversight 19
Management of Other Risks 20
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 22
Agency Response Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), St. Mary’s County Public Schools (SMCPS)
ranks 12th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland.
Fiscal year 2020 full-time student enrollment was 18,083 students. SMCPS had
28 schools, consisting of 18 elementary, 4 middle schools, 3 high schools, and 3
other types of schools (including alternative, vocational, and charter school).
Funding
SMCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from the State, St. Mary’s
County, and the federal government. According to SMCPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $277.8 million in
fiscal year 2020; including approximately $136.7 million from the State. See
Figure 1 below for SMCPS’ revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year
2020 according to its audited financial statements.
Figure 1
SMCPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2020
Federal
Miscellaneous
$1,066
$436
7%
3%
State
Local
$7,558
$6,303
49%
41%
Source: SMCPS’ Fiscal Year 2020 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
5

--- Page 8 ---
Expenditures
According to SMCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2020 expenditures
were approximately $274.4 million. The largest expenditure category was
salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 76
percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2020. According to MSDE
records, during the 2019-2020 school year, SMCPS had 2,190 full-time
equivalent positions, which consisted of 1,542 instructional and 648 non-
instructional positions. Instruction accounted for over half of SMCPS’
expenditures on a categorical basis (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
SMCPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2020
(amounts in millions)
Source: SMCPS’ Fiscal Year 2020 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
SMCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. In accordance with State law,
MSDE provides considerable oversight of SMCPS through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations. MSDE
also works with SMCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal
law. The St. Mary’s County government also exercises authority over SMCPS
primarily through the review and approval of SMCPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
6

--- Page 9 ---
External Audits
SMCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. The firm performs procedures to verify the amounts
and disclosures in the financial statements. The firm also evaluates the
appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management. In the related audit reports, the firm
stated that the financial statements presented fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of SMCPS as of June 30, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, and
2020 and the changes in its financial position and, where applicable, its cash
flows for the years then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
SMCPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of SMCPS’ compliance
with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements and other
matters. This report is an integral part of the annual independent audited financial
statements. Furthermore, the accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
SMCPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide
assurance to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place,
and the entity is generally in compliance with certain program requirements.
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2015 through 2020, and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2019 audits, which was the latest available during our audit
fieldwork.
Certain work of the independent certified public accounting firm, which we
determined was reliable, covered areas included in the scope of our audit. As a
result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the following areas:
 Accounts receivables
 Federal grant activity
The independent accounting firm did not disclose any material deficiencies in
these areas.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 11 of the 14
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated September 21, 2015. We
determined that SMCPS satisfactorily addressed 10 of these findings. The
remaining finding is repeated in this report, as noted in the following figure.
Figure 3
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
SMCPS did not adequately restrict user’s capabilities on its
Finding 1 Not repeated
automated procurement and accounts payable system.
Contracts were not always awarded through competitive
Finding 2 procurements and contract billings were not always properly Not repeated
verified.
Human resources and payroll system user capabilities were
Finding 3 not adequately monitored and restricted and independent Not repeated
documented reviews of transactions were not performed.
SMCPS equipment policies were not comprehensive and
Not repeated
Finding 4 proper controls and recordkeeping were not established over
(Not followed up on)
sensitive equipment.
Controls over accounts, passwords, database access and
Finding 5 Not repeated
logging, and security monitoring were not sufficient.
Finding 6 The SMCPS computer network was not adequately secured. Not repeated
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected
Finding 7 Not repeated
against malware.
SMCPS did not periodically perform a system-wide analysis
Finding 8 of bus routes and did not use bus capacities to maximize the Not repeated
efficiency of its bus routes.
Certain SMCPS payments to bus contractors did not consider Repeated
Finding 9
market conditions, actual costs, or available discounts. (Current Finding 4)
Internal controls over payments to bus contractors were not
Finding 10 Not repeated
adequate.
Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated as
Not repeated
Finding 11 transactions could be voided by cashiers without
(Not followed up on)
independent review or approval.
SMCPS did not perform documented independent Not repeated
Finding 12
verifications of validated deposits. (Not followed up on)
SMCPS did not competitively bid healthcare contracts for
Finding 13 administrative services and stop loss coverage and did not Not repeated
maintain copies of the annual agreements.
SMCPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for
Finding 14 Not repeated
employee and retiree healthcare costs.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
St. Mary’s County Public Schools (SMCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from the State, St. Mary’s County, and the federal government.
According to SMCPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled approximately $277.8 million in fiscal year 2020; including approximately
$136.7 million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the SMCPS financial statements and the objectives
of our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this work to
provide audit coverage for accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school, and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2020, school
activity collections totaled $2.6 million and the June 30, 2020 fund balance was
$1.3 million.
SMCPS’ Board of Education (the Board) has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure
that school activity funds were used only for intended purposes. Finance
Department employees conducted school activity fund reviews to determine
compliance with the School Activity Funds Accounting Manual by testing
collections and disbursements, and ensuring that funds have been properly
accounted for. These internal school activity fund reviews are performed at all
schools annually and the related findings are discussed with school principals and
bookkeepers. The resultant reports we reviewed, disclosed that internal controls
weaknesses were not prevalent and that control weaknesses at certain schools
were addressed by school management.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of others to provide audit coverage in this area
including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and safeguarding
of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing. Specifically, we considered
9

--- Page 12 ---
the work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm and
reviews performed by SMCPS’ Finance Department.
Federal Funds
Background
SMCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to SMCPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
2020 expenditures totaled $19.4 million, not including federally funded fee-for-
service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent certified public
accounting firm that conducted the Single Audit of SMCPS’ federal grants and
the objectives of our audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on
SMCPS compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure’s impact on compliance and
audited the required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes
claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2015 to 2020.
The related report stated that SMCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to internal
controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal programs, the
auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
SMCPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to SMCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
The Maryland State Department of Education’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring
Team issued a report in September 2019 of the results of its review of 41 student
case files for 71 criteria (including the correct billing of Medicaid for eligible
services). The report found that SMCPS was 100 percent compliant with 64
criteria and between 91 to 97 percent compliant with the remaining criteria.
According to SMCPS records, fiscal year 2020 state and federal reimbursements
for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $1.8 million.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of Medicaid subsidized services.
We relied on the work of the independent certified public accounting firm that
conducted the Single Audits for all other work in the federal funds area, including
policies, procedures, and controls with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and SMCPS records, disbursements,
excluding payroll, totaled $65.0 million during fiscal year 2020. SMCPS uses an
automated system for purchases and disbursements. Requisitions are created in
the system by departments and are subject to on-line departmental and purchasing
department approvals. Purchase orders are prepared on the system by the
purchasing department based on the approved requisitions. The purchasing
department also generally handles the solicitation, bid evaluation, and
establishment of contracts. The receipt of goods and services is entered into the
automated system by the receiving school or department. Payments are then
processed by the Finance Department through the automated system that matches
receiving reports to appropriate purchasing documents and then prints vendor
checks and posts the payment to the financial records.
SMCPS’ written procurement policies require that procurements exceeding
$50,000 be competitively bid in accordance with Section 5-112 of the Education
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Contracts and agreements exceeding
$50,000 are to be approved by the Board.
Finding 1
SMCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain requirements of
State law and recognized best practices when participating in
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA).
Analysis
SMCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain requirements of State
law and recognized best practices, and SMCPS did not always perform the
requirements and certain best practices when evaluating the merits of participating
in an ICPA. Specifically, the following statutory requirement and critical best
practices were not included in SMCPS’ policies, and the requirements of State
law and certain of these best practices were not always consistently used when
obtaining goods and services under an ICPA.
11

--- Page 14 ---
 Prepare a written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA, as required
by State law
 Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations
 Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs
 Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties
 Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly advertised
and obtain originating agency’s competitive procurement documentation
(including public advertisements and proposal evaluations)
 Verify terms, scope of services, specifications, and price meet SMCPS
needs
 Execute an addendum of participation with the lead contract agency and
remove or incorporate necessary local terms and conditions
 Obtain a copy of the ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification
We tested SMCPS’ participation in nine ICPAs during fiscal years 2019 and 2020
with contract awards totaling approximately $5.6 million. Our review disclosed
that SMCPS did not have a written assessment of the benefits of using an ICPA
for any of the ICPAs tested, as required by State law. In addition, analyzing the
costs of conducting competitive solicitations was not performed for eight of the
ICPAs and researching, comparing, and evaluating other available ICPAs was not
performed for six of the ICPAs tested. Furthermore, verifying that the ICPA was
competitively bid and publicly advertised was not performed for five of the
ICPAs.
Incorporating the statutory requirement and best practices into SMCPS policies
could help ensure they are consistently used. In this regard, we did identify
certain critical best practices (allowing utilization by other parties, verifying terms
and scope, executing addendums of participation, obtaining a copy of the ICPA
and related pricing) that were incorporated into all nine of the ICPAs we
reviewed, but were not included in SMCPS’ policies.
State law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is
applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of cooperative purchasing
arrangements or ICPAs only after the using entity has determined (or assessed) in
writing that the use of such arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote
12

--- Page 15 ---
administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental cooperation1. Further,
the Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, ICPA users should ensure that the contract was awarded through a
competitive procurement process, and requires that addendums be executed
documenting their participation and incorporating local required terms and
conditions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that SMCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirement and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies, and ensure that the performance of the requirement
and best practices is documented when evaluating the participation in
ICPAs.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the SMCPS
budget. According to SMCPS’ records, fiscal year 2020 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $209.4 million, representing approximately 76 percent of the total
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2019-2020 school year SMCPS had 2,190 full-time positions, which
consisted of 1,542 instructional positions and 648 non-instructional positions.
SMCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track leave usage, and process and record payroll transactions.
Leave for full time employees is approved by supervisors in a time management
system which is then uploaded to the payroll system to create electronic bi-weekly
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA). As
defined, an ICPA is a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a certain
manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract and at least one
additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can
result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to all
ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article of the Code provides that local education agencies do not need
to conduct competitive procurements for goods and commodities if they use a contract awarded
by public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing organizations and the originating procuring
agency followed public bidding procedures.
13

--- Page 16 ---
time records, and any adjustments are processed by central payroll personnel.
Manual timesheets are used for the remaining employees and approved by
supervisors.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of SMCPS’ internal control over the human resources and payroll areas of
operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to SMCPS’ notes to the audited financial statements, the undepreciated
value of its capital equipment was $12.6 million as of June 30, 2020. SMCPS
maintains centralized automated records for equipment with a cost of $5,000 or
more (including assets capitalized for financial statement purposes). In addition,
SMCPS’ Department of Information Technology Services maintains inventory
records for all sensitive items that are susceptible to theft such as computers
(laptops, tablets) and small items (cameras, portable tools) regardless of cost.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the equipment area of operations.
Information Technology
Background
SMCPS’ Information Technology Services (ITS) Department maintains and
administers the SMCPS’s computer network, computer operations and
instructional information system applications. SMCPS operates a wide area
network, with internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local
networks to the SMCPS centralized computer resources. ITS also supports the
student information and the financial management systems, which include critical
applications pertaining to student grades, student attendance, budgeting,
purchasing, accounting, accounts payable, payroll, human resources and various
other functions.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 2
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was maintained without
adequate safeguards and being identified.
Analysis
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was maintained without
adequate safeguards and being identified. SMCPS operated a computer system
which contained a significant amount of sensitive PII. As of June 16, 2020, we
noted that this system’s database included a significant number of unique
sensitive information records which were maintained in a manner that made the
information vulnerable to improper disclosure. SMCPS personnel also advised us
that this sensitive PII was not subject to other substantial mitigating security
controls. We did identify numerous employee or system accounts that had access
to this sensitive PII and found such access to be proper.
Furthermore, SMCPS had not performed an inventory of its systems to identify all
stored sensitive PII, determined if it was necessary to retain the PII, and deleted
PII identified as unnecessary. Detailed aspects of this finding were omitted from
this report, however the related detailed information, including a sensitive
information record count, was previously shared with SMCPS for purposes of
implementing the following recommendation.
Best practices as per the State of Maryland Information Technology Security
Manual requires that agencies protect confidential data using adequate safeguards
and/or other substantial mitigating controls.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that SMCPS
a. implement appropriate information security safeguards for its stored
sensitive PII; and
b. perform an annual inventory of all of its systems, identify all sensitive PII,
and delete all unnecessary PII.
Finding 3
Certain servers were improperly located within the internal network, and
security settings for SMCPS’ password controls for network authentication
were not adequate.
Analysis
SMCPS’ computer network had certain insecure elements. We noted two
conditions affecting network security.
15

--- Page 18 ---
 Certain servers were located in the SMCPS internal network rather than being
isolated in a separate protected network zone to minimize security risks.
These servers, by their nature and location, created improper security risk for
the internal network. Best practices in the State of Maryland Information
Technology Security Manual include placing such servers in an external
protected zone to protect those servers as well as the entity’s internal network.
Detailed aspects of this finding were omitted from this report; however, the
related information was previously shared with SMCPS for the purposes of
implementing appropriate corrective actions.
 Certain password control settings defined for authenticating SMCPS network
users were not in accordance with best practices as per the State’s Information
Technology Security Manual requirements concerning password length,
history, minimum age and expiration. During our audit work, we noted that
there were approximately 3,800 defined network accounts involved with
either all parts or a portion of this control weakness.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that SMCPS
a. relocate servers, as appropriate, to a separate protected network zone to
limit security exposures to the internal network segment; and
b. establish appropriate password controls over user network
authentication.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
SMCPS employs a staff of 182 employees to maintain 28 schools (including
alternative, vocational, and charter school and a number of other facilities (such as
administrative and support offices). According to its fiscal year 2020 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to SMCPS’ facilities over the next six years are estimated to cost
approximately $101.6 million.
SMCPS Capital Projects Were Competitively Procured and Related
Expenditures Were Properly Supported
Our review of 5 construction-related procurements awarded during fiscal years
2019 and 2020 totaling $17.8 million, disclosed that all 5 contracts were
competitively procured and properly approved by the Board. In addition, our test
of 14 invoices totaling $6.1 million for these contracts disclosed that the invoices
16

--- Page 19 ---
were properly supported and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with
contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
SMCPS has processes in place to promote ongoing facility maintenance and to
minimize energy costs. For example, SMCPS performs preventive maintenance
on its buildings and equipment to prevent emergency repairs. In addition,
SMCPS monitors energy (including electricity and heating) usage and related
costs. SMCPS also has written policies that encourage both students and
employees to be aware of and limit their energy use. SMCPS also makes use of
solar alternative energy sources.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of SMCPS’ internal control over the facilities construction, renovation, and
maintenance financial-related areas of operations reviewed. Our audit also did
not disclose any significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws,
rules, or regulations.
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE), SMCPS has approximately 17,900 students eligible to receive student
transportation service. SMCPS reported that 2.9 million route miles were traveled
to transport students for the 2019-2020 school year. These students were
transported using 191 contractor-owned buses and 13 system-owned buses.
According to SMCPS financial records, fiscal year 2019 transportation costs
totaled $17.2 million with $14.0 million (81 percent) representing payments for
the contracted bus services.
SMCPS bus contracts are for an initial 6-year term subject to renewal for an
additional 6-year term to last the 12-year useful life of the bus. The contracts can
be terminated by the Board at its discretion for cause by giving 30 days written
notice, or by either party at the end of the school year for any reason by giving
written notice of 30 days. Payments to bus contractors consist of several
components including hourly reimbursements for drivers, a per-mile maintenance
fee, and fuel costs. Additional components include a per-vehicle allotment (PVA)
intended as reimbursement for the cost of purchasing a bus and a flat rate for
17

--- Page 20 ---
return on investment, reimbursement of certain administrative costs (such as
overhead, insurance, bus driver training, physicals, and drug testing).
Finding 4
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors did not reflect actual
costs or could not be supported resulting in potentially higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
Analysis
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors did not reflect actual costs or
could not be supported resulting in potentially higher payments than necessary for
student transportation services.
 SMCPS could not support the appropriateness of the estimated $3.2 million it
paid to bus contractors for per-mile bus maintenance costs ($0.85 per mile)
during fiscal year 2019. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding report.
 SMCPS could not document how it determined the reasonableness of
administrative costs of $4,835 per bus paid during fiscal year 2019 which we
estimated totaled $919,000 for all contractors. Since fiscal year 2012, SMCPS
has reimbursed the bus contractors for administrative costs and this amount
has continued to increase. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding report.
 The standard contract language used by SMCPS for its bus contracts did not
include a right to audit provision. Such a provision would allow SMCPS to
verify the contractors’ actual costs of purchasing and maintaining the buses
when negotiating the PVA, hourly reimbursements for drivers, the per-mile
maintenance fee, fuel costs, and the annual administrative fees. The State of
Maryland has established a preference in regulation that all contracts require
contractors to make their records available for audit by authorized
representatives of the State at all reasonable times.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that SMCPS
a. use actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently
derived estimates for establishing contractor rates for per-mile
maintenance costs (repeat);
b. document the reasonableness of the annual administrative costs paid to
contractors (repeat); and
18

--- Page 21 ---
c. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use
it to determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses.
Food Services
Background
According to SMCPS’ audited financial statements, food service operating
expenditures totaled $6.5 million in fiscal year 2020, and were primarily funded
with federal funds totaling $3.6 million and food sales totaling $2.6 million.
According to MSDE records, in fiscal year 2020 SMCPS had 89 food service
positions for its 28 schools, consisting of 82 cafeteria positions and 7
administrative positions.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to the Food Services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
The St. Mary's Board of Education (the Board) is composed of five elected
members and a non-voting student member. As noted in the Background
Information section, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the SMCPS financial statements and federal programs.
The Board has not established any special committees.
SMCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both
Board members and SMCPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (Assistant Superintendent, Deputy Superintendent, General
Counsel, Chief Strategic Officer, Accountability Officer, Directors, and
Principals) by April 30th of each year.
In accordance with the policy, SMCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
19

--- Page 22 ---
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and SMCPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2019 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
SMCPS self-insures its employee and retiree healthcare costs. SMCPS negotiates
contracts with a third-party administrator (TPA) firm for health care claims
processing services for employee and retiree medical, vision, dental, pharmacy
costs, and for stop-loss insurance coverage.
SMCPS pays the TPA a monthly subscription charge based on the number of
participants and their medical coverage, and an administrative fee. The monthly
payment also includes the stop-loss insurance, which indemnifies SMCPS against
health insurance claim amounts that exceed $200,000 per participant per plan year
(as of the 2018-2019 plan year).
Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of SMCPS.
In a year-end settlement process, for the plan year ending June 30th, the TPA nets
the amount of medical claims it paid, and related fees, excess stop-loss amounts
and rebates, against the monthly subscription charges billed to and paid by
SMCPS to determine any excess amount due from or to be reimbursed to either
party.
SMCPS contracts with two consultants to help manage the health plans. One
consultant performs data analysis of the health services utilization and costs,
provides recommendations on potential rate changes, and evaluates the merits of
the health plan proposals. The other consultant audits medical claims processed
by the TPA for compliance with the health plans, reconciles paid claims to the
year-end settlements, and determines the reasonableness of stop-loss costs paid by
the TPA.
As of December 1, 2020, SMCPS management advised that health insurance
benefits were provided to approximately 5,678 enrolled employees, dependents,
and retirees. According to TPA records, during the 2018-2019 contract year
20

--- Page 23 ---
health care payments totaled $40.9 million, including $1.7 million for
administrative fees and $2.7 million for stop-loss insurance coverage.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to the management of
other risks area of operations reviewed.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the financial management practices of the St. Mary’s County Public Schools
(SMCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State Government
Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained
provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the SMCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the SMCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of SMCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in
accordance with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in
each of these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding audit
report on SMCPS dated September 21, 2015, was limited to those findings that
were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the SMCPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by SMCPS. We also interviewed personnel at
SMCPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
22

--- Page 25 ---
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of SMCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2019 to September 30, 2020. Generally,
transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment, which primarily
considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-
statistical audit sampling was used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, the
results of the tests cannot be used to project those results to the entire population
from which the test items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the
audit, we relied on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that
annually audits SMCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single
Audit, as well as the reviews of student activity funds performed by SMCPS’
Finance Department.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the SMCPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
SMCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to SMCPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
SMCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
23

--- Page 26 ---
We conducted our fieldwork from April 2020 to December 2020. On March 16,
2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic health crisis, the State Superintendent of
Schools decided to close school and administrative buildings to employees and
the public for a two-week period. This was eventually extended for the remainder
of the 2019-2020 school year with limited access by certain employees. All
SMCPS buildings were open during the entire period of our fieldwork, so the
objectives and scope of our audit were not impacted. To the extent that the
COVID-19 crisis continues to impact SMCPS operations, certain
recommendations in this report may need to be adjusted to ensure proper controls
under the modified operations.
The SMCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
Appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section
2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise SMCPS regarding the
results of our review of its response.
24

--- Page 27 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 28 ---
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
SMCPS procurement policies did not incorporate certain requirements of State law and
recognized best practices when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPA).
We recommend that SMCPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory requirement and
other identified and acknowledged best practices into its procurement policies, and ensure
that the performance of the requirement and best practices is documented when evaluating
the participation in ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide The legislative analysis included a checklist of eight items recognized as
additional comments as best practices in evaluating the Intergovernmental Cooperative
deemed necessary. Purchasing Agreements for use by St. Mary’s County Public Schools.
Of which, it was determined that St. Mary’s County Public Schools
consistently performed the following five best practices:
● Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties.
● Verify terms, scope of services, specifications and price met
the entity's needs.
● Execute an addendum of participation with lead contract
agency and remove or incorporate necessary local terms and
conditions.
● Obtain a copy of the ICPA and related price lists for invoice
verification.
● Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and
publicly advertised and obtain originating agency’s
competitive procurement documentation (including public
advertisements and proposal evaluations.)
St. Mary’s County Public Schools strives to continually set our bar high
and conform with nationally established best practices.
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 29 ---
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2021
Please provide details of SMCPS will develop a comprehensive checklist to be completed when
corrective action or obtaining goods or services under an ICPA. This checklist and
explain disagreement. supporting documentation will be maintained in the contract file.
SMCPS will modify the existing Regulation DJC-R (Procurement
Methods) to include reference to the checklist as a mandatory
component of the procurement process when goods or services are being
obtained under an ICPA.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 30 ---
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
Finding 2
Sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) was maintained without adequate
safeguards and being identified.
We recommend that SMCPS
a. implement appropriate information security safeguards for its stored sensitive PII; and
b. perform an annual inventory of all of its systems, identify all sensitive PII, and delete all
unnecessary PII.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide additional With the increased reliance on technology, St. Mary’s County Public
comments as deemed Schools is doing its part to assess the school districts cyber vulnerability.
necessary. St. Mary’s County Public Schools recently, in partnership with the
Maryland Association of Boards of Education Group Insurance Pool, has
engaged in a vulnerability assessment.
Recommendation 2a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of The Department of Information Technology has identified a system to
corrective action or provide automated scans to identify PII on St. Mary’s County Public
explain disagreement. Schools servers. The system will scan for sensitive data, show access
levels, and provide remediation options. Grant funding has been
awarded to support this initiative with a purchase to be made the first of
July 2021 and full implementation to be made by June 30, 2022.
Recommendation 2b Agree Estimated Completion Date: July 1, 2021
Please provide details of Most of the accounts listed are system, software product, and/or
corrective action or accounts used for scheduled tasks for System Administrators. However,
explain disagreement. there are a few members of the Department of Assessment and
Accountability and the Department of Information Technology with
account access due to the nature of their positions. The Department of
Information Technology will work with the Department of Assessment
and Accountability to restrict access to the sensitive fields wherever
possible and will review database security options.
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 31 ---
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
Certain servers were improperly located within the internal network, and security settings
for SMCPS’ password controls for network authentication were not adequate.
We recommend that SMCPS
a. relocate servers, as appropriate, to a separate protected network zone to limit security
exposures to the internal network segment; and
b. establish appropriate password controls over user network authentication.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide With the increased reliance on technology, St. Mary’s County Public
additional comments as Schools is doing its part to assess the school districts cyber vulnerability.
deemed necessary. St. Mary’s County Public Schools recently, in partnership with the
Maryland Association of Boards of Education Group Insurance Pool, has
engaged in a vulnerability assessment.
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of The Department of Information Technology will review each server
corrective action or listed and determine either DMZ status or decommissioning. The
explain disagreement. Department of Information Technology is developing a plan to migrate
the DMZ to a new data center to leverage increased redundancy and
processing power. This would also include utilizing additional network
restrictions and firewall policies.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2022
Please provide details of The Department of Information Technology will review the locally
corrective action or defined accounts and modify to reflect password policies where possible.
explain disagreement. User accounts are governed by domain-wide password policy. Domain
accounts do have complexity requirements enabled. ITS will review and
determine the impact of changing a particular password policy. The
Department of Information Technology will make the change as
applicable following the outcome of the impact assessment.
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 32 ---
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
Finding 4
Certain elements of the payments to bus contractors did not reflect actual costs or could
not be supported resulting in potentially higher payments than necessary for student
transportation services.
We recommend that SMCPS
a. use actual documented maintenance costs, cost studies, or independently derived
estimates for establishing contractor rates for per-mile maintenance costs (repeat);
b. document the reasonableness of the annual administrative costs paid to contractors
(repeat); and
c. include provisions to audit the bus contractors in future contracts and use it to
determine the actual cost of operating contractor buses.
Agency Response
Analysis
Please provide SMCPS determines the rates paid to contractors each year based upon
additional comments as multiple factors. Those factors include but are not limited to: data from
deemed necessary. publications, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for Motor Vehicle Parts
and Motor Vehicle Maintenance rates in the Washington DC/Baltimore
Area, comparisons to the rates used by other LEAs, new school bus
specification requirements, experience with school system owned buses,
and available funding. The contractor payment formula for each school
year, which includes the per mile maintenance rate for that year, receives
final approval by the Board of Education at their first August meeting
each school year.
Recommendation 4a Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2021
Please provide details of According to Government Fleet Magazine, the “Average Maintenance
corrective action or Cost Per Mile” for a similar Class B vehicle was:
explain disagreement.
Government Fleet Magazine Rate SMCPS Rate
2015 $0.84 per mile FY15 $.73 per mile
2016 $0.96 per mile FY16 $.75 per mile
2017 $0.91 per mile FY17 $.75 per mile
2018 $1.10 per mile FY18 $.80 per mile
2019 $1.26 per mile FY19 $.85 per mile
According to a 2011 Michigan School Business Officials’ Bus
Maintenance Cost report, the “Average Vehicle Maintenance Cost Per
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 33 ---
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Bus” was $14,189 in the 2009-2010 school year. The average daily
miles of a SMCPS regular route bus is 100.17 miles per day. 100 miles
x 181 Days x .88/mile (SMCPS FY21 Rate) is $15,928.
During the previous three years the CPI for Motor Vehicle Parts and
Motor Vehicle Maintenance rates have increased by an average of 2.03%
per year.
In an October 2020 comparison to 15 other LEAs which use the formula
payment, St. Mary’s maintenance rate placed it 8th. Somerset had a
low of $.70 per mile, followed by Washington County with a $.7603 per
mile rate. Garrett County had the highest rate of $1.06 per mile
followed by Calvert County at $.9894 per mile.
Taking all these items into account, SMCPS contends the maintenance
rate paid to school bus contractors is appropriate, reasonable, and
fair. SMCPS will ensure this annual review and analysis is documented
for future audits.
Recommendation 4b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2021
Please provide details of SMCPS implemented an Operation Cost payment to school bus
corrective action or contractors as a result of the first audit conducted by the Office of
explain disagreement. Legislative Audits (OLA) in 2008. The OLA report was issued in April
2009. The initial Operation Cost payment was set at $450 per month,
per bus, for 10 months for a total of $4,500. This payment was
established to cover a contractor’s operational expenses for items such as
management, mortgages, utilities, insurances, substitute drivers,
taxes, and other various items not explicitly designated in the contractor
formula. Prior to FY10, these items were incorporated into the Per
Vehicle Allotment (PVA) payment.
The Operation Cost payment has been adjusted each year primarily
based upon change in the consumer price index.
SMCPS contends the current operation fee paid to school bus contractors
is appropriate, reasonable, and fair. SMCPS will ensure that an annual
review and analysis is documented for future audits.
Recommendation 4c Agree Estimated Completion Date: August 31, 2021
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 34 ---
St. Mary’s County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Please provide details of SMCPS will work with legal consultation to review the contractual
corrective action or language for possible inclusion of audit capacity in contracts.
explain disagreement.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 35 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Peter W. Chong
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Malik A. Farooq
Thomas J. Kraemer
Staff Auditors
Dominick R. Abril
Information Systems Staff Auditor