Title: Charles County Public Schools
Date: 02/13/2017
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d35cc9d72404c150a0a
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:05:36.102481
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Charles County Public Schools
February 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGIsLATIvE AuDITs
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Warren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII CPA
February 13, 2017
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
Senator CraigJ. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit ofthe financial management practices ofthe Charles
County Public Schools (CCPS) in accordance with the requirements ofthe
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) ofthe Annotated Code of
Maryland. The objectives ofthis audit were to evaluate whether CCPS’
procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its
assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use offinancial
resources.
Our audit disclosed that CCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability in a number of areas including procurement and
disbursements, payroll processing, and equipment inventory. Furthermore,
our audit identified significant security and control risks pertainingto CCPS’
computer systems and network.
For example, numerous employees had unnecessary access to critical data
files and programs. These included users of CCPS’ automated procurement
and accounts payable system and the human resources and payroll system.
Consequently, there was no assurance that all processed transactions were
proper or approved. Also, third party contractors and students were given
unnecessary access to the entire CCPS internal network, which included
payroll, human resource, and student information.
We also found that CCPS needs to ensure its methodologyfor determining
payments to bus contractors results in the best value. For certain payment
components, CCPS could not substantiate their reasonableness. For
example, we estimated that for the 106 new buses placed into service
between Fiscal Years 2010 and 2016, CCPS would pay out approximately
$9.8 million hiore over the 15-year life ofthe buses, because the investment
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hoffine 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
rate of return paid was considerably higher than the consultant recommended
rate.
CCPS also paid bus contractors for fuel, but did not exclude federal excise
taxes, which the contractors are exempt from paying and may claim as a
credit on their income tax returns. During one recent school year, the related
federal excise taxes totaled $196,500. In addition, CCPS could not
substantiate the reasonableness of payments to bus contractors for
reimbursement of unemployment insurance taxes. For example, in fiscal years
2015 and 2016 one contractor was paid $138,000 for his unemployment
insurance tax, while the actual unemployment insurance tax incurred was only
$9,000, resulting in an overpayment of $129,000.
CCPS did not always ensure that the use of certain procurement methods was
properlyjustified as required, including sole source procurements and the use
of intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements. In addition, stop-
loss insurance for employee and retiree health care was not competitively
procured and COPS did not have a process in place to ensure the propriety of
certain employee and retiree health care costs, which totaled approximately
$27 million duringfiscal year 2015.
The COPS response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
COPS.
Subsequent to this audit, CCPS requested and was granted an exemption
from the State law requiring the Office of Legislative Audits conduct a financial
management practices audit of each local school system once every six years.
In this regard, legislation enacted duringthe 2016 Session ofthe General
Assembly (Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland) allowed a local school
system meeting certain conditions to obtain an exemption for one six-year
audit cycle. Consequently, it is anticipated that the next financial
management practices audit of COPS will occur duringthe cycle covering
fiscal years 2023 to 2028.
Respectfully submitted,
-f)
ThomasJ. Barnickel Ill, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 6
External and Internal Audits 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Revenue and Billing Cycle 8
Federal Funds 9
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
 Finding 1 – CCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities 10
on its automated procurement and accounts payable system.
Finding 2 – CCPS did not assess the benefits of using 10
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPA)
as required by State law, nor in most cases did it establish that
the ICPA contracts were awarded through a competitive
procurement process.
 Finding 3 – Certain contracts were awarded as sole source 12
procurements without appropriate justification, were not properly
approved, or were not published in eMaryland Marketplace,
as required.
Finding 4 – CCPS allowed certain corporate purchasing cards 13
(CPC) to be used by multiple employees and CPCs were used to
purchase gift cards.
Human Resources and Payroll
 Finding 5 – Human resources and payroll system user access 14
capabilities were not adequately restricted. In addition,
independent documented reviews of personnel and payroll
transactions were not performed.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 6 – CCPS did not perform a complete annual physical 15
inventory of computers as required and access to the automated
inventory records was not adequately restricted.
Information Technology
Finding 7 – Numerous users had unnecessary modification 16
access to critical files and programs.
Finding 8 – Numerous third parties and students had unnecessary 17
network level access to the entire CCPS internal network.
Finding 9 – Publicly accessible servers were improperly located on 18
the internal network and intrusion detection prevention system
coverage for encrypted traffic did not exist.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 10 – CCPS lacked documentation it advised the Board that 19
the price paid for land purchased for a new school was
significantly higher than the land’s appraised value.
Transportation Services
 Finding 11 – CCPS did not base certain elements used to determine 20
the per vehicle allotment (PVA) on market conditions or
actual costs.
Finding 12 – CCPS could not substantiate the basis for certain 22
amounts paid to bus contractors and those payments were
higher than necessary.
 Finding 13 – CCPS did not ensure the accuracy of data used to 24
compute certain payments to the bus contractors and lacked
sufficient internal controls over the automated payment system.
Food Services 25
School Board Operations 25
Other Financial Controls
Finding 14 – Stop-loss coverage for employee and retiree health 27
care was not competitively procured.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
 Finding 15 – CCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain claim 27
payments for employee and retiree health care costs.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 29
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Charles County Public Schools (CCPS) ranks
ninth in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland
with 26,258 students. CCPS has 40 schools, consisting of 21 elementary
schools, 8 middle schools, 7 high schools, 4 education centers.
According to CCPS’ audited financial statements, expenditures totaled
approximately $395 million in fiscal year 2015. The largest expenditure
category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which accounted for 70
percent of total operating expenditures during fiscal year 2015. According to
MSDE records, as of October 2014, CCPS had 3,379 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 2,483 instructional and 896 non-instructional
employees.
Oversight
CCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Charles
County government provide the majority of CCPS funding. In addition, MSDE
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and monitoring of
various financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with
certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with
CCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law. Charles
County government exercises authority over CCPS, primarily through review
and approval of CCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
External and Internal Audits
CCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what
is referred to as a Single Audit of CCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statements for fiscal
years 2014 and 2015, and the Single Audit for 2013 and 2014. We
examined the related work papers for the most recent fiscal year available
when we commenced our field work.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited CCPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit of federal grants, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain
areas, we relied on the results of the independent audits to reduce the scope
of our audit work related to certain revenues (amounts due from other
governments) and federal grant activity. In addition, we relied on the results
of the work performed by the CCPS internal auditors related to school activity
funds.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives, our
audit included a review to determine the status of 19 of the 25 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated July 1, 2010. We determined
that CCPS satisfactorily addressed 13 of these findings. The remaining 6
findings are repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Charles County Public Schools (CCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Charles County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the CCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $391 million during fiscal year 2015. In addition to these
revenue sources, schools also collect funds for various purposes, such as for
student activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not
considered school revenue, these student activity funds are accounted for
separately by each school and are reported in summary in the audited
financial statements. Although this revenue is raised through student-related
activities, CCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year
2015, school activity fund collections totaled $6.3 million and the June 30,
2015 balance was $2.5 million.
External Audits
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the CCPS financial statements and our objective
for this area (that is, to determine whether revenues were properly controlled
and accounted for), we placed significant reliance on the results of the firm’s
audit for certain revenues, for which the auditor’s procedural reviews and
testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Internal Auditor Audits School Activity Funds
The internal auditor conducts audits of school activity funds to determine
whether proper controls have been established over collections and
disbursements, and funds have been properly accounted for. The audits of
the school activity funds at CCPS schools identified some control weaknesses
at certain schools that were addressed by school management. The reports
we reviewed disclosed that internal control weaknesses identified were not
prevalent. The internal auditor audits all schools’ activity funds on a rotating
basis and reports its findings to the school principals and central
administrative staff.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Federal Funds
Background
CCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2015 expenditures of federal
award funds totaled $18.2 million, not including federally funded fee-for-
service programs such as Medicaid reimbursement for special education
services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audits of CCPS federal grants for fiscal years 2014
and 2015 and the objectives of our audit in this area (that is, to determine
federal grant activity was properly controlled and accounted for), we relied on
the auditor's work and results to reduce the scope of our audit for federal
grants. Besides expressing an opinion on CCPS compliance with the terms of
several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal
control structure's impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2014
and 2015 required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards. The related
report stated that CCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to
internal controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal
programs, the auditor did not identify any deficiencies in internal control that
were considered to be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
CCPS has a comprehensive procurement manual. The manual sets bidding
requirements for goods, request for proposal requirements for services, and
specifies when the Superintendent’s approval is required. The manual also
requires the Board to be notified of all procurements that exceed $25,000.
Requisitions are computer generated by the requesting department and must
be approved by executive staff (Division head). Approved requisitions are
then converted to purchase orders and approved by the Procurement
Manager. According to CCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled
$119 million during fiscal year 2015.
9

--- Page 12 ---
CCPS also has a credit card purchasing program and, during fiscal year 2014,
CCPS employees used credit cards to make purchases totaling $2 million.
Monthly invoices for credit card purchases were paid directly by the school
system. According to CCPS records, as of December 2015, there were 171
active credit cards to facilitate purchasing.
Finding 1
CCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system.
Analysis
CCPS did not adequately restrict user access capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system. Our review identified twelve
employees who were assigned access to screens used to perform critical
functions, even though the access was not required for their job duties. Those
functions included adding a vendor, processing purchase orders, and giving
final pay approval on invoices. Additionally, eight employees were assigned
capabilities that allowed them to perform incompatible functions. For
example, five employees could create an invoice and mark goods as received
(a key event, which initiates invoice payment).
Our test of procurement and accounts payable transactions processed by
CCPS disclosed that the transactions tested were for appropriate CCPS
disbursements and were properly supported.
A similar condition related to restricting user capabilities was commented on in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that CCPS restrict assigned capabilities to eliminate the
ability of users to perform incompatible duties and access unnecessary
critical screens (repeat).
Finding 2
CCPS did not assess the benefits of using intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements (ICPA) as required by State law, nor in most cases did
it establish that the ICPA contracts were awarded through a competitive
procurement process.
Analysis
For 16 contracts that were based on ICPAs, with payments totaling $31
million in fiscal year 2015, CCPS did not prepare a written determination of
10

--- Page 13 ---
the benefits of using an ICPA, as required by State law. This law, which legal
counsel to the Maryland General Assembly advised us is applicable to local
education agencies, allows the use of cooperative purchasing arrangements
only after the using entity has determined in writing that the use of such
arrangements will provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies,
or promote intergovernmental cooperation.1 Additionally, for 12 of these
contracts with fiscal year 2015 expenditures totaling $23.5 million, CCPS did
not obtain evidence that the originating agency awarded the contracts through
competitive procurements as required by Section 5-112(a)(3) of the Education
Article, of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Three of these contracts, with fiscal year 2015 expenditures totaling
$391,000, did not use the contract terms and prices established by the other
government entities but negotiated their own unique contract terms and
prices with the contracted vendor. Without the aforementioned written
determinations of the ICPA benefits, these three procurements have the
appearance of sole source procurements, which may not have ensured CCPS
received the best value.
Furthermore, CCPS did not have the price lists for all contracts that were
piggybacked from an ICPA, and thus had no way to determine if they were
charged the proper amounts or were even purchasing goods and services
included under the original ICPAs. For 13 out of 21 ICPA related invoices we
tested (related to 9 of the agreements), CCPS did not verify that proper pricing
was received for payments totaling approximately $1.1 million. Finally, we
found that CCPS did not establish a contract value for each ICPA (that is, set a
limit on the amount to be expended with each vendor).
Recommendation 2
We recommend that CCPS
a. comply with State law and ensure that a written determination of benefit
for its use of an ICPA is prepared,
b. obtain evidence that the ICPA contract was competitively procured by the
originating entity,
c. verify that proper prices are on the vendor invoices, and establish a
maximum expenditure amount for CCPS under each ICPA agreement for
CCPS internal approvals.
1 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, of the Annotated Code of
Maryland in part, defines an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement as a
contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a manner consistent with
the purposes set forth in Section 11-201 of the Article, that is available for use by the
governmental entity entering the contract and at least one additional governmental entity,
and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings that can result from
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 3
Certain contracts were awarded as sole source procurements without
appropriate justification, were not properly approved, or were not published in
eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
Analysis
CCPS did not always justify the use of sole source procurements, obtain
approval from the Superintendent for purchases of $25,000 or greater, or
post solicitations or notice of awards on eMaryland Marketplace, as required.
 CCPS procured therapy services via the sole-source procurement method
without adequately establishing and documenting that the services could
only be provided by the vendor selected. Such determinations are
required by the CCPS Purchasing Manual. Payments for the therapy
services totaled $496,000 during fiscal year 2015.
 For 13 of the 35 contracts tested, CCPS had not obtained the required
approval from the Superintendent for the original contract awards (each of
which exceeded $25,000). These 13 contracts had expenditures totaling
$24.2 million during fiscal year 2015. The CCPS Purchasing Manual
requires that purchases over $25,000 be approved by the
Superintendent. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
 Our test of 17 purchases from fiscal years 2014 to 2016, disclosed that
CCPS did not use eMaryland Marketplace to solicit bids or publish awards
for 5 of the items tested, each of which was in excess of $25,000. State
law requires a local school system to publish a procurement notice or
notice of award greater than $25,000 on eMaryland Marketplace.
Payments related to the 5 procurements totaled $4.5 million during fiscal
year 2015.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that CCPS
a. limit the use the sole-source procurement method to those instances
when a documented justification establishes that only one vendor can
provide the goods or services,
b. obtain the Superintendent’s approval for procurements with reasonably
estimated expenses in excess of $25,000 (repeat), and
c. publish contract bids and awards in eMaryland Marketplace as required by
State Law.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 4
CCPS allowed certain corporate purchasing cards (CPC) to be used by multiple
employees and CPCs were used to purchase gift cards.
Analysis
CCPS controls over its CPC were not adequate and existing policies were not
being enforced. According to CCPS records, as of December 31, 2015, there
were 171 active cards issued to CCPS employees and related expenditures
totaled approximately $2.1 million during calendar year 2015.
 CCPS authorizes the use of “site” cards that are assigned to principals but
used by many employees at a location. In the event of improper
purchases using these cards, CCPS may not be able to identify the
employee making such transactions, because these cards are used by
multiple employees. In addition, once an employee has physical access to
a card that card’s information can be used to make online purchases.
CCPS may not be able to determine who made any online purchases using
just the card information. During fiscal year 2015 CCPS had 105 “site”
cards, with monthly credit limits ranging from $1,500 to $25,000, and
expenditures totaling approximately $780,000.
 Cardholders purchased gift cards, which are prohibited per CCPS’ CPC
policy, totaling at least $1,455 between March 29, 2014 and December
21, 2015. Supervisors reviewed and approved all transactions despite
receipts and cardholder logs clearly indicating gift cards were purchased.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that CCPS
a. establish individual accountability for transactions by assigning a separate
purchasing card to each authorized user,
b. strictly enforce the existing restrictions in the CPC manual prohibiting the
purchase gift cards,
c. ensure that expenditure transactions are subjected to appropriate review
and approval, and
d. investigate the disposition and appropriateness of the gift cards
purchased.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the CCPS
budget. According to CCPS records, fiscal year 2015 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $275 million. CCPS uses an automated integrated human
resources and payroll system to maintain human resources information. The
system automatically generates bi-weekly time records and any adjustments
are processed by central payroll personnel. The system generates payroll
checks and direct deposit advices. Payroll processing involves both
automated processes (such as compiling leave and running edit reports) and
manual processes (such as data entry of new employee information).
Finding 5
Human resources and payroll system user access capabilities were not
adequately restricted. In addition, independent documented reviews of
personnel and payroll transactions were not performed.
Analysis
Adequate internal controls had not been established over the capabilities
assigned to users on the automated human resources and payroll system and
the review and approval of certain payroll transactions.
 CCPS did not properly restrict the capabilities assigned to users on its
human resources and payroll system. Certain critical system functions,
such as those allowing changes to employee salary, direct deposit
information, and leave balances, were either unnecessarily assigned to
individuals or not properly separated. Our review disclosed that 36 of the
45 users who were assigned these critical access capabilities did not need
these capabilities for their job duties, and 11 of the 45 users could
perform incompatible functions. For example, five IT employees have
access capabilities, which unnecessarily allowed them to perform salary
adjustments, modify employee direct deposit information, and alter leave
records, even though none of these capabilities were required for their job
duties.
 There were no independent reviews to ensure that processed employee
personnel and payroll transactions were correct and appropriate. Our test
of human resources and payroll changes and adjustments did not disclose
any inappropriate transactions.
Similar conditions were commented on in our preceding audit report.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that CCPS
a. limit the assignment of critical system functions to those employees who
require such access capabilities to perform their job duties (repeat),
b. eliminate the ability of users to perform incompatible system functions
(repeat), and
c. perform a periodic documented independent review of critical personnel
and payroll transactions processed (repeat).
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to CCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $30.7 million as of June 30, 2015.
CCPS uses automated records to track its equipment inventory for items with
a cost of $5,000 or greater. In addition, CCPS maintains automated records
for its sensitive information technology equipment (such as all computers and
laptops, regardless of cost).
Finding 6
CCPS did not perform a complete annual physical inventory of computers as
required and access to the automated inventory records was not adequately
resticted.
Analysis
Physical inventories were not conducted as required by CCPS policies.
Specifically, during fiscal year 2015, the required annual physical inventory of
sensitive information technology equipment was performed on only a
selection (approximately 15 percent) of items rather than a complete physical
inventory. As a result, CCPS had no assurance that its approximately 31,000
information technology items were properly accounted for.
Furthermore, our review of system access identified 50 users with edit
capabilities within the inventory software. Of these, 29 users are assigned to
CCPS locations and are responsible for maintaining the sensitive equipment
and performing physical inventories. As a result, users could mark items as
disposed to conceal a missing or stolen item.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that CCPS
a. comply with sensitive item inventory procedures by completing a full
physical inventory annually,
b. ensure that an employee independent of the inventory record keeping
function completes and documents the physical inventory, and
c. restrict ability to mark items as disposed only to employees authorized to
process disposals.
Information Technology
Background
The CCPS Technology Department maintains and administers the CCPS
computer network, computer operations, and instructional information system
applications. CCPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity,
which connects the individual schools’ local networks to the computer
resources located at the CCPS data center. The CCPS network includes two
perimeter network firewalls to protect the CCPS network and CCPS operates a
critical administrative and academic related application which has finance,
human resources, and student information modules.
Finding 7
Numerous users had unnecessary modification access to critical files and
programs.
Analysis
Numerous users had access capabilities that enabled them to modify critical
files and programs; these capabilities were not required to perform their job
duties. We identified 896 active accounts on the server hosting the CCPS
administrative and academic related application that, via access to a software
utility and access inherited from a default server role, had unnecessary
modification access to numerous critical system, application and data files,
and programs.
Best practices identified in the State of Maryland Information Security Policy,
state that agencies must ensure that only authorized individuals (employees
or agency contractors) have access to confidential information and that such
access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of
“least possible privilege” and “need to know.”
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that CCPS limit access capabilities to modify critical files and
programs to only those employees who require such access for their job
duties.
Finding 8
Numerous third parties and students had unnecessary network level access
to the entire CCPS internal network.
Analysis
Numerous third parties and students had unnecessary network level access
to the entire CCPS internal network. Specifically, we identified 27 third parties
(for example IT vendors) who were provided remote access to the CCPS
network. However, this access was not properly restricted and these 27 third
parties had improper network level access to the entire CCPS internal
network, including servers holding payroll, human resource, and student
information, rather than being limited to only those network resources (areas)
related to their respective responsibilities. Similarly, all student accounts
accessing the CCPS network via a wireless connection were also provided
network level access to the entire CCPS network, rather than being properly
restricted to only the devices needed for their education.
Best practices, as per the State of Maryland Information Security Policy
require that entities’ networks must ensure that only authorized individuals
have access to confidential information and that such access is strictly
controlled, audited, and that it supports the concepts of “least possible
privilege” and “need to know.”
Recommendation 8
We recommend that CCPS properly secure its network resources from third
parties and students. Specifically, we recommend that CCPS remove
unnecessary network level access capability to the CCPS internal network
from third parties and all students.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Finding 9
Publicly accessible servers were improperly located on the internal network
and intrusion detection prevention system coverage for encrypted traffic did
not exist.
Analysis
Publicly accessible servers were improperly located on the internal network
and intrusion detection prevention system coverage for encrypted traffic did
not exist. Specifically, our review disclosed the following conditions:
 Eleven publicly accessible servers were located on the CCPS internal
network segment rather than isolating such servers in a separate
protected network zone. These 11 servers, if compromised, could expose
the internal network to attack from external sources. Recommended
security procedures, per the National Institute of Standards and
Technology Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy, include placing
publicly accessible servers in an external protected zone to protect those
servers as well as the entity’s internal network.
 Intrusion Detection Prevention System (IDPS) coverage did not exist for
encrypted traffic entering the CCPS network. Although CCPS used a
network-based IDPS to protect its entire network from external
unencrypted traffic, we were advised by CCPS that the IDPS was not used
for encrypted traffic due to potential performance issues. Furthermore,
CCPS did not use a host-based intrusion prevention system (HIPS) on its
servers that processed encrypted traffic.
Complete IDPS coverage includes, when there is encrypted traffic, the use
of a network-based IDPS that is supplemented (where necessary) with
host-based intrusion prevention to aid significantly in the
detection/prevention of, and response to, potential network security
breaches and attacks. Also, best practices identified in the
aforementioned Information Security Policy require protection against
malicious code and attacks, by using IDPS to monitor system events,
detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of information systems
and/or confidential information.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that CCPS
a. relocate these publicly accessible servers to a separate protected network
zone; and
b. perform a documented review and assessment of network security risks
and identify how IDPS coverage (which may include HIPS) should be best
18

--- Page 21 ---
applied to its network, and based on this review and assessment,
implement the necessary coverage.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
CCPS employs a staff of approximately 236 operations employees and 60
maintenance employees to maintain its 43 facilities (including schools and
other administrative and support offices). According to the fiscal year 2015
Capital Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and
systemic improvements to CCPS facilities over the next five years were
estimated to cost $29.6 million. State and local funded CIP projects during
fiscal year 2015 totaled $17.3 million.
Finding 10
CCPS lacked documentation it advised the Board that the price paid for land
purchased for a new school was significantly higher than the land’s appraised
value.
Analysis
CCPS could not provide any evidence the Board was notified that the amount
paid for two parcels of land purchased for a new school ($1,101,030) was
significantly higher than the appraised value of the land ($695,000) at the
time of the purchase. Although the Board did approve the purchase of the
land, the presentation to the Board only listed the negotiated purchase price
and did not mention the appraised value and Board minutes did not mention
the appraisal.
CCPS management advised us that due to a shortage of suitable land parcels
in the area where it wanted to build a school, and that the land was not
currently for sale, the owners demanded an above market price to accept the
sale.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that CCPS
a. retroactively report the appraisal amount to the Board, and
b. provide the Board with documentation of appraised amounts for all real
estate purchases.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Transportation Services
Background
CCPS had approximately 23,000 students eligible to receive student
transportation services during fiscal year 2015. These students were
transported 6 million route miles during the 2014-2015 school year using 9
system-owned buses and 274 contractor-owned buses. The Transportation
Department is responsible for providing transportation service to schools,
determining student transportation eligibility, and establishing school bus
stops for each school. According to the audited fiscal year 2015 financial
statements, transportation costs totaled $24.9 million, with $22.9 million
representing payments for contracted bus services. Bus contractors are paid
a per vehicle allotment (PVA) that repays the contractors the full acquisition
cost of the bus over its life (for example, 15 years). The PVA also provides an
additional annual payment as a return on investment (ROI) to the contractors,
which is established when a bus is purchased and remains fixed over the life
of the bus. Finally, bus contractors are paid for operating costs (such as
driver salaries, fuel use, maintenance costs, and certain administrative costs).
Finding 11
CCPS did not base certain elements used to determine the PVA on market
conditions or actual costs.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did
not reflect market conditions or actual costs. The PVA is one of several
elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors. CCPS’ bus
contracts are for one-year terms with renewals generally granted over the 15-
year useful life of the bus. Our review of the contract terms disclosed the
following conditions:
 CCPS overpaid bus contractors for bus cost. The PVA formula includes
reimbursement for the cost of the bus. The cost reimbursement
component of the PVA is calculated as if the bus will only be in operation
for 10 years. Thus, bus contractors are paid 100 percent of the bus cost
over 10 years. In addition to paying 100 percent of the bus cost, CCPS
pays contractors 80 percent of the annual PVA rate for each of remaining
5 years of the life of the bus. Thus bus contractors are paid 140 percent of
the bus’ cost over the life of each bus (10 percent of the cost of the bus
for 10 years plus 8 percent of the cost for 5 years).
20

--- Page 23 ---
 CCPS could not substantiate the basis for the ROI rate used in the PVA
payment formula. Specifically, CCPS used a formula that provides 11.92
percent of the bus price to be paid annually for ROI, which was
considerably higher than a rate suggested by a transportation consultant
hired by CCPS. Like the bus cost, the ROI is also paid at 100 percent over
10 years with an additional 5 years paid at 80 percent. The ROI provides a
financial return for the operator investing in a bus instead of another
investment option.
To estimate the financial impact to CCPS paying the PVA over 10 years with
additional payment at 80 percent for 5 years and of using the 11.92 percent
rate rather than the prime interest rate plus a reasonable ROI, we
recalculated the PVA for each of the 106 new buses placed into service since
our prior audit (fiscal years 2010 through 2016). To be conservative, for our
calculations, and as recommended by the consultant who evaluated the CCPS
transportation policies, we used the prime rate during September 2015 of
3.25 percent plus 2 percent interest.2 These calculations show that the CCPS
annual PVA payments per bus were $6,750 to $9,189 higher than the
payments would have been had the consultant’s suggested rate (of 5.25
percent) and 15-year life been used in the calculation. The effect is that, over
the 15-year life of these 106 new buses put into service by contractors since
2010, CCPS will pay out approximately $9.8 million more than if the prime
rate plus 2 percent was used for the ROI and cost was reimbursed over 15
years.
Additionally, buses in service during our prior audit are now being used for 15
years, rather than the 12 years as was the case in our prior audit. Contractors
with these buses will also receive payments of 140 percent of the bus cost.
This results in potential overpayments for these 168 buses of approximately
$5 million.
This analysis does not include the effects of the lost interest income that
could have been earned by CCPS on the excess amounts paid. CCPS claimed
2 The use of the prime interest rate only for ROI was recommended in a November 1999
study commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a
lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment rate; therefore, it
is deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation. However, a May 2010 MSDE PVA
Workgroup commented that the profit (or ROI) to be included in the PVA should reflect what
a reasonable investor or business person would expect on a long-term investment, and not
necessarily the prime rate. As of October 2016, current 10 and 30 year US Treasury Note
rates, which could be reflective of a reasonable long-term investment option were 1.8 and
2.5 percent, respectively. Consequently, the 5.25 percent rate used in our calculation
provided a higher ROI than if the investment option rate was used. Nevertheless, the rate
used by CCPS of 11.92 percent is still considerably higher.
21

--- Page 24 ---
that contractors suffered losses in other areas that offset the higher PVA
amount; however, it could not document that assertion. CCPS noted that their
PVA rate has remained unchanged since 1980.
A similar condition was commented on in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that CCPS
a. ensure that the bus purchase reimbursement PVA component is
consistent with the anticipated useful life of the bus, so as not to
reimburse contractors in excess of bus purchase cost; and
b. use a prevailing market rate in the PVA that yield a reasonable ROI
(repeat).
Finding 12
CCPS could not substantiate the basis for certain amounts paid to bus
contractors and those payments were higher than necessary.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did
not reflect market conditions or actual operating costs. Our review of the
contract terms disclosed the following conditions:
 CCPS payments to contractors for bus maintenance costs were negotiated
with the bus contractors and were not supported by documented
maintenance and other repair costs. Bus contractors were paid for
maintenance at a rate of $0.81 per mile during the 2014-2015 school
year and $0.82 per mile for school 2015-2016 school year. During fiscal
year 2015 CCPS paid $4.9 million in maintenance costs or an average of
$15,170 per bus (based on 274 buses).
 CCPS did not exclude from payments to bus contractors the federal fuel
excise tax. 3 In this regard, CCPS pays contractors for fuel usage using a
monthly average of diesel fuel prices and dividing by an established mile
per gallon (mpg) rate depending on the bus capacity. However, according
to federal law, CCPS contractors are exempt from the $0.244 per gallon
excise tax for diesel fuel and bus contractors are able to receive a credit
3 Subsequent to the completion of our audit fieldwork, Chapter 397, Laws of Maryland 2016,
effective July 1, 2016, exempted a county board of education or a school bus operator
under contract with a county board of education, from State motor fuel taxes. In addition,
the law authorized county boards of education and a school bus operator to claim refund of
State motor fuel taxes paid. Consequently, this exemption should be factored into future
payments.
22

--- Page 25 ---
for federal fuel taxes paid when the contractor files their income tax
returns. If CCPS had considered the $0.244 exemption amount in its
calculation, payments to the contractors would have been lower (for
example, a total of $196,500 less during the 2014-2015 school year).
 CCPS could not explain how payments intended to reimburse bus
contractors for payroll-related costs (unemployment insurance, payroll
taxes) were determined. These payments represented approximately 25
percent of the salaries paid for bus drivers and attendants, which appears
to be higher than necessary to reimburse the contractors for those costs.
For example, according to federal and State laws, unemployment
insurance contributions are only paid on the first $7,000 and $8,500 of
annual salary, respectively, yet CCPS paid bus contractors for
unemployment insurance on the entire amount of driver and attendant
salaries. Bus drivers who work all 180 days of a school year are paid at
least $17,400, but CCPS’ contractor payments included unemployment
insurance on all wages paid, although the contractors only paid
unemployment insurance on less than half of wages actually paid.
According to the Maryland Division of Unemployment Insurance, the fiscal
year 2016 unemployment insurance rates for eight of CCPS’ bus
contractors ranged from 1.5 to 7.5 percent of the first $8,500 depending
on the employers’ claims history yet CCPS paid all bus contractors 8.7
percent of driver and attendant salaries. Based on the above, we
calculated that during fiscal years 2015 and 2016, one contractor
operating 25 buses received payments from CCPS included components
for federal and State unemployment insurance totaling approximately
$138,000, while the actual taxes paid by the contractor to the federal and
State governments totaled only $9,000, resulting in excess payments of
$129,000. Payments for payroll related costs totaled approximately $2.2
million during fiscal year 2015, including approximately $838,000 for
unemployment taxes.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that CCPS ensure that all contractor payments have a
documented and justified basis. Specifically, CCPS should
a. use actual bus operating and payroll costs as a basis for establishing
contractor rates for per mile maintenance costs and fixed payroll-related
charges, and
b. exclude federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
23

--- Page 26 ---
Finding 13
CCPS did not ensure the accuracy of data used to compute certain payments
to the bus contractors and lacked sufficient internal controls over the
automated payment system.
Analysis
CCPS did not ensure the accuracy of the mileage payments to bus contractors
and did not ensure that user access to the payment software was proper and
adequately segregated. At least once each school year, the contractors
complete a manifest that includes the total time and miles driven on each
route. CCPS uses the data on these manifests to calculate the hourly pay and
maintenance and fuel cost components of the monthly payments to the
contractors.
 Although there was evidence of supervisory approvals on the manifests,
our tests disclosed mileage variances between the manifest and the CCPS
routing software estimates. Our test of 26 manifests prepared by
contractors, disclosed that for 2 of the manifests the daily billed mileage
significantly exceeded the amounts in the routing software. For example,
one manifest reported morning mileage of 173 miles while the CCPS
routing software, which we verified with mapping software, indicated the
route was only 136 miles for a daily overstatement of 37 miles.
 CCPS had not established proper controls over its automated bus payment
system. Specifically, all 10 employees of the transportation office have
full edit access to all data fields including contractor miles and time.
Users performing reviews or confirmation of the accuracy of payment
reports to manifests were among the authorized users who could edit data
that affect contractor payments. Therefore, there was no independent
verification of source documents against system data, which is used to
calculate payments to bus contractors. A similar condition regarding user
access was commented on in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that CCPS
a. thoroughly review and verify bus data on bus contractors’ manifests to
ensure that the payments to the contractors accurately reflect the actual
bus services provided,
b. recover any overpayments to the bus contractors,
c. restrict edit access to the automated system to only to those employees
who need the capabilities to perform their job duties (repeat), and
d. independently verify the accuracy of critical data recorded in the system
(repeat).
24

--- Page 27 ---
Food Services
Background
CCPS has a cooking cafeteria at each of its 36 schools and at 2 of its
education centers. Food and related supplies are maintained at the schools or
the central warehouse. In fiscal year 2015, CCPS had 400 food service
employees (comprised of 393 cafeteria positions and 7 administrative
positions). According to the fiscal year 2015 audited financial statements,
food service operation revenues exceeded food service operation
expenditures by approximately $395,000. Additionally, CCPS’ fiscal year
2014 cost per meal was the second lowest among four similar sized Maryland
public school systems.
Cash Handling Procedures for Cafeteria Sales Were Established
CCPS has implemented procedures and controls designed to ensure that
cafeteria receipts were properly accounted for, processed, and deposited.
CCPS has developed a Cash Handling Procedures manual to establish a
uniform policy for the handling of all cafeteria sales. The Procedures outline
responsibilities including, collection, reporting, and deposit practices.
Applicable food service employees must sign a signature page to
acknowledge reading the procedures, and periodically, staff from the Food
Services Department conducts unannounced audits to test for compliance by
cafeteria staff with the procedures.
School Board Operations
Background
CCPS’ Board of Education consists of seven elected voting members and one
student member with no voting rights. In its oversight responsibilities, the
Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent
audits of the CCPS financial statements and federal programs. The Board
meets monthly for regular board meetings during the school year and
schedules additional meetings as needed. The Board has its approved
policies available on the CCPS website.
25

--- Page 28 ---
CCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law,
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure, and was
approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of this policy are
applicable to Board members as well as all CCPS employees. CCPS
established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members who are appointed by
the Board of Education. The Panel acts as an advisory body to the Board and
interprets the ethics code and provides advisory opinions. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendents, and
a number of other administrators (such as school principals and department
heads) by April 30th of each year. Our test of the records for employees
required to submit financial disclosure forms for calendar year 2014,
disclosed that forms were generally submitted as required.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
CCPS is self-insured for healthcare costs for employee, retiree, and eligible
dependents up to the designated stop-loss limit. CCPS contracts with a
vendor to provide administrative services, such as claims processing for
participants’ medical, dental and vision costs, and for the stop-loss coverage.
Stop-loss coverage indemnifies CCPS against health insurance claim amounts
that exceed a specified threshold for a covered member.
Medical providers submit claims to the claims administrator who pays them
on behalf of CCPS. CCPS pays the administrator for claims the administrator
reports it paid to healthcare providers and pays an administrative fee for
these services. CCPS does perform matches to ensure all plan participants
are legitimate and that total participants for determining administrative fees
billed agree to CCPS records. Amounts paid for healthcare during fiscal year
2015 totaled $29.5 million, including approximately $1.8 million for
administrative fees and $758,000 for stop-loss insurance.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Finding 14
Stop-loss coverage for employee and retiree healthcare was not competitively
procured.
Analysis
CCPS obtained stop-loss insurance to protect against the risk of large claims
each year by negotiating with the prior vendor without undertaking a
competitive procurement. CCPS entered into a stop-loss insurance contract in
fiscal year 2013 for a one-year period, which has been renewed annually
through 2016. Between 2013 and 2015, the premiums paid for stop-loss
coverage have increased by 26 percent.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that CCPS use a competitive procurement process to procure
stop-loss coverage.
Finding 15
CCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain claim payments for employee and
retiree healthcare costs.
Analysis
CCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that certain amounts paid to
the third-party administrator were proper. Specifically, CCPS did not audit the
propriety of the claims paid on its behalf by the administrator to ensure that
the services were actually provided, were covered by the health plans, and
were appropriately priced. A similar condition regarding the need to ensure
the propriety of healthcare costs was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
The State of Maryland Office of Personnel Services and Benefits contracts
with a private firm to audit the third-party administrators of the State’s health
insurance, prescription drug, dental benefit, and mental health benefit plans,
which includes conducting reviews to ensure the propriety of claims paid.
These reviews, which are provided for in the State’s contracts with the third-
party administrators, allow for the statistical projection of error rates to total
claims paid, allowing the State to recoup the projected amount of erroneous
claims. According to the Office, improper payments from these reviews have
consistently exceeded the cost of the reviews.
27

--- Page 30 ---
Recommendation 15
We recommend that CCPS establish procedures to verify the propriety of
healthcare claim amounts paid (repeat).
28

--- Page 31 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Charles County Public
Schools (CCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the CCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. To evaluate whether the CCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of CCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on CCPS dated July 1, 2010, was limited to those findings that
were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the CCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by CCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at CCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
29

--- Page 32 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).4
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of CCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from January 1, 2014 through June 30,
2015. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits CCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data — including financial and operational —
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from CCPS’ automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure, inventory, and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
CCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to CCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
4 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
30

--- Page 33 ---
We conducted our fieldwork from October 2015 to June 2016. The CCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise CCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
31

--- Page 34 ---
APPENDIX
5980 Radio StationRoad
P.O. Box2770
LaPlata, MD20646
Charles County Public Schools Mainline: 301-932-6610
www.ccboe.com
KimberlyA, Hill, Ed.D. OfficeofFiscal Services
SuperintendentofSchools 301-934-7350
RandolphA. Sotomayor
AssistantSuperintendentofFiscalServices
January 26, 2017
Mr. Thomas J. Barnickell Ill, CPA
Legislative Auditor
Department of Legislative Audits
Maryland General Assembly
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickell,
Enclosed is our response to the performance audit report on Charles County Public Schools. We have
provided a schedule indicating our concurrence with the recommendations and expected completion
dates.
AssistantSuperintendent of Fiscal Services
Enclosures
cc: Michael Lukas, Chairman, Charles County Board of Education
Kimberly A. Hill, Superintendent ofSchools
It’s all aboutteaching and learning.
24-hour informationline: 301-934-7410

--- Page 35 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
PROCUREMENT AND
DISBURSEMENT CYCLE
CCPS did not adequately 1 We recommend that CCPS We agree with the recommendation. We have restricted user access Complete Yes
restrict user access capabilities restrict assigned capabilities to capabilities to critical screens on automated Procurement and
on its automated procurement eliminate the ability of users to Accounts Payable systems.
and accounts payable system. perform incompatible duties and
Multiple derivatives of the Maintain Vendor Records module are
access unnecessary critical
available to control user access. Only authorized personnel have
screens (repeat).
access to unrestricted Maintain Vendor Records, but many have
access to restricted Maintain Vendor Records:
Menu Item Description
Maintain Vendor Records
Maintain Vendor Records (Change only)
Maintain Vendor Records (Lookup)
Maintain V Records (Lookup w/Recipient#)
Maintain Vendor Records (Lookup & Delete)
CCPS secretaries may have the CCPS Requisition menu to provide
job-functional access including multiple restricted/controlled items
(Account Balance Lookup, Purchaser Order Lookup, Requisitions)
Only Purchasing Department has the CCPS Purchasing menu in
addition to the secretaries’ menu for end user assistance and
training.
Due to this finding, the Procurement Manager will request to add a 6/30/17
Purchasing Assistant. A survey of five similar sized Maryland
school systems compared the number of schools to purchasing staff.
The result includes an average ratio of 7.9 to 1. Using the same
metrics for CCPS, the ratio is 10 to 1.
CCPS did not assess the 2 We recommend that CCPS a-b. Effective immediately, the Procurement Manager has Complete Yes
benefits of using implemented direct procedures for the use of ICPA’s as
intergovernmental cooperative a. comply with State law and follows:
purchasing agreements (ICPA) ensure that a written
as required by State Law, nor determination of benefit for  Only use in emergency situations,
in most cases did it establish
its use of ICPA is prepared,  Document cost/price analysis required highlighting the
that the ICPA contracts were
benefits, and
awarded through a competitive
procurement process. b. obtain evidence that the  Procurement Manager will ensure the award process meets or
ICPA contract was exceeds the competitive requirements of CCPS.
competitively procured by
the originating entity, and
c. verify that proper prices c. Effective immediately Purchasing has issued a list of active
are on the vendor invoices, contracts to Accounts Payable in order to have an opportunity
and establish a maximum to review and approve all invoices no matter the dollar
expenditure amount for amount. This process will ensure that CCPS internal
CCPS under each ICPA authorized approval process is followed and all
agreement for CCPS pricing/invoices are reviewed and verified.
internal approvals.
1

--- Page 36 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
Certain contracts were 3 We recommend that CCPS a. CCPS Purchasing Policy and Procedures Manual includes a Complete Yes
awarded as sole source “Sole Source Justification” form that must comply with four
procurements without a. limit the use the sole-source (4) specific reasons. They are:
appropriate justification, were procurement method to
not properly approved, or were 1. Vendor/Contractor is the original equipment
those instances when a
not published in eMaryland manufacturer; there are no regional distributors.
documented justification
Marketplace, as required. 2. The parts/equipment are not interchangeable with
establishes that only one
similar parts of another manufacturer.
vendor can provide the 3. This is the only equipment that meets the specialized
goods and services, needs of the department and performs the intended
function.
4. Detailed justification is available which establishes
beyond doubt that the Vendor/Contractor is the only
practical source available to provide the good or service
required. Supporting documentation is required.
We believe the “Sole Source Justification” form, which has
been in effect since 2005, performs the intended purpose
when used and documented properly, meets and exceeds the
requirements of the sole source finding. We will immediately
review, document, and post procurements of $25,000.00 or
greater on e-Maryland Marketplace.
b. obtain the Superintendent’s b. Our current purchasing policies and procedures require the
approval for procurements Superintendent’s signed approval of all procurements and
with reasonably estimated contracts $25,000 and greater. The Superintendent’s signature
expenses in excess of can be found on all Purchase Orders issued at or greater than
$25,000 (repeat), and said threshold. The Superintendent’s signature is now
required on all Notice of Awards, Invitations to Bid, and
Request for Proposals regardless of the threshold. In addition,
all Bids and Request for Proposals are listed on the monthly
procurement report issued to the Superintendent and the
Board. We agree with the recommendation.
c. publish contract bids and
c. We agree with your recommendation and we have complied
awards in eMaryland
by posting all Invitations to Bid and Request for Proposals,
Marketplace as required by
$25,000 and greater on e-Maryland Marketplace. Since the
State Law. mandate gave us a choice of procurements OR awards, CCPS
elected at the time of the mandate to advertise all Invitations
to Bid and Request for Proposals on e-Maryland Marketplace
and our bid files contain a written record of such postings.
2

--- Page 37 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
CCPS allowed certain 4 We recommend that CCPS a. We agree with the recommendation and understand the TBD Yes
corporate purchasing cards auditor’s position. However, our purchase card program
(CPC) to be used by multiple a. establish individual serves the needs of our school system. The schools have
employees and CPCs were accountability for department cards to accommodate multiple users. In order to
used to purchase gift cards. transactions by assigning a operate efficiently at the schools, we feel the use of
separate purchasing card to department cards is more practical. Due to limited office staff
each authorized user, and specialized items that are needed for various programs, it
would be difficult for one individual to go out and make all of
these purchases. Principals are issued P-cards for budget
funds and student activity funds. The Principal is held
responsible for the proper use of the P-cards and uses his/her
discretion to determine who is permitted to make P-card
purchases. Principals approve all P-card purchases. We feel
our policies and procedures provide controls to address the
added risk involved with using department cards. P-cards are
secured in the school safe when not in use. A checkout and
transaction log is maintained by the financial secretary who
serves as the site coordinator. The checkout and transaction
log sheet is reconciled monthly to the bankcard statement.
Any unauthorized purchases would be investigated and
tracked to individuals by sign out dates. It should be noted
that department cards are only issued at the school level. In
addition, we have had very few instances of misuse since we
started using P-cards.
Individual P-cards are issued to maintenance staff who make
frequent purchases and are considered high risk.
b-c. Purchase of gift cards are prohibited according to the CCPS 2/2017
b. strictly enforce the existing Purchase Card Policy and Procedures Manual. This policy
restrictions in the CPC has been in effect since the implementation of our Purchase
manual prohibiting the Card Program in 2008. We have several layers of review of
purchase gift cards, purchase card spending and violators are notified
immediately. Depending on the violation, written reprimand
c. ensure that expenditure and or termination is applied. We will continue to
transactions are subjected communicate the Do’s and Don’ts of our P-card program to
to appropriate review and our users and remind them of the consequences of misuse.
approval, and
d. Gift cards noted in the audit report were for student awards,
d. investigate the disposition which were allowed purchases. CCPS allows gift cards to be
and appropriateness of the purchased for students and volunteers. The gift cards that
gift cards were purchased were for small dollar amounts given to honor
roll students. However, the schools should not have used the
p-card to pay for them. We will discuss the policy,
procedures and restrictions for P-cards and distribute the
Purchasing Card Policy and Procedures Manual at the next
Financial Secretaries’ meeting.
HUMAN RESOURCES
AND PAYROLL
Human Resources and payroll 5 We recommend that CCPS a. We agree with the recommendation. We have restricted user Complete Yes
system user access capabilities access capabilities to critical screens on Human Resources
were not adequately restricted. a. limit the assignment of and Payroll system.
In addition, independent critical system functions to
documented reviews of those employees who
personnel and payroll require such access
transactions were not capabilities to perform their
performed. job duties (repeat),
3

--- Page 38 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
b. eliminate the ability of b. Since Finance-Payroll and Human Resources-Employee use
users to perform the same Employee Management System, both groups must
incompatible system have unrestricted access to the Employee Basic Information
functions (repeat), and Menu for job-functional data manipulation. Finance-Payroll
only has lookup access to Employee Basic Information.
c. perform a periodic c. Policies and procedures were implemented after the previous
documented independent Legislative Audit in July 2010. The auditors reviewed the
review of critical personnel information and tested the process during their fieldwork. The
and payroll transactions Restricted Staff Accountant transferred to the Internal Audit
processed (repeat). Staff Accountant position. Unfortunately, her computer access
to payroll information was not turned off during the time she
performed the independent payroll reviews (2014-2015).
Prior to this time and since January 2016, the independent
payroll reviews were conducted by staff members who have
no access to payroll record files and are “independent.”
INVENTORY CONTROL
AND ACCOUNTABILITY
CCPS did not perform a 6 We recommend that CCPS a. We agree with the recommendation. However, it is 6/30/17 Yes
complete annual physical impractical for the computer analyst to complete a full annual
inventory of computers as a. comply with sensitive item physical inventory of technology equipment. Many sensitive
required and access to the inventory procedures by items are signed out to students to take home and we feel the
automated inventory records completing a full physical inventory would disrupt the education process. We will
inventory annually,
was not adequately restricted. revise our polices/procedures to only perform annual random
sample inventories of sensitive technology items.
b. ensure that an employee b. We agree with the recommendation. However, we currently TBD
independent of the
do not have the resources to complete an independent physical
inventory record keeping
inventory. The Fixed Asset Analyst does conduct sample
function completes and
inventories at ten locations per year. Upon management
documents the physical
approval and additional resources, we will implement this
inventory, and
procedure.
c. We agree with the recommendation. However, the Web Help
c. restrict ability to mark items TBD
Desk software was not designed to track inventory and it
as disposed only to
employees authorized to cannot restrict the user’s ability to mark items as disposed. In
process disposals. the next 2-3 years, we will be looking for an ERP System and
will include the option to restrict users in our search.
INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
Numerous users had 7 We recommend that CCPS limit We agree with the recommendation. All objects and work Complete Yes
unnecessary modification access capabilities to modify management commands are available to authorized technology and
access to critical files and critical files and programs to security administrators only.
programs. only those employees who
require such access for their job
duties.
4

--- Page 39 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
Numerous third parties and 8 We recommend that CCPS We agree with the recommendation. CCPS has restricted third party Complete Yes
students had unnecessary properly secure its network access to network resources. We only provide remote access to
network level access to the resources from third parties and authorized staff and outside vendors to perform their duties. We
entire CCPS internal network. students. Specifically, we have either deleted or disabled the third party/vendor accounts
recommend that CCPS remove identified during the audit. We configured the students and staff
unnecessary network level BYOD access networks as per the recommendation of the BYOD
access capability to the CCPS committee. Network web filter applies to both CCPS owned and
internal network from third BYOD equipment.
parties and all students.
a. We agree with the recommendation. We have either shut
Publicly accessible servers 9 We recommend that CCPS Complete Yes
down or relocated the servers to the DMZ. The only exception
were improperly located on the
is the remote communications server used for VPN
internal network and intrusion a. relocate these publicly
detection prevention system accessible servers to a routing/remote access, cable cast server, and live.ccboe.com.
coverage for encrypted traffic separate protected network Users need to VPN internal drives and systems, we cannot
did not exist. zone, and move this to the DMZ. Communications Department hosts
cable cast and live.ccboe.com servers for live video feed of
school events.
b. perform a documented Complete
review and assessment of b. With the implementation of new generation firewalls, we are
network security risks and processing all inbound HTTPS and SSH traffic through the
identify how IDPS Intrusion Prevention System. As per the firewall
coverage (which may manufacturer’s recommendation, we are also in the process of
include HIPS) should be decryption on this traffic. We have also deployed malware
best applied to its network, protection on all web and file servers.
and based on this review
and assessment implement
the necessary coverage.
FACILITIES
CONSTRUCTION,
RENOVATION, AND
MAINTENANCE
5

--- Page 40 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
CCPS lacked documentation it 10 We recommend that CCPS a. We agree with the recommendation and will provide the 3/2017 Yes
advised the Board that the information in a weekly update at the same time the audit
price paid for land purchased a. retroactively report the findings are presented to the Board.
for a new school was appraisal amount to the
significantly higher than the Board, and
land’s appraised value.
TB D
b. provide the Board with
b. We agree with the recommendation and it is our future intent
documentation of
to report appraisal information for real estate purchases to the
appraised amounts for al Board.
real estate purchases.
TRANSPORTATION
SERVICES
CCPS did not base certain 11 We recommend that CCPS a – b. The PVA is the annual payment CCPS makes to its bus FY18 Yes
elements used to determine the contractors to reimburse them for the purchase price of the school
PVA on market conditions or a. ensure that the bus bus (based on county specs), the interest cost of financing the bus,
actual costs. purchase reimbursement the depreciation of the value of the bus, the State of Maryland
PVA component is excise tax, and the contractor’s profit (Return on Investment or
consistent with the ROI). As bus contractors are for profit small business owners, they
anticipate useful life of the have two major sources of overall profit. The most significant
bus, so as not to reimburse source being the PVA and the other being maintenance rate. Funds
contractors in excess of bus that are received through these lines are used for additional
purchase cost; and operational expenses such as facility mortgage, lease, upkeep,
utilities, support staff, etc. While CCPS does feel that its current
b. use prevailing market rate rates are appropriate and reasonable, the department will review its
in the PVA that yield a payment calculations and amounts paid to school bus contractors.
reasonable ROI (repeat), Such factors as using the prevailing market rate and anticipated
useful life, establishing a per mile rate and incorporating a bid may
be considered in the future for adjusting PVA.
6

--- Page 41 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
CCPS could not substantiate 12 We recommend that CCPS a. The school system has created a work group consisting of FY18 Yes
the basis for certain amounts ensure that all contractor members of the transportation department, central office staff
paid to bus contractors and payments have a documented and bus contractors to undergo monthly discussions regarding
those payments were higher and justified basis. Specifically, compensation. These meetings have focused on creating a
than necessary. CCPS should basis for maintenance, fixed charges and how the Federal
Fuel Excise Tax will be addressed moving forward. It is the
a. use actual bus operating goal of the work group to produce actual bus operating cost
and payroll costs as a basis and payroll costs to associate with our payment schedule. We
for establishing contractor are in the discussion phase with our group as to how to best
rates for per mile address the Federal and State Fuel Excise Taxes.
maintenance costs and
fixed payroll-related b. Our intention is to discontinue reimbursement to our
charges, and contractors for the State and Federal Fuel Tax beginning in
SY 17-18.
b. exclude federal fuel excise
taxes from contractor We will address the amount of reimbursement for
payments. unemployment taxes with the bus contractors. We will also
make adjustments to next year’s bus contracts by correcting
the amount of unemployment taxes that will be reimbursed.
7

--- Page 42 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
CCPS did not ensure the 13 We recommend CCPS a. The Transportation Department is currently in discussions with FY18 Yes
accuracy of data used to various vendors to determine a more accurate means to calculate
compute certain payments to a. thoroughly review and time and mileage. The best practice would suggest that we base
bus contractors and lacked verify bus data on bus our time and mileage reports and payments to contractors by
sufficient internal controls contractors’ manifests to
utilizing routing software and GPS mapping data. The burden to
over the automated payment ensure that the payments to
determine overpayment lies on the staff in the Transportation
system. the contractors accurately
Department and increased review and oversight will be a priority
reflect the actual bus
when determining the accuracy of time and mileage. The
services provided,
department’s intent moving forward is to determine time and
mileage by utilizing the software or by purchasing a more
appropriate package to meet our system’s needs and satisfy the
recommendations of the audit.
b. recover any overpayments b. We are currently auditing payment calculations used for each
to the bus contractors, contractor in the payment system to determine if any contractors
were paid incorrectly. If any are found, we will adjust the pay
calculation and make adjustments to future payments to recover
any overpayments.
c. restrict edit access to the c. The Transportation Department is conducting an internal audit of
automated system to only the currently assigned levels of access each employee needs to
to those employees who fulfill their assigned responsibilities. Currently, we do have
need the capabilities to various levels of authorization, which permits certain people the
perform their job duties ability to access, and modify approved pages within the
(repeat) and automated payment system program. While numerous members
of the transportation staff have access to the automated payment
system portal, they have limited abilities to view or modify many
of the programs features/pages. If it is determined appropriate
through our internal audit, additional limits will be put in place to
further safeguard the integrity of the data, which may completely
remove one’s ability to access the system or provide them with
view only capabilities within the features they can utilize.
d. independently verify the d. Payment processing involves two persons. One person verifies
accuracy of critical data payment information for contractors prior to input into the system
recorded in the system by an independent person.
(repeat).
8

--- Page 43 ---
Charles County Board of Education
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit
FINDINGS LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR BOARD OF EDUCATION DATE AGREE
RECOMMENDATION
ACTION/RESPONSE
OTHER FINANCIAL
CONTROLS
Stop-loss coverage for 14 We recommend that CCPS use a We agree with the recommendation. CCPS’ Procurement Manager FY18 Yes
employee and retiree competitive procurement process is working with the Benefits Manager to solicit and award contracts
healthcare was not to procure stop-loss coverage. as recommended.
competitively procured.
Please note: Our health care provider has indicated that CCPS
administrative fees for stop-loss coverage is 20% less than similar
sized organizations at the same stop-loss threshold. Compared to
other LEA’s in the Southern Maryland Tri-County area, CCPS pays
lower stop-loss administrative fees, yet has a larger enrollment
count and higher stop-loss threshold.
CCPS did not ensure the 15 We recommend that CCPS Our health care provider’s Special Investigation Unit (SIU) is TBD Yes
propriety of certain claim establish procedures to verify the responsible for overseeing their anti-fraud programs; they support
payments for employee and propriety of healthcare claim and work collaboratively with all business units towards the
retiree healthcare costs. amounts paid (repeat). identification, resolution, and prevention of fraud and abuse. To
accomplish these goals, they utilize proactive and reactive methods.
The SIU program is included in the monthly administration fees
paid to our health care provider by Charles County Public Schools.
We agree that Charles County Public Schools should not rely solely
on our health care provider for the adjudication of claims. Given
the magnitude of work involved with implementing the specifics of
the aforementioned recommendation, CCPS will investigate the
propriety of contracting with a consultant to perform said audits.
9

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Catherine M. Clarke, CPA, CIA, CFE
Senior Auditor
J. Gregory Busch
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Anthony V. Calcagno
Amanda M. Jones
Kelly M. McNemar, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors