Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2008
Date: 11/24/2009
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b6d
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:04:57.400436
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2008
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
November 24, 2009
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Mr. Kevin M. O’Keefe, Chairman
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Mr. Karl S. Aro, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. We are
herein summarizing the results of such audits.
Our review disclosed that all opinions expressed by the colleges’ independent
auditors stated that the applicable financial statements were fairly presented in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. Additionally, none of the colleges had a deficit net assets balance as of
June 30, 2008. However, there were four colleges for which the applicable
auditors reported a total of nine material weaknesses in internal control for fiscal
year 2008. In these instances, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the colleges’
responses to the material weaknesses noted, and concluded that appropriate
follow-up actions had been taken.
A draft copy of this report was provided to MHEC for review and comment.
Since there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not
necessary.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information and Purpose of Review
According to the State’s records, State aid totaling approximately $242 million for
the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16
community colleges. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and
student enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and
various other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College)
is a budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation.
Baltimore City Community College is not subject to the Education Article,
Section 16-315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual
financial audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits. We issue separate reports on the College, which contain information
regarding the results of these audits.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to adopt
guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on the colleges. The
guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors to express
opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial statements as
well as to the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating the State aid to
the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue management letters
containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of internal controls.
While not required, many of the auditors issue management letters that contain
non-material weaknesses.
We reviewed the audit reports of the State’s community colleges for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2008 to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit net asset balances, or
uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the results of that
review.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
Eleven of the 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2008 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that 11 of the 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2008. The four community college audit reports submitted
after the required filing date were for the College of Southern Maryland,
Frederick Community College, Garrett College, and Hagerstown Community
College; no extensions of the filing date had been granted to these four colleges.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions; however, four reports were
not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2008 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors.
However, 3 of the 15 community college audit reports reviewed for fiscal year
2008 did not express opinions on all opinion units included in the colleges’ basic
financial statements, as required by generally accepted auditing standards.
Specifically, the independent auditor’s reports for the College of Southern
Maryland, Montgomery College, and Prince George’s Community College did
not express separate opinions on the colleges’ business-type activities and
discretely presented component units (for example, college foundations).
In addition, we noted that one community college’s audit report (Community
College of Baltimore County) was not appropriately modified to properly reflect
that the opinions were based, in part, on the report of another auditor. In this
regard, the audit report’s introductory paragraph stated that the community
college’s discretely presented component unit had been audited, in part, by other
auditors and that the independent auditor’s opinions, as related to this portion of
the discretely presented component unit, was based solely on the report of other
auditors. However, related modifications were not made to the scope or opinion
paragraphs of the Independent Auditors’ Report.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Similar conditions in which these audit reports were not presented in accordance
with generally accepted auditing standards were also noted during our preceding
review. MHEC notified the community colleges of these deficiencies to help
ensure that the deficiencies are corrected in future audits.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Financial Statements
None of the community colleges had a deficit net assets balance as of June 30,
2008.
There were no deficit net assets balances reported for any of the 15 colleges as of
June 30, 2008. A deficit net assets balance would indicate that the college had
more liabilities than assets and could indicate a potential financial problem.
The financial statements of one community college disclosed bank deposits
that were not fully collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by State
law.
The financial statements of Wor-Wic Community College disclosed that bank
deposits were not fully collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by State
law. Specifically, these financial statements disclosed that cash deposits totaling
$707,107 either were collateralized by out-of-state bonds ($704,508) or were
uninsured and uncollateralized ($2,599).
Article 95, Section 22 of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires that deposits
with financial institutions by community colleges be fully collateralized, and
establishes the types of acceptable collateral (generally, federal obligations or
obligations of Maryland governmental entities). Full collateralization minimizes
the risk of loss of deposits in the event the financial institution defaults.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Management Letters
Management letters for fiscal year 2008 included a total of 24
recommendations for improvement, including a total of nine
recommendations considered to be material weaknesses in the systems of
internal control for four colleges.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. Our
review disclosed that eight of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations, while the remaining seven community colleges received a total
of 24 recommendations, 9 of which were considered to be material weaknesses in
the colleges’ systems of internal control. The material weaknesses were found to
exist at Allegany College, College of Southern Maryland, Garrett College, and
Prince George’s Community College, and were related to the colleges’ financial
reporting, fixed assets, automated information systems, and payroll.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
material weaknesses and determined that appropriate follow-up action had been
taken.
MHEC did not formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
15 non-material recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s guidelines,
comments and suggestions related to non-material weaknesses are not required.
When auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up actions
are subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2008
recommendations by fiscal area. Five of the 24 recommendations (all related to
non-material weaknesses) were repeated from the preceding year.
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Accounting and financial reporting 7
Financial aid 6
Cash receipts and disbursements 3
Fixed assets, inventory 2
Payroll 2
Other (for example, automated information 4
systems)
Total 24
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Garman, CPA
Assistant Director
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor
Catherine M. Clarke
Staff Auditor