Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of Agriculture to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2014 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 01/28/2015
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150afd
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:10:41.538924
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 4 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Audit Action Plan
As of 31-Jul-14
Finding # Finding / Department’s response Department Date
OLA’s Recommendation Follow‐up Completed
1. Certain cash receipts were not
adequately controlled, verified to
deposit, or reconciled with
registrations issued.
a. Ensure that the documentation With the cooperation of our Current Lockbox service has been 1/15/14
used to initially record collections Information Technology program, we expanded to all licensing /
is given directly to an employee have been phasing in the lockbox registration programs.
independent of cash receipts and
service throughout the Department
registration functions for deposit
and are ninety‐five percent (95%)
verification
complete (1‐15‐13). Current Lockbox
service is being changed to a new
vendor by Treasurer’s office. When
this conversion is complete, the
remaining programs will be converted.
(10‐30‐13).
b. Ensure that all collections received Although using the Lockbox will help, Secretary Hance sent email to all On‐going
are deposited in a timely manner programs will still receive checks. program managers to remind them
Therefore, all staff has been reminded that timely deposits are required
and has had follow‐up discussions
that it is imperative that deposits are
with program managers during staff
made in a timely manner.
meetings.
c. Establish a process for supervisory This is already an established On‐ going
review and approval of procedure within the Department.
registrations issued by an
employee independent of
registration and cash receipts
processes.

--- Page 5 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Audit Action Plan
As of 31-Jul-14
Finding # Finding / Department’s response Department Date
OLA’s Recommendation Follow‐up Completed
d. Implement a procedure to We are reviewing all programs for The results of our On‐going
independently reconcile the total independent reconciliation of reconciliation have found a
value of registrations issued and licenses/registrations issued versus the problem in our licensing
fees collected according to its application database, which
fees collected and credited to the
records with related revenues our IT staff is looking into.
program. This listing will document the
deposited. Obtained 100% compliance
program person responsible and
for FY’13.
require that documentation of this
reconciliation be forwarded to Fiscal
Services. This process will be
implemented by June 30, 2013.
2. Proper internal controls were not
established over the processing of
purchasing and disbursement
transactions.
We recommend that MDA The Department will be meeting with MDA staff meets with DOIT security 4/30/2012
establish independent online DOIT security staff (Bonnie Hudson) and all issues have been corrected.
approval requirements for all to establish proper internal controls.
critical purchasing and All profiles and approval paths will be
disbursement transactions. updated and completed by December
31.

--- Page 6 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Audit Action Plan
As of 31-Jul-14
Finding # Finding / Department’s response Department Date
OLA’s Recommendation Follow‐up Completed
3. Significant control deficiencies
existed over property records and
physical inventories.
We recommend that MDA comply During the last year the Department We our modifying the inventory 8/30/2014
with Inventory Control Manual has taken the following action prior to system to make it more user friendly
requirements. auditor’s arrival: and expand its reporting capability.
1) New Inventory system has
been developed and data has An inventory of sensitive items will
been entered. be completed each year, reconciled,
and documentation will be
New Inventory system has been
maintained. The Department plans
developed and data has been entered,
to be in compliance with the DGS
reconciled and control account
Inventory Control Manual.
established (4/30/13). On‐going
2) Reconciliation of equipment
Currently, not completed on a
purchases and data input to regular basis. Our goal will be to
inventory system complete reconciliation on a
3) Reconciliation of Land, monthly basis starting in FY’15.
Agricultural Easements, and
6/30/2015
Buildings completed as of This has been completed the last 3
years and completed on an annual
6/30/12 and reconciled with
basis.
FMIS.
4) Annual report of fixed assets
was submitted to DGS on On‐going
8/22/12 for FY’12. A number
of categories were reconciled
with FMIS Fixed assets system.

--- Page 7 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Audit Action Plan
As of 31-Jul-14
Finding # Finding / Department’s response Department Date
OLA’s Recommendation Follow‐up Completed
The Department has changed
procedures that will ensure that a Physical Inventory has been
completed.
physical inventory is performed every
three years. Currently, The
Schedule of physical inventory will
Department has already completed a
be established. On‐going
physical inventory in several outlying
locations and programs within
Headquarters. We are continuing this
effort and will have completed the
entire department by June 30.
4. MDA lacked adequate controls
over non‐cash credit adjustments.
a. Periodically ( for example, Any non‐cash credits will be approved Reviewed by Fiscal Admin. On 3/30/2013
monthly) generate output reports by supervisory level employees. monthly basis.
of non‐cash credit adjustments
The Department currently reviews the
and ensure that independent
output report (DAFR 2261) on a daily
personnel verify recorded
basis. We will review capability of staff
adjustments to supporting
in this area with DOIT security staff.
documentation

--- Page 8 ---
Maryland Department of Agriculture
Audit Action Plan
As of 31-Jul-14
Finding # Finding / Department’s response Department Date
OLA’s Recommendation Follow‐up Completed
b. Separate the capabilities for The Fiscal Administrator for The 3/30/2013
initiating and approving non‐cash Department will verify supporting
credit adjustments and ensure documentation on any non‐cash
these employees do not have credits. The Fiscal Administrator is
access to cash receipts independent of the cash receipts and
credit initiation process.

--- Page 9 ---
Exhibit 2 to January 28, 2015 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s April 24, 2013 Audit Report on the
Department of Agriculture
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Cash Receipts
1. We recommend that MDA
a. ensure that the documentation used to initially record Not Resolved
collections is given directly to an employee independent of
the cash receipts and registration functions for deposit
verification.
b. ensure that all collections received are deposited in a timely Corrected
manner.
d. implement a procedure to independently reconcile the total
value of registrations issued and fees collected according to Not Resolved
its records with the related revenues deposited.
Purchases and Disbursements
2. We recommend that MDA establish independent online Not Resolved
approval requirements for all critical purchasing and
disbursement transactions.
Property
3. We recommend that MDA comply with the Inventory Control
Not Resolved
Manual requirements.
Accounts Receivable
4b. We recommend that MDA separate the capabilities for
Not Resolved
initiating and approving non-cash credit adjustments and
ensure these employees do not have access to cash receipts.
Shaded recommendations are more fully described in Exhibit 3.

--- Page 11 ---
Exhibit 3 to January 28, 2015 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings That Had Not Been Resolved
Cash Receipts
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 1
We recommend that MDA
a. ensure that documentation used to initially record collections is given directly to an
employee independent of the cash receipts and registration functions for deposit
verification (repeat).
d. implement a procedure to independently reconcile the total value of registrations issued
and fees collected according to its records with the related revenues deposited (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review noted that the documentation used to record collections was not given directly to an
employee independent of the cash receipts and registration functions for deposit verification.
Rather, a copy of the original record of collections was first provided to the employee who
prepared the deposit, and that employee forwarded the record to an independent employee for
deposit verification. Although MDA initiated procedures to reconcile the total value of
commercial feed and pesticide registrations issued to the related fees deposited, these procedures
were not adequate to ensure that the proper amounts were collected. For example, for one
registration type, the number of registrations issued that was used in the reconciliation process
was merely calculated by dividing the total amount collected by the value of an individual
registration, without ensuring that the result agreed with the record of actual registrations issued.
Purchases and Disbursements
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 2
We recommend that MDA establish independent online approval requirements for all
critical purchasing and disbursement transactions (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Although MDA eliminated the ability to process critical purchasing and disbursement
transactions for four of the five employees noted in the audit report, our review noted one of
those employees, plus two additional employees, could still process certain critical purchasing
and disbursement transactions without independent approval.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 12 ---
Property
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 3
We recommend that MDA comply with the Inventory Control Manual requirements
(repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Although MDA’s status report stated that a new inventory system had been developed and a
control account established, we found that establishment of a control account was still in process.
Physical inventories of sensitive and non-sensitive equipment have been completed; however,
MDA is still in the process of reconciling the inventory results to the related detail records and
ensuring the accuracy of those records to include all property items. Finally, annual reports of
fixed assets were submitted to the Department of General Services for fiscal years 2013 and
2014.
Accounts Receivable
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 4b
We recommend that MDA separate the capabilities for initiating and approving non-cash
credit adjustments and ensure these employees do not have access to cash receipts (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Our review noted six system users who could initiate and approve non-cash credit adjustments
without independent approval. One of these employees also had access to the related cash
receipts, as compared to two employees in our audit report. In its status report, MDA described a
manual process to mitigate the impact of the above weakness by having an independent
supervisor verify all non-cash credits to supporting documentation; however this employee could
also process non-cash credits and, consequently, was not independent of the process.
Page 2 of 2