Title: Department of Information Technology - Department of State Police - Department of Natural Resources - Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
Date: 11/18/2016
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509d6
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:01:17.820560
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Information Technology (DoIT)
Department of State Police (DSP)
Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
DoIT Did Not Effectively Monitor Agreements Executed Primarily by DSP and DNR
With Two Telecommunications Companies
Sufficient Accountability and Control Was Not Established for Lease Payments
Totaling $4.4 Million Deposited Into Escrow Accounts Maintained Outside of the
State’s Control
DSP and DNR Did Not Oversee Escrow Accounts Activity Nor Supervise Employees
Who Arranged Purchases of Equipment and Services Using Escrow Funds
Certain Lease Payments Were Not Received, Equipment Purchases Were Not
Accounted for, and Certain Questionable Activities Were Identified
November 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFIcE Of LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GEN.ERAL ASSEMBLY
‘.u-ren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor
November 18, 2016
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review ofan allegationwe received related to certain
resource sharing lease agreements between two telecommunications companies
and the Department ofInformation Technology (DolT), the Department ofState
Police (DSP), or the Department ofNatural Resources (DNR). The agreements
provide compensationto the State from these companies, which are allowed to
use the State’s communications infrastructure, such as towers, to install, operate,
and maintain conununications systems.
DolT is responsible for reviewing, valuating, and approving information
technology resource sharing agreements entered into by State agencies under its
authority. Our review disclosed that DolT did not maintain comprehensive
records ofthe agreements, nor effectively oversee the 10 such agreements and
related renewals which were the subject ofour review. These 10 agreements were
primarily entered into by the Departments ofState Police and Natural Resources
as early as 1996, with related compensation (including renewal periods) valued at
$5.9 million as ofJune 2016.
Certain arrangements pertaining to the receipt oflease payments and the
subsequent expenditure ofthese funds did not provide sufficient control and
accountability. Beginning in 2001, lease payments from the two
telecommunications companies for these resource sharing agreements were being
deposited into escrow accounts maintained outside ofthe State’s control by a law
firm, and DSP and DNR did not establish effective oversight ofthe escrow
account activity. One DSP employee and one DNR employee singly directed the
law firm to make purchases oftelecommunications equipment and services from
these escrow accounts. We identified certain questionable activities by one of
these individuals, which we referred to the Office ofthe Attorney General. As of
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-li

--- Page 4 ---
June 2016, deposits into and withdrawals from the accounts totaled $4.4 million
and $3.8 million, respectively, and the balances in the accounts totaled $536,700.
DolT employees responsible for overseeing resource sharing agreements became
aware ofthese questionable arrangements in April 2011, but took no substantive
action. We were advised that DolT Executive Management did not become
aware ofthe practice until July 2015, at which time the law firm was directed to
cease making any payments from the escrow accounts and DNR undertook an
internal audit ofthe funds. The resulting January 2016 report concluded the
escrow accounts effectively created an “off-budget” pool offunds that could be
spent without regard to the State budget or procurement requirements.
DolT has recently taken certain actions for current and future agreements to help
ensure that all funds received from information technology resource sharing
agreements are deposited into the Major Information Technology Development
Project Fund, which it maintains. DolT advised us that the affected State
agencies will need to collectively make decisions regarding the closure ofall
escrow accounts and the disposition ofthe related funds.
An Executive Summary is included on page 5 ofthis report. The responses to our
findings and recommendations from DolT, DSP, and DNR are included as an
appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us
during the course ofthis review by DolT, DSP, and DNR.
Respectfully submitted,
1.
Thomas Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 9
Resource Sharing Agreements 9
Agency Responsibilities 9
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 11
Findings and Recommendations 15
Oversight of Resource Sharing Agreements
Finding 1 – The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) did 15
not maintain comprehensive records of telecommunications
resource sharing agreements. Certain arrangements regarding the
related lease payments, such as the depositing of payments into
escrow accounts outside of the State’s control, were inconsistent
with DoIT’s understanding of the requirements of State law. DoIT
did not take timely action to address these arrangements.
Finding 2 – DoIT, the Department of State Police (DSP), and the 19
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) did not maintain
comprehensive records of resource sharing agreements for their
own telecommunications towers, properly execute or obtain
required approvals for renewals, nor maintain records of
equipment attached to their towers.
Finding 3 – The financial transactions pertaining to escrow account 21
funds were not recorded in the State’s accounting records and
were not monitored by State officials, and related interest earnings
were retained by the law firm. DSP and DNR personnel did not
ensure that account disbursements agreed with the amounts of
related purchases.
Finding 4 – DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not ensure that all 23
compensation due under the resource sharing agreements was
collected and, consequently, certain payments were not received.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 5 – Purchases made by DSP and DNR from the escrow 24
accounts were not subject to supervisory approval and were not
made in accordance with State procurement regulations, and no
other attempts were made to ensure that the best value was
received.
Questionable Activities
Finding 6 – The DNR employee who directed escrow account 26
purchases authorized the use of escrow funds for certain
questionable activity related to the purchase and installation of a
telecommunications tower on DNR land.
Finding 7 – The DNR employee who directed escrow account 28
purchases processed a unique arrangement with a
telecommunications company without review and approval from
either DNR management or DoIT. The related payments were
deposited into an escrow account and were used to purchase
equipment without a competitive procurement and without DNR
and control agency approvals.
Accountability and Control over Equipment Purchases
Finding 8 – DSP and DNR did not record, tag, and inventory 29
equipment purchased with escrow account funds and could not
readily determine the location of all equipment purchased.
Agency Responses Appendix
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Special Review on Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
We have conducted a review of an allegation we received related to certain
resource sharing lease agreements between two telecommunications companies
and the Department of Information Technology (DoIT), the Department of State
Police (DSP), or the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The agreements
provide compensation to the State from these companies, which are allowed to
use the State’s communications infrastructure, such as towers, to install, operate,
and maintain communications systems. The allegation related to the lack of
records and oversight regarding those agreements and related compensation, and
possible violations of State budget and procurement law. We determined that the
allegation was valid.
DoIT is responsible for reviewing, valuating, and approving resource sharing
agreements entered into by State agencies under its authority. However, DoIT did
not maintain comprehensive records of the agreements, nor did it effectively
oversee the 10 such agreements and related renewals which were the subject of
our review. These 10 agreements were primarily entered into by the Departments
of State Police and Natural Resources, as early as 1996, with related
compensation (including renewal periods) valued at $5.9 million as of June 2016.
Consequently, certain arrangements pertaining to the receipt and expenditure of
lease payments did not provide sufficient control and accountability over those
funds.
Our review disclosed that, beginning as early as 2001, the two
telecommunications companies entered into escrow agreements with a law firm
and deposited their lease payments into escrow accounts outside of the State’s
control, instead of directly buying telecommunications equipment and services on
the State’s behalf as provided for under the initial agreements. Under this new
arrangement, the law firm was directed by the companies to disburse funds, on the
State’s behalf, for the purchase of equipment or services. In practice, these
purchases were authorized by one employee at DSP or one employee at DNR,
who exercised complete control over those transactions. As of June 2016,
deposits into and withdrawals from the accounts totaled $4.4 million and $3.8
million, respectively, and the balances in the accounts totaled $536,700.
DoIT employees responsible for overseeing resource sharing agreements became
aware of these questionable arrangements in April 2011, but took no substantive
action. We were advised that DoIT Executive Management did not become
aware of the practice until July 2015 at which time the law firm was directed to
5

--- Page 8 ---
cease making any payments from the escrow accounts and DNR undertook an
internal audit of the funds. The resulting January 2016 report concluded the
escrow accounts effectively created an “off-budget” pool of funds that could be
spent without regard to the State budget or procurement requirements and that the
arrangement lacked proper segregation of duties.
Citing State law, DoIT believes the funds deposited into the escrow accounts
should have been deposited into the Major Information Technology Development
Project (MITDP) Fund, which DoIT administers. The MITDP Fund is used to
support many of the State’s major information technology development projects.
Since the lease payments were not deposited into the Fund, the monies were used
for purposes other than those specified by the Fund’s enabling law. We reviewed
purchases, totaling approximately $1.5 million, that were made during the period
from January 2011 through June 2016, as authorized by DSP and DNR personnel.
While the items purchased appeared to support DSP and DNR wireless
telecommunications activities, such as for radio communications systems, the
purchases were not for a major information technology development project.
We noted that the escrow account transactions were not recorded in the State’s
accounting records and were not monitored to ensure the propriety of the
transactions. For example, DSP and DNR did not obtain bank account statements
and did not verify that disbursements made by the law firm agreed with the
purchases authorized nor ensure all lease payments due were deposited. We
determined that payments totaling $342,000 had not been received dating back to
2009.
Purchases of equipment and services made by DSP and DNR using escrow
account funds were not subject to any independent supervisory review and
approval. One individual from each of these Departments singly decided what
equipment and services would be purchased and directed the law firm to make
payment to vendors on their behalf using escrow funds. Furthermore, purchases
were not made in accordance with State procurement regulations and we
identified instances in which the prices paid for equipment exceeded those
available under State contracts.
Furthermore, in 2012, the DNR employee who directed the escrow account
purchases authorized the law firm to pay $73,350 to an out-of-State vendor to
install a telecommunications tower on DNR land without conducting a proper
procurement and executing a written contract. This same individual had
previously executed, without the knowledge of DNR or DoIT officials, an
agreement that specified that a telecommunications company would pay DNR
$162,000 to vacate its licenses to operate certain radio frequencies that interfered
6

--- Page 9 ---
with cellular equipment operated by the telecommunications company and for
DNR to purchase a replacement system. In April 2016, DNR terminated the
employee. DNR management advised us that the employee’s services were no
longer needed and that the termination was not related to the use of the escrow
funds. Because of concerns regarding the nature of these procurements, we
referred these matters to the Criminal Division of the Office of the Attorney
General for its review.
There were a number of other issues raised regarding DoIT’s oversight and DSP’s
and DNR’s administration of the arrangements. For example, 19 of 22 renewal
options under the 10 agreements were not formally executed, including some
agreements which required Board of Public Works’ approval. Two agreements
were allowed to continue after their initial terms without the State receiving any
compensation, resulting in a potential loss of compensation totaling $575,000.
Finally, DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not maintain complete inventory lists
describing the equipment attached to their telecommunications towers and the
ownership of the equipment so that they could ensure all attached equipment was
covered by an agreement.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Background Information
Resource Sharing Agreements
State law allows State agencies to enter into information technology resource
sharing agreements with private companies. These agreements allow these
private companies the non-exclusive, long-term use of State rights-of-way,
existing communications infrastructure, and real estate, for the private companies
to install, operate, and maintain communications systems. In exchange, these
private companies provide the State with communications equipment, services, or
cash. State law requires that a unit of State government shall advise the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT) of any information technology
proposal involving resource sharing. DoIT’s Secretary is required to review,
determine the value of, and approve all resource sharing agreements proposed by
State agencies under its authority.
Based on our inquiries, we determined that the Department of State Police (DSP),
the Department of Natural Resources (DNR), and DoIT had 24 resource sharing
agreements with private companies (DSP – 6, DNR – 15, DoIT – 3) for the non-
exclusive long-term use of State resources, including rights-of-way (highways,
roads, bridges), communications infrastructure (telecommunications towers), and
real estate (land and buildings). As further described under the Scope, Objectives,
and Methodology section, our review focused on 10 of these resource sharing
agreements between DSP, DNR, or DoIT and two telecommunications
companies.
Agency Responsibilities
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) was established by
Chapter 9, Laws of Maryland 2008, effective July 1, 2008. DoIT is responsible
for the State’s information technology policies, procedures, and standards, and for
overseeing the implementation of major information technology projects for the
State’s Executive Branch agencies and commissions.1 DoIT manages the Major
Information Technology Development Project Fund and coordinates, purchases,
and manages information technology and telecommunications services for State
agencies. DoIT is also responsible for reviewing, determining the value of, and
approving information technology resource sharing agreements with State
agencies. Prior to DoIT’s creation, the information technology functions of the
Executive Branch were the responsibility of the Department of Budget and
1 By Law, DoIT does not have authority or responsibilities for the University System of Maryland,
Morgan State University, or St. Mary’s College.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Management (DBM). Prior to these functions being the responsibility of DBM,
the wireless communications services functions were the responsibility of the
Department of General Services.
The Department of State Police (DSP) is responsible for safeguarding the lives
and safety of all persons within the State, protecting property, and assisting in
securing to all persons the equal protection of the laws. DSP maintains a wireless
telecommunications network to support public safety and emergency
communications within DSP and with various other state, local, and federal
entities. This network uses multiple telecommunications towers, primarily
located at DSP’s barracks.
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) oversees the management and
use of the State’s living and natural resources for the current and future enjoyment
of Maryland’s citizens and visitors. DNR maintains a wireless
telecommunications network to support communications among the State’s parks
and natural resources’ police operations. This network uses multiple
telecommunications towers located across the State.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a review of an allegation that we received related to resource
sharing agreements between two telecommunications companies and the
Department of Information Technology (DoIT), the Department of State Police
(DSP), or the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The allegation related to
possible violations of State budget and procurement law and the lack of records
and oversight regarding certain resource sharing agreement activity and related
compensation. Cash compensation from these agreements was allegedly
deposited into escrow accounts maintained by a law firm.
The purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegation we received
was valid and to determine if the related activities violated State laws, regulations,
and policies. This review was performed in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland. We determined that
the allegation was valid.
The scope of our review included 10 resource sharing agreements between DSP,
DNR, or DoIT and two telecommunications companies. The agreements, which
were entered into during the period from July 1996 through September 2003,
allowed these companies to attach cellular equipment to six State-owned
telecommunications towers located in Waterloo, Waldorf, Westminster, Parole,
La Plata, and Germantown.
DSP is responsible for six of these agreements and DNR and DoIT are each
responsible for two agreements. The agreements have initial terms of 5 to 10
years, with several 5-year renewal options, and provide for the
telecommunications companies to compensate the State in the form of equipment,
services, and lease payments, or a combination thereof. The total value of
compensation for these 10 agreements was $5.9 million. (Refer to Table 1 on the
next page.)
Our review focused on the procedures established to monitor and account for the
compensation received by the three Departments under these 10 agreements.
During the period from February 2001 through June 2016, payments related to
resource sharing agreements totaling approximately $4.4 million were deposited
into six escrow accounts maintained outside of the State’s control by a law firm.
We also focused on the disbursement of those funds and the accounting for the
related purchases. As of June 30, 2016, the two telecommunications companies
continued to have cellular antennas and related equipment attached to the towers.
During the course of our review, we became aware of two arrangements related to
telecommunications services that were handled by a DNR employee and DNR
11

--- Page 14 ---
was unaware of one of these arrangements. The employee no longer works for
DNR.
Table 1
Summary of Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
Value of Compensation Through June 30, 2016
Value of
Terms of Agreement
Compensation
State Agency Location Vendor (Including Extension
Through June
Periods)
2016
1 Westminster Company 1 May 1996 to April 2018 $325,988
2 Company 1 May 1996 to April 2016 $797,345
Waterloo
3 Company 2 May 2001 to July 2016 $602,357
DSP
4 Company 1 May 1996 to April 2016 $938,542
Parole
5 Company 2 May 2001 to July 2016 $733,304
6 La Plata Company 1 Sept. 2003 to Sept. 2023 $332,327
7 Company 1 May 1996 to April 2016 $800,594
DSP/DNR* Waldorf
8 Company 2 May 2001 to May 2021 $602,357
9 Company 1 Oct. 2002 to Oct. 2022 $488,231
DoIT Germantown
10 Company 2 Oct. 2002 to Oct. 2022 $240,000
*On October 18, 2000, DSP transferred the Waldorf Barracks property to DNR. Total $5,861,045
Source: Resource Sharing Agreements
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, inspections of documents and records,
observations, and discussions with DoIT, DSP, and DNR personnel, as we
deemed necessary to achieve our objectives. We reviewed numerous documents,
including resource sharing agreements, escrow account records, procurement
documents, invoices, and related records. We interviewed State employees and
law firm personnel. Finally, we conducted certain physical inspections of cell
tower equipment. The results of our review of the allegation are identified in the
findings in this report. Our review did not constitute an audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Our review
was primarily conducted during the period from February through July 2016.
We identified certain questionable matters involving a DNR employee, as
described in findings 6 and 7 and we referred these matters to the Criminal
Division of the Office of Attorney General. DNR should consult with the Office
of the Attorney General before taking any actions related to the findings contained
in this report. A referral to the Criminal Division does not mean that a criminal
act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be filed.
12

--- Page 15 ---
The responses to our findings and recommendations from DoIT, DSP, and DNR
are included as an appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government
Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise the
Departments regarding the results of our review of these responses.
13

--- Page 16 ---
14

--- Page 17 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Oversight of Resource Sharing Agreements
Finding 1
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) did not maintain
comprehensive records of telecommunications resource sharing agreements.
Certain arrangements regarding the related lease payments, such as the
depositing of payments into escrow accounts outside of the State’s control,
were inconsistent with DoIT’s understanding of the requirements of State
law. DoIT did not take timely action to address these arrangements.
Analysis
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT), as the oversight agency, did
not maintain comprehensive records of telecommunications resource sharing
agreements maintained by Executive Branch agencies under its authority,
including its own agreements and did not account for the activity and related
compensation.
Furthermore, certain arrangements regarding the lease payments received under
these agreements were inconsistent with DoIT’s understanding of the related
requirements of State law. DoIT employees became aware in April 2011 of the
longstanding practice of two telecommunications companies depositing lease
payments into escrow accounts maintained by a law firm, but DoIT did not take
timely action to address the matter until July 2015.
Agreements Recordkeeping
DoIT did not maintain a complete list of existing Executive Branch agency
resource sharing agreements, including the value of the agreements and renewal
periods. At the beginning of our review, a spreadsheet maintained by DoIT only
listed 5 of the 10 agreements included in our review. These 10 agreements were
entered into by DoIT, the Department of State Police (DSP), and the Department
of Natural Resources (DNR). Furthermore, at the time of our review, DoIT did
not maintain copies of these agreements in its files. Consequently, DoIT did not
establish a mechanism to ensure it was aware of all arrangements made by State
agencies with telecommunications companies and that the related agreements had
been subject to its review.
Arrangements for Lease Payments Received
Citing State law, DoIT believes any funds received from information technology
resource sharing agreements should be deposited into the Major Information
Technology Development Project (MITDP) Fund, which is maintained by DoIT.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Rather than depositing funds into the MITDP Fund, the lease payments from two
telecommunications companies for resource sharing agreements were deposited
into federally insured interest-bearing escrow accounts maintained by a law firm.
This practice began in February 2001 when one of the telecommunications
companies executed an escrow agreement with a law firm to serve as its fiduciary
for holding lease payments due to the State for its resource sharing agreements.
In March 2002, the second telecommunications company executed a similar
escrow agreement with the same law firm.
Prior to the establishment of the escrow accounts, lease payments were not made;
rather, compensation paid under these resource sharing agreements was in the
form of telecommunications equipment and services that were provided, or paid
for, by the telecommunications companies on the State’s behalf. Under this new
arrangement, the law firm was directed by the companies to disburse funds, on the
State’s behalf, for the purchase of equipment or services. In practice, these
procurements were authorized by DSP and DNR personnel. We were advised by
the law firm that the escrow accounts were created as a convenience so that the
telecommunications companies could avoid direct involvement in the purchase of
equipment and services for the State. Whether executive management of the
Department of Budget and Management, which, at that time, had oversight
responsibility for the State’s telecommunications activities, was aware of the
arrangement is unknown to us.
There were six different escrow bank accounts established and used by the law
firm. Based on our review of the applicable bank statements for these six bank
accounts, deposits into and withdrawals from the account (excluding transfers
between accounts and bank fees) related to the agreements (and renewals) during
the period from February 2001 through June 30, 2016 totaled approximately $4.4
million and $3.8 million, respectively. As compensation for serving as the
fiduciary, the escrow agreements permitted the law firm to retain accumulated
interest earnings.
According to DoIT, any funds received from information technology resource
sharing agreements should be deposited into the MITDP Fund, which has been
maintained by DoIT since 2008 when it was established as a State agency. State
law, dating back to 1996,2 requires that all funds from the sale, lease, or exchange
of communications sites, facilities, or frequencies, and from information
technology agreements involving resource sharing be deposited into the Fund,
which is used to support many of the State’s major information technology
2 A similar requirement existed under State law governing the Fund’s predecessor - the
Information Technology Investment Fund, which was maintained by the Department of Budget
and Management.
16

--- Page 19 ---
development projects. Furthermore, since July 1, 2014, State law requires this
revenue to be used only to support the operation of networkMaryland, the State’s
information technology communications network.
The lease payments from the resource sharing agreements were not deposited into
the Fund and the monies were used for purposes other than those specified by
law. We reviewed purchases, totaling approximately $1.5 million, that were
made during the period from January 2011 through June 2016, as authorized by
DSP and DNR personnel. While the items purchased appeared to support DSP
and DNR wireless telecommunications activities, such as for radio
communications systems, the purchases were not for a major information
technology development project nor, after July 2014, were they related to
networkMaryland. Furthermore, because the lease payments deposited into the
escrow account also included compensation related to DoIT’s agreements, these
funds were available to be spent by DSP and DNR.
Actions Taken by DoIT, DSP, and DNR
In April 2011, DoIT’s Resource Sharing Program Manager raised concerns about
the escrow account arrangement with the law firm and at least one other DoIT
employee was made aware of this arrangement; however, no substantive action
was taken to investigate this matter until 2015. Specifically, DoIT did not take
action to stop the deposit of lease payments into the escrow accounts and did not
determine the proper disposition of the remaining balance of funds in the escrow
accounts.
We were advised that DoIT Executive Management did not become aware of the
arrangement until July 2015 when DNR sought to modify its resource sharing
agreements for the Waldorf tower. Based on concerns DoIT had with the
renewals, in July 2015, DoIT formally requested financial documentation on the
escrow accounts from the law firm, DSP, and DNR. At that time, DNR also
directed the law firm to cease making any disbursements from the escrow
accounts for either DSP or DNR unless expressly authorized by DNR’s Deputy
Secretary. After reviewing the information provided, a determination was made
collectively by DoIT, DSP, and DNR to have DNR’s internal audit unit conduct
an audit of the escrow accounts.
DNR’s internal audit began in August 2015 with the purpose of (1) determining
the legal basis for the escrow accounts in relationship to State finance and
procurement laws, regulations, and policies; and (2) assessing the control and
accountability of funds deposited, maintained, and withdrawn from the escrow
accounts. DSP also conducted an internal investigation in September and October
of 2015, and concluded that its employee who authorized escrow purchases failed
17

--- Page 20 ---
to properly inventory the equipment purchased. DSP subsequently counseled this
employee.
On January 28, 2016, DNR issued a report based on its completed review of
escrow account activity during the period from January 1, 2013 to August 31,
2015. The report concluded the escrow accounts effectively created an “off-
budget” pool of funds that could be spent without regard to the State budget or
procurement requirements and that the arrangement lacked proper segregation of
duties.
As a result of the internal audit, DoIT advised us it took the following actions:
1. Advised DSP and DNR that all telecommunications resource sharing
agreements require DoIT approval and all related lease payments need to
be made directly to the MITDP Fund
2. Established standard language regarding payments to the MITDP Fund for
future resource sharing agreements
3. Initiated a review of each of the 10 resource sharing agreements to identify
all in-kind equipment and lease payments made to determine the amount
owed to the MITDP Fund
4. Issued a policy clarification regarding resource sharing renewals, standard
pricing methodology, and procedures for handling requests to change
equipment on resource sharing sites by telecommunications companies
As of June 30, 2016, two escrow accounts remained open with a combined
balance of approximately $536,700. Except for one transaction that was in
process prior to the law firm being instructed to cease disbursements, no
disbursements have since been made from the escrow accounts. DoIT advised us
that the final closure of the escrow accounts and disposition of the related funds
will not be completed until all related resource sharing agreements have been
modified and a determination is collectively made by DoIT, DSP, and DNR
regarding the disposition of the available funds.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DoIT
a. maintain a comprehensive record of all telecommunications resource
sharing agreements administered by State agencies under its jurisdiction,
maintain copies of those agreements, and require the agencies to
periodically (such as, annually) report the status of the agreements;
b. discontinue use of the escrow accounts;
18

--- Page 21 ---
c. working with DSP and DNR, determine the disposition of the remaining
escrow account funds and all future resource sharing agreement lease
payments; and
d. evaluate whether there is any recourse or action to be taken if it is
determined that escrow funds should have been deposited into the
MITDP Fund and that the funds were used in a manner inconsistent with
the MITDP Fund’s purposes.
Finding 2
DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not maintain comprehensive records of resource
sharing agreements for their own telecommunications towers, properly
execute or obtain required approvals for renewals, nor maintain records of
equipment attached to their towers.
Analysis
DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not maintain a complete list of their resource sharing
agreements. Also, these Departments did not properly execute agreement renewal
options and did not obtain Board of Public Works (BPW) approval when the
value of those options exceed $200,000. Finally, all three Departments lacked
inventory records detailing the specific equipment attached to their
telecommunications towers and did not ensure that agreements were executed
with all parties with equipment on the towers.
 DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not maintain a list of their resource sharing
agreements. Consequently, the Departments did not establish a mechanism to
monitor the agreement terms to ensure, for example, that renewal options
were properly exercised and that all compensation due from
telecommunications companies was received and accounted for.
 Although the initial resource sharing agreements were formally executed and
approved by BPW, the agreements were usually allowed to continue beyond
their initial terms without formal notification and agreement between the
parties to exercise renewal options, as required by the agreement provisions.
Consequently, the Departments missed opportunities to negotiate the payment
terms of the initial agreements, some of which have been in existence for
approximately 20 years. Based on the renewal option periods specified in the
10 agreements, we determined that, collectively, 19 of the 22 renewal options
(generally for a period of 5 years each) were informally exercised by the three
Departments by allowing the telecommunications companies to continue to
use the towers. The value of 9 of these renewals were individually greater
19

--- Page 22 ---
than $200,000 and, according to BPW staff, should have been submitted to
BPW for review and approval.
 None of the three Departments maintained complete inventory lists detailing
the type and ownership of equipment attached to their telecommunications
towers, including equipment owned by the State (see finding 8). During this
review, we conducted physical inspections of telecommunications towers in
Parole (DSP), Westminster (DSP), Waldorf (DNR), and Germantown (DoIT),
along with Department personnel. The inspections identified many equipment
items attached to the towers, including equipment represented to us as being
owned by federal, State, or local governments, which are permitted to use the
towers without making lease payments. The Departments could not verify
that resource sharing agreements or memoranda of understanding with
government entities had been established for all attached equipment.
All attached equipment should be inventoried to help ensure that only
appropriate communications equipment is deployed on State towers.
Agreements and memoranda of understanding are necessary to affix the
responsibilities of all parties, to specify the agreement terms and any payment
arrangements, and to address matters such as site access, maintenance, and
liability.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. maintain a comprehensive record of their resource sharing agreements
and copies of any renewal options exercised;
b. review existing agreements and determine whether the terms should be
renegotiated, ensure the existing arrangements with the
telecommunications companies are supported by executed agreements or
renewal options, and ensure that new agreements, as well as renewals
valued at $200,000 or more, are retroactively submitted to BPW for
approval; and
c. establish and maintain complete inventory records of all equipment
attached to State-owned telecommunications towers under their
jurisdiction and ensure that resource sharing agreements or memoranda
of understanding have been executed with all entities with equipment
attached to the towers.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 3
The financial transactions pertaining to escrow account funds were not
recorded in the State’s accounting records and were not monitored by State
officials, and related interest earnings were retained by the law firm. DSP
and DNR personnel did not ensure that account disbursements agreed with
the amounts of related purchases.
Analysis
The financial transactions pertaining to the escrow accounts were not recorded in
the State’s accounting records and were not monitored by State officials, and the
related interest was retained by the law firm. DSP and DNR personnel did not
ensure that account disbursements agreed with amounts of related purchases.
 The financial transactions of
Summary of Escrow Transactions
the escrow accounts (deposits
February 2001 to June 2016
and disbursements) were not
Deposits of Lease
recorded in the State’s $4,354,641
Payments
accounting records, nor were
Disbursements for
they monitored by State purchase of goods and $3,845,966
officials through the State services
budget process. As identified Source: Escrow Account Bank Records
in the aforementioned DNR
internal audit, the escrow accounts effectively created an “off-budget” pool of
funds that could be spent without regard to the State budget or procurement
processes. As a result, these funds were not subject to any budgetary or fiscal
oversight by the General Assembly and executive control agencies. State law
requires that both revenues and expenditures be approved by the General
Assembly in the annual State budget.
 DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not obtain escrow account bank statements to
monitor the deposit and disbursement activity and did not ensure the law firm
performed monthly bank reconciliations. While the law firm maintained
paper documentation to support deposit and withdrawal transactions (such as
cancelled checks and deposit slips), law firm personnel advised us that the
firm did not maintain formal accounting records for the accounts (such as a
check register) and did not complete monthly bank reconciliations. Although
State personnel were not signatories on the escrow accounts, because the
accounts contained funds due to the State and available for its use, the related
transactions should have been monitored.
 Interest earned on the escrow accounts was not paid to the State but was
retained by the law firm. The escrow agreements between the law firm and
21

--- Page 24 ---
the telecommunications companies provided for the firm to retain any interest;
however, since these funds otherwise would have been paid to the State, the
interest on unspent funds would have been earned by the State. If the lease
payments had been remitted to the MITDP Fund, the Fund would have been
credited with the interest earnings in accordance with State law. Based on our
review of bank records, we determined that accumulated interest earnings on
the escrow accounts and investment of these funds in certificates of deposit
totaled approximately $90,900 during the period from February 1, 2001 to
June 30, 2016.
 DSP and DNR personnel did not verify that all escrow account disbursements
agreed in amount with the corresponding purchases. DSP and DNR did not
obtain the associated invoices for the equipment and services purchased.
Consequently, there was no official state record of these purchases, and there
was no assurance that the amounts paid from the escrow accounts for
equipment and services purchased were consistent with the agreed-upon
prices and related vendor invoices. As previously mentioned, we reviewed
purchases totaling approximately $1.5 million that were made during the
period from January 2011 through June 2016. Based on our review, we
concluded that the amounts paid appeared to be consistent with the available
documentation, such as email requests and price quotes from DSP and DNR
for those purchases.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. in consultation with the Department of Budget and Management and the
State Comptroller’s Office, determine the proper method for recording
any current fiscal year escrow account revenue and expenditure
transactions in the State’s accounting records;
b. obtain all bank statements for escrow accounts until they are closed and
verify the propriety of all transactions;
c. in consultation with legal counsel, determine whether the State can
recover any interest retained by the law firm; and
d. to the extent practical, obtain and review invoices for purchases made
with escrow account funds, compare them to amounts disbursed from the
accounts, and take appropriate action for any differences identified.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 4
DoIT, DSP, and DNR and did not ensure that all compensation due under
the resource sharing agreements was collected and, consequently, certain
payments were not received.
Analysis
DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not have processes in place to ensure that all
compensation due from the resource sharing agreements was received. Even
though DSP and DNR took action in 2008 to collect payments totaling
approximately $701,400 that had been outstanding since fiscal year 2002, DSP
and DNR did not establish effective monitoring of subsequent lease payments.
For the 10 agreements included in the scope of our review, we compared the
funds deposited into the escrow accounts with the lease payments required by the
agreements (including the renewal periods) during the period from February 2001
through June 2016. We identified instances in which either required payments
were not received or the initial agreements had lapsed and provisions were not
made for compensation beyond the initial contract periods even though the
telecommunications companies continued using the towers. The estimated value
of uncollected compensation totaled $917,000.
 For eight resource sharing agreements, we determined that compensation
totaling approximately $342,000 of the $4,697,000 in lease payments required
was not received. For example, for one resource sharing agreement for space
on DSP’s Waterloo tower, we noted that only $391,400 of the $602,400 in
required compensation was deposited into the escrow accounts; the delinquent
balance of $211,000 dated back to fiscal year 2009. As of June 30, 2016, the
outstanding compensation had not been pursued or recovered.
 For two resource sharing agreements with two telecommunications
companies, no compensation had been received for periods dating back to
May 2003. Specifically, we noted that no funds had been deposited into the
escrow accounts for the agreements for DSP’s Westminster tower or for
DoIT’s Germantown tower. The two initial agreements provided that, as
compensation, the companies would erect new telecommunications towers on
State land, rather than make lease payments. The new tower under the
Westminster agreement was valued at $326,000 for the period from May 1996
to April 2003. The new tower under the Germantown agreement was valued
at $240,000 for the period from October 2002 to October 2012. The
companies erected the towers in accordance with the agreements. However,
when these initial agreements expired, DSP and DoIT did not require the
23

--- Page 26 ---
companies to begin making lease payments even though their equipment was
still on the DSP and DoIT towers.
DSP and DoIT could not provide us with documentation of the renewals for
these agreements (see finding 1). However, based on standard lease rates for
similar resource sharing agreements, DoIT advised us that compensation
totaling approximately $575,000 ($375,000 for Westminster since May 2003
and $200,000 for Germantown since October 2012) should have been
received through June 2016.
DoIT, DSP, and DNR management personnel advised us that they believed the
law firm was monitoring the amounts owed by the telecommunications
companies. However, the law firm is a fiduciary of the telecommunications
companies and had no contractual obligation to monitor payments on the State’s
behalf. Therefore, each Department was responsible for ensuring the
telecommunications companies made the lease payments required under their
resource sharing agreements.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. establish procedures to ensure that all lease payments due from resource
sharing agreements are received, and
b. determine the amount of unpaid compensation for all 10 resource sharing
agreements and take necessary actions to collect the amounts from the
respective telecommunications companies.
Finding 5
Purchases made by DSP and DNR from the escrow accounts were not subject
to supervisory approval and were not made in accordance with State
procurement regulations, and no other attempts were made to ensure that
the best value was received.
Analysis
Purchases of equipment and services made by DSP and DNR using escrow
account funds were not subject to any independent supervisory review and
approval and were not made in accordance with State procurement regulations.
There was no documentation to substantiate that efforts were made to ensure the
best value was received. During the period from February 1, 2001 to June 30,
2016, approximately $3.8 million was disbursed from the escrow accounts for
purchases made by the law firm on behalf of DSP and DNR. We reviewed
purchases totaling approximately $1.5 million ($843,700 for DSP and $656,400
24

--- Page 27 ---
for DNR) that were made during the period from January 1, 2011 to June 30,
2016.
 Purchases made from escrow account funds on behalf of DSP and DNR were
not subject to independent supervisory review and approval by the respective
Departments. One information technology employee at DSP and one
information technology employee at DNR each singly decided what
equipment and services would be purchased and directed the law firm to make
payment to vendors on their behalf using escrow funds. To make a purchase,
these employees sent an email to the law firm requesting the purchase of
specific services or equipment from a specific vendor. The law firm complied
with the request if sufficient funds were available in the accounts and ordered
the equipment to be delivered or the services to be provided to DSP or DNR.
 Equipment and services obtained using funds from the escrow accounts were
not competitively procured, solicitations were not published on eMaryland
Marketplace, and procurements were not subject to control agency (such as
the Department of Budget and Management and DoIT) and Board of Public
Works approval, as required by State procurement regulations. In many cases,
these DSP and DNR employees requested that purchases be made from
vendors with which there were available Statewide contracts. However, there
was no evidence that the DSP and DNR employees made escrow fund
purchases using the rates, specifications, and terms provided in Statewide
contracts. As a result, assurance was lacking that DSP and DNR obtained
equipment and services at the most advantageous prices to the State.
We noted that, during the period from June 2013 to August 2015, the
aforementioned DSP employee directed the law firm to make multiple
purchases of a specific piece of telecommunications equipment (wireless
dispatch consolette) from a vendor, at a total cost of $258,800. This same
equipment could have been purchased through one of two Statewide contracts
at a total cost of approximately $184,700, resulting in savings of $74,100 (or
29 percent). The DSP employee was aware of the Statewide contracts and
was involved with procurements of these same items using the Statewide
contract. For example, in June 2014, the employee solely authorized the
purchase of six consolettes using escrow account funds at a unit cost of
$10,233. In September 2014, the employee was authorized by DSP to
purchase nine of these items using the normal DSP procurement process and a
Statewide contract for $7,533 per item—a difference of $2,700 per item. This
DSP employee advised us that the Statewide contracts were not used for
purchases with escrow funds because the actual purchases were made by the
25

--- Page 28 ---
law firm, not by a State agency. However, as noted above, the purchases were
controlled by and made on behalf of DSP and DNR.
As previously mentioned, DNR directed the law firm in July 2015 to cease
making any disbursements from the escrow accounts for either DSP or DNR
unless expressly authorized by DNR’s Deputy Secretary. As of June 30, 2016,
except for one transaction that was in process at that time, no other disbursements
for DSP or DNR purchases had been made from the accounts.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DSP and DNR
a. continue abiding by the current prohibition on the use of the escrow
account funds; and
b. determine the extent to which retroactive approval should be obtained
from the Board of Public Works, the Department of Budget and
Management, and DoIT for previous purchases from escrow funds, and
obtain those approvals.
Questionable Activities
Finding 6
The DNR employee who directed escrow account purchases authorized the
use of escrow funds for certain questionable activity related to the purchase
and installation of a telecommunications tower on DNR land.
Analysis
The DNR employee who directed the escrow account purchases authorized the
law firm to pay an out-of-State vendor to install a telecommunications tower on
DNR land without formal approval of DNR or DoIT officials and without
conducting a proper procurement or executing a written contract. DNR could not
document that the tower construction had been inspected, and the selection of the
vendor and certain of the payments appeared questionable.
In August 2012, the DNR employee initiated a bid solicitation for the installation
of a telecommunications tower. (The tower components had previously been
purchased by this employee with escrow funds.) According to DNR records, the
procurement was cancelled after the bids were evaluated. All bids exceeded
DNR’s $50,000 delegated procurement authority for information technology
contracts and, therefore, the procurement required DoIT’s review and approval,
which the DNR employee believed would take too long to obtain.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Several days after the cancellation, the employee authorized the law firm to
disburse $57,600 from the escrow account to the vendor that had submitted the
lowest bid on the original solicitation, even though that vendor had been
disqualified from the original procurement. The vendor was disqualified because
the bid was submitted after the bid submission deadline, did not contain all the
required affidavits (such as disclosure of no conflicts-of-interest or criminal
convictions, and a certificate of liability insurance), and did not provide
documentation for certain qualifications (such as past experience with installing
telecommunications towers, installing and aligning microwave antennas, and
tower climbing certification). In addition, the vendor was located out of state and
was not registered with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation as
required by State law. The DNR employee advised us that the vendor was
selected because DNR was familiar with the vendor’s performance on tower
maintenance services provided on other DNR towers. According to State records,
DNR had paid this vendor approximately $318,300 for tower maintenance
services during the period from July 2011 to November 2015.
DNR also did not have a written contract with the vendor as required by State
procurement regulations. As a result, terms and conditions (such as price, time
period, scope of work, legal recourse for non-performance) were not established.
In total, the vendor was paid $88,500 for the tower installation work, even though
the vendor’s original bid on the solicitation was $57,600—a difference of
$30,900. Based on our review, approximately $13,400 of this difference appeared
to be for labor related to the tower foundation work which was already included in
the scope of the original bid. The remaining $17,500 was for extra work
completed that was not included in the scope of the original procurement during
the solicitation process.
The failure to obtain DoIT’s review for the contract procurement is significant
because DoIT had a Statewide contract with preapproved vendors for tower
installation services. In addition, DoIT management advised us that inspections
are typically performed when towers are installed to ensure they are installed
according to specifications. These specifications include obtaining a certification
of concrete tower foundation footings, a certification of tower installation, and a
verification of electrical systems. The aforementioned vendor was not on the
DoIT Statewide contract and DNR could not provide documentation that the
tower was inspected after it was installed. The tower was subsequently inspected
in August 2016 by a DoIT contractor as part of the Statewide interoperability
wireless radio project known as Maryland First. The inspection concluded the
tower was adequately supported for the current equipment and could support the
loading of proposed equipment for the radio project.
27

--- Page 30 ---
According to DNR’s records, the total cost of the tower installation project was
approximately $138,400, which included the tower, communications equipment
and services, and installation services. The $88,500 paid to the aforementioned
vendor included $73,350 from escrow funds and $15,150 that was paid in
multiple transactions via the State’s corporate purchasing card.
In April 2016, DNR terminated the aforementioned employee. DNR management
advised us that the employee’s services were no longer needed and that the
termination was not related to the use of the escrow funds. Because of concerns
regarding the nature of this procurement, we referred this matter to the Criminal
Division of the Office of the Attorney General for its review.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DNR
a. submit the tower installation award to DoIT for retroactive review and
approval; and
b. in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General, determine the
extent to which any of the payments totaling $13,400 were
inappropriately paid to the vendor and pursue recovery.
Finding 7
The DNR employee who directed escrow account purchases processed a
unique arrangement with a telecommunications company without review and
approval from either DNR management or DoIT. The related payments
were deposited into an escrow account and were used to purchase equipment
without a competitive procurement and without DNR and control agency
approvals.
Analysis
The DNR employee who directed escrow account purchases processed an
arrangement with a telecommunications company without review and approval
from either DNR management or DoIT. The September 2008 agreement
specified that the telecommunications company would pay DNR $162,000 to
vacate its licenses to operate certain radio frequencies that interfered with cellular
equipment operated by the telecommunications company and for DNR to
purchase a replacement system. The funds received were deposited into one of
the escrow accounts used for the resource sharing agreements instead of being
deposited into the MITDP Fund as required by law. The funds were then used to
purchase the replacement system specified in the arrangement without any
competitive procurement.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Neither DNR nor DoIT were aware of the existence of this arrangement until we
brought it to their attention. According to State law, agreements related to radio
frequencies should be reviewed and approved by DoIT and the funds received
should have been deposited into the MITDP Fund. Because of concerns
regarding the nature of this procurement, we referred this matter to the Criminal
Division of the Office of the Attorney General for its review.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DNR and DoIT review the aforementioned arrangement
to determine whether State contract requirements have been met, the terms
promote the best interests of the State, and the agreement is properly
approved and executed.
Accountability and Control over Equipment Purchases
Finding 8
DSP and DNR did not record, tag, and inventory equipment purchased with
escrow account funds and could not readily determine the location of all
equipment purchased.
Analysis
DSP and DNR did not record, tag, and inventory equipment purchased with
escrow account funds and could not provide a listing or identify the location of
equipment purchased. Prior to or during our review, both DSP and DNR
attempted to identify equipment purchased with escrow funds but these efforts
were incomplete or were not comprehensive.
 In April and May of 2016, DSP reviewed equipment purchases made with
escrow funds during the period from January 1, 2013 to August 31, 2015
which, according to escrow account records, totaled approximately $625,600.
DSP attempted to locate the equipment, ensure it was properly tagged, and
record it in the equipment records. As of June 30, 2016, DSP’s review was
still in progress.
 In December 2015, DNR performed a physical inventory of equipment
purchased with escrow funds that had been installed on select
telecommunications towers to ensure the equipment was recorded and tagged;
however, DNR did not compare the results of this physical inventory with the
items purchased with escrow funds. Using available documentation, such as
email authorizations and vendor price quotes, we subsequently compared
purchases made with escrow funds, during the period from January 1, 2013 to
29

--- Page 32 ---
August 31, 2015, totaling approximately $337,500, with DNR’s physical
inventory results. Based upon our comparison it appears reasonable that DNR
had identified, tagged, and recorded these equipment items in December 2015.
Considering that disbursements from the escrow accounts totaled $3.8 million
during the approximately 15 years of their existence, the efforts recently made by
DSP and DNR do not address a significant portion of those expenditures. While
we recognize that, due to age, some of the equipment may have been disposed of
or become obsolete or inoperable, the Departments should obtain reasonable
assurance that they had received the equipment purchased and should attempt to
determine the related disposition.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DSP and DNR, to the extent practical,
a. expand the aforementioned inventory reviews to identify all equipment
purchased with escrow account funds,
b. tag and record located equipment in the inventory records, and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any equipment that cannot be
located.
30

--- Page 33 ---
APPENDIX
LARRY HOGAN
Governor
BOYD K. RUTHERFORD
Lieutenant Governor
State of Maryland
DAVID A. GARCIA
Department of Information Technology Secretary
Mr. Thomas J. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
State of Maryland
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, MD 21201
Dear Mr. Barnickel:
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) has reviewed your draft audit report
covering the Special Review of Resource Sharing Lease Agreements. As requested, our
responses to the Findings in the report, as related to DoIT, are attached.
For additional clarification purposes, the two leases ascribed to DoIT and reviewed as part of this
audit were originally entered into in 2002 by the Department of Budget and Management. Prior
to the creation of DoIT as a Unit of State government in 2008, the information technology
functions of the Executive Branch were the responsibility of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM). The asset in the leases ascribed to DoIT is now categorized as a DoIT asset
and our review treats the leases as if they were DoIT leases.
If you have any questions or need additional information, you may contact my Chief of Staff at
(410) 697-9403 or al.bullock@maryland.gov.
Sincerely,
David A. Garcia, Secretary
Department of Information Technology
cc: Mr. Al Bullock, Chief of Staff
Mr. Douglas Carrey-Beaver, Principal Counsel
100 Community PL Crownsville, MD 21032-2022
DOIT.MARYLAND.GOV
Tel:(410)697-9700 TTY Users: Call via Maryland Relay

--- Page 34 ---
DoIT Response to Findings and Recommendations
Resource Sharing Lease Agreements Special Review
November 2016
Oversight of Resource Sharing Agreements
Finding 1
The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) did not maintain
comprehensive records of telecommunications resource sharing agreements.
Certain arrangements regarding the related lease payments, such as the
depositing of payments into escrow accounts outside of the State’s control,
were inconsistent with DoIT’s understanding of the requirements of State
law. DoIT did not take timely action to address these arrangements.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DoIT
a. maintain a comprehensive record of all telecommunications resource
sharing agreements administered by State agencies under its jurisdiction,
maintain copies of those agreements, and require the agencies to
periodically (such as, annually) report the status of the agreements;
b. discontinue use of the escrow accounts;
c. working with DSP and DNR, determine the disposition of the remaining
escrow account funds and all future resource sharing agreement lease
payments; and
d. evaluate whether there is any recourse or action to be taken if it is
determined that escrow funds should have been deposited into the
MITDP Fund and that the funds were used in a manner inconsistent with
the MITDP Fund’s purposes.
DoIT Response
While we agree that DoIT employees became aware in April 2011 of the
longstanding practice of two telecommunications companies depositing lease
payments into escrow accounts maintained by a law firm and that no action was
taken at that time, we would like to acknowledge that DoIT Executive
Management did take action to address the matter immediately as soon as they
became aware of the practice in July 2015.
a. Concur. DoIT will appropriately maintain all records provided and is
exploring what avenue of reporting best fits within its authority.
b. Concur. However, we disagree to the extent the recommendation suggests
that DoIT made use of escrow agreements.
1

--- Page 35 ---
c. Concur. The Departments have agreed that the remaining escrow account
funds, as well as all future resource sharing agreement lease payments,
will be deposited into the MITDP Fund.
d. Concur.
Finding 2
DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not maintain comprehensive records of resource
sharing agreements for their own telecommunications towers, properly
execute or obtain required approvals for renewals, nor maintain records of
equipment attached to their towers.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. maintain a comprehensive record of their resource sharing agreements
and copies of any renewal options exercised;
b. review existing agreements and determine whether the terms should be
renegotiated, ensure the existing arrangements with the
telecommunications companies are supported by executed agreements or
renewal options, and ensure that new agreements valued at $100,000 or
more, are retroactively submitted to BPW for approval;
c. establish and maintain complete inventory records of all equipment
attached to State-owned telecommunications towers under their
jurisdiction and ensure that resource sharing agreements or memoranda
of understanding have been executed with all entities with equipment
attached to the towers.
DoIT Response
a. Concur.
b. Concur.
c. Concur.
2

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 3
The financial transactions pertaining to escrow account funds were not
recorded in the State’s accounting records and were not monitored by State
officials, and related interest earnings were retained by the law firm. DSP
and DNR personnel did not ensure that account disbursements agreed with
the amounts of related purchases.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. in consultation with the Department of Budget and Management and
the State Comptroller’s Office, determine the proper method for
recording any current fiscal year escrow account revenue and
expenditure transactions in the State’s accounting records;
b. obtain all bank statements for escrow accounts until they are closed
and verify the propriety of all transactions;
c. in consultation with legal counsel, determine whether the State can
recover any interest retained by the law firm; and
d. to the extent practical, obtain and review invoices for purchases made
with escrow account funds, compare them to amounts disbursed from
the accounts, and take appropriate action for any differences
identified.
DoIT Response
Although not a party to the escrow agreements DoIT is happy to assist with all
review and corrective actions.
a. Concur.
b. Concur.
c. Concur.
d. Concur.
Finding 4
DoIT, DSP, and DNR and did not ensure that all compensation due under
the resource sharing agreements was collected and, consequently, certain
payments were not received.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. establish procedures to ensure that all lease payments due from resource
sharing agreements are received, and
3

--- Page 37 ---
b. determine the amount of unpaid compensation for all 10 resource sharing
agreements and take necessary actions to collect the amounts from the
respective telecommunications companies.
DoIT Response
a. Concur. DoIT has instituted new standard language for all resource
sharing leases that correctly direct payments to the MITDPF.
b. Concur.
Finding 5
Purchases made by DSP and DNR from the escrow accounts were not subject
to supervisory approval and were not made in accordance with State
procurement regulations, and no other attempts were made to ensure that
the best value was received.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DSP and DNR
a. continue abiding by the current prohibition on the use of the escrow
account funds; and
b. determine the extent to which retroactive approval should be obtained
from the Board of Public Works, the Department of Budget and
Management, and DoIT for previous purchases from escrow funds, and
obtain those approvals.
No response from DoIT necessary as there was no recommendation for DoIT.
Questionable Activities
Finding 6
The DNR employee who directed escrow account purchases authorized the
use of escrow funds for certain questionable activity related to the purchase
and installation of a telecommunications tower on DNR land.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DNR
a. submit the tower installation award to DoIT for retroactive review and
approval; and
b. in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General, determine the
extent to which any of the payments totaling $13,400 were
inappropriately paid to the vendor and pursue recovery.
4

--- Page 38 ---
No response from DoIT necessary as there was no recommendation for DoIT.
Finding 7
The DNR employee who directed escrow account purchases processed a
unique arrangement with a telecommunications company without review and
approval from either DNR management or DoIT. The related payments
were deposited into an escrow account and were used to purchase equipment
without a competitive procurement and without DNR and control agency
approvals.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DNR and DoIT review the aforementioned arrangement
to determine whether State contract requirements have been met, the terms
promote the best interests of the State, and the agreement is properly
approved and executed.
DoIT Response
Concur.
Accountability and Control over Equipment Purchases
Finding 8
DSP and DNR did not record, tag, and inventory equipment purchased with
escrow account funds and could not readily determine the location of all
equipment purchased.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DSP and DNR, to the extent practical,
a. expand the aforementioned inventory reviews to identify all equipment
purchased with escrow account funds,
b. tag and record located equipment in the inventory records, and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any equipment that cannot be
located.
No response from DoIT necessary as there was no recommendation for DoIT.
5

--- Page 40 ---
Special Review
Department of State Police Response to
Office of Legislative Audit
RESOURCE SHARING LEASE AGREEMENTS
October 2016
1

--- Page 41 ---
Finding 2
DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not maintain comprehensive records of resource sharing
agreements for their own telecommunications towers, properly execute or obtain
required approvals for renewals, nor maintain records of equipment attached to their
towers.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. maintain a comprehensive record of their resource sharing agreements and copies
of any renewal options exercised;
b. review existing agreements and determine whether the terms should be
renegotiated, ensure the existing arrangements with the telecommunications
companies are supported by executed agreements or renewal options, and ensure
that new agreements, as well as renewals valued at $200,000 or more, are
retroactively submitted to BPW for approval; and
c. establish and maintain complete inventory records of all equipment attached to
State-owned telecommunications towers under their jurisdiction and ensure that
resource sharing agreements or memoranda of understanding have been executed
with all entities with equipment attached to the towers.
MDSP Response:
a. MDSP agrees: MDSP will maintain comprehensive records of all resource sharing
agreements including any renewal options exercised.
b. MDSP agrees: MDSP will review all existing agreements for resource sharing lease
agreements. MDSP will ensure that any new agreements, including renewals, valued at
$200,000 or more are submitted to the BPW for approval.
c. MDSP agrees: MDSP has already begun to comply with this recommendation and will
continue to identify all equipment attached to State-owned towers under MDSP’s
jurisdiction. MDSP will ensure that a memorandum of understanding will be executed
with all entities with equipment attached to the towers.
2

--- Page 42 ---
Finding 3
The financial transactions pertaining to escrow account funds were not recorded in
the State’s accounting records and were not monitored by State officials, and related
interest earnings were retained by the law firm. DSP and DNR personnel did not
ensure that account disbursements agreed with the amounts of related purchases.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. in consultation with the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the
State Comptroller’s Office, determine the proper method for recording any
current fiscal year escrow account revenue and expenditure transactions in the
State’s accounting records;
b. obtain all bank statements for escrow accounts until they are closed and verify the
propriety of all transactions;
c. in consultation with legal counsel, determine whether the State can recover any
interest retained by the law firm; and
d. to the extent practical, obtain and review invoices for purchases made with escrow
account funds, compare them to amounts disbursed from the accounts, and take
appropriate action for any differences identified.
MDSP Response:
a. MDSP agrees: MDSP will work with DBM and the Comptroller’s Office to determine
the proper method for recording current fiscal year escrow account information.
b. MDSP agrees: MDSP will try, to the extent that escrow bank records are available and
received, to verify all transactions within the escrow account pertaining to MDSP.
c. MDSP agrees: MDSP will consult with legal counsel to determine whether the State
can recover any interest retained by the law firm.
d. MDSP agrees: MDSP will, to the extent practical, obtain and review invoices for
purchases made with escrow account funds, compare them to amounts disbursed from
the accounts, and take appropriate action for any differences identified.
3

--- Page 43 ---
Finding 4
DoIT, DSP, and DNR and did not ensure that all compensation due under the
resource sharing agreements was collected and, consequently, certain payments were
not received.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR
a. establish procedures to ensure that all lease payments due from resource sharing
agreements are received, and
b. determine the amount of unpaid compensation for all 10 resource sharing
agreements and take necessary actions to collect the amounts from the respective
telecommunications companies.
MDSP Response:
a. MDSP agrees: MDSP will establish procedures to ensure that all lease payments due
from resource sharing agreements with MDSP are received.
b. MDSP agrees: MDSP will take necessary steps to collect from the appropriate
telecommunications companies any unpaid compensation for those resource sharing
agreements executed between MDSP and the telecommunications company.
4

--- Page 44 ---
Finding 5
Purchases made by DSP and DNR from the escrow accounts were not subject to
supervisory approval and were not made in accordance with State procurement
regulations, and no other attempts were made to ensure that the best value was
received.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DSP and DNR
a. continue abiding by the current prohibition on the use of the escrow account
funds; and
b. determine the extent to which retroactive approval should be obtained from the
Board of Public Works, the Department of Budget and Management, and DoIT
for previous purchases from escrow funds, and obtain those approvals.
MDSP Response:
a. MDSP agrees: MDSP will continue abiding by the current prohibition on the use of
the escrow account funds.
b. MDSP agrees: MDSP will determine the extent to which retroactive approval should
be obtained from the Board of Public Works, the Department of Budget and
Management, and DoIT for previous purchases from escrow funds, and obtain those
approvals.
5

--- Page 45 ---
Finding 8
DSP and DNR did not record, tag, and inventory equipment purchased with escrow
account funds and could not readily determine the location of all equipment
purchased.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DSP and DNR, to the extent practical,
a. expand the aforementioned inventory reviews to identify all equipment purchased
with escrow account funds,
b. tag and record located equipment in the inventory records, and
c. take appropriate corrective action for any equipment that cannot be located.
MDSP Response:
a. MDSP Agrees: MDSP immediately conducted an internal review of the
aforementioned equipment with the assistance of MDSP’s Internal Audit Section. To
the extent possible, due to the availability of records, MDSP will continue to identify
all equipment purchased with escrow account funds.
b. MDSP agrees: MDSP has already begun and will continue to tag and record into
MDSP’s inventory records, equipment purchased with escrow account funds.
c. MDSP agrees: MDSP, based upon the availability of records and to the extent
practical, will take appropriate corrective action for any equipment purchased with
escrow account funds that cannot be located.
6

--- Page 47 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Response to OLA Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
Finding 2
DoIT, DSP, and DNR did not maintain comprehensive records of resource sharing
agreements for their own telecommunications towers, properly execute or obtain required
approvals for renewals, nor maintain records of equipment attached to their towers.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DoIT, DSP and DNR:
a. Maintain a comprehensive record of their resource sharing agreements and copies
of any renewal options exercised;
b. Review existing agreements and determine whether the terms should be
renegotiated, ensure the existing arrangements with the telecommunications
companies are supported by executed agreements or renewal options, and ensure
that new agreements, as well as renewals valued at $200,000 or more, are
retroactively submitted to BPW for approval; and
c. Establish and maintain complete inventory records of all equipment attached to
State-owned telecommunications towers under their jurisdiction and ensure that
resource sharing agreements or memoranda of understanding have been executed
with all entities with equipment attached to the towers.
The Department agrees with the finding and the related recommendations.
The Department has executed a new Resource Sharing Policy to clarify proper procedure for
such transactions effective March 1, 2016.
Finding 3
The financial transactions pertaining to escrow account funds were not recorded in the
State’s accounting records and were not monitored by State officials; and related interest
earnings were retained by the law firm. DSP and DNR personnel did not ensure that
account disbursements agreed with the amounts of related purchases.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that DoIT, DSP and DNR:
a. In consultation with the Department of Budget and Management and the State
Comptroller’s Office, determine the proper method for recording any current fiscal
year escrow account revenue and expenditure transactions in the State’s accounting
records;
b. Obtain all bank statements for escrow accounts until they are closed and verify the
propriety of all transactions;
c. In consultation with legal counsel, determine whether the State can recover any
interest retained by the law firm; and
Page 1 of 4

--- Page 48 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Response to OLA Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
d. To the extent practical, obtain and review invoices for purchases made with escrow
account funds, compare them to amounts disbursed from the accounts, and take
appropriate action for any differences identified.
The Department agrees with the finding and related recommendations.
The Department’s internal audit reviewed bank statements for the escrow accounts and invoices
for all DNR purchases made through the escrow accounts for the period January 1, 2013 to
August 31, 2015 and found that all purchases were accounted for and there was no questionable
activity.
Finding 4
DoIT, DSP and DNR did not ensure that all compensation due under the resource sharing
agreements was collected and, consequently, certain payments were not received.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that DoIT, DSP, and DNR:
a. Establish procedures to ensure that all lease payments due from resource sharing
agreements are received; and
b. Determine the amount of unpaid compensation for all 10 resource sharing
agreements and take necessary actions to collect the amounts from the respective
telecommunications companies.
The Department agrees with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 5
Purchases made by DSP and DNR from the escrow accounts were not subject to
supervisory approval and were not made in accordance with State procurement
regulations; and no other attempts were made to ensure that the best value was received.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DSP and DNR:
a. Continue abiding by the current prohibition on the use of the escrow account funds;
and
b. Determine the extent to which retroactive approval should be obtained from the
Board of Public Works, the Department of Budget and Management, and DoIT for
previous purchases from escrow funds, and obtain those approvals.
The Department agrees with the finding and related recommendations. DNR initiated the current
freeze on the use of escrow account funds on August 27, 2015, shortly after it became aware of
the funds existence.
Page 2 of 4

--- Page 49 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Response to OLA Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
DNR will abide by the prohibition on the use of escrow account funds, and will work to secure
retroactive approval should it be deemed appropriate by the Board of Public Works, the
Department of Budget & Management, and the Office of the Attorney General.
Finding 6
The DNR employee who directed escrow account purchases authorized the use of escrow
funds for certain questionable activity related to the purchase and installation of a
telecommunications tower on DNR land.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DNR :
a. Submit the tower installation award to DoIT for retroactive review and approval;
and
b. In consultation with the Office of the Attorney General, determine the extent to
which any of the payments totaling $13,400 were inappropriately paid to the vendor
and pursue recovery.
The Department agrees with the finding and related recommendations.
Finding 7
The DNR employee who directed escrow account purchases processed a unique
arrangement with a telecommunications company without review and approval from either
DNR management or DoIT. The related payments were deposited into an escrow account
and were used to purchase equipment without a competitive procurement and without
DNR and control agency approvals.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DNR and DoIT review the aforementioned arrangement to determine
whether State contract requirements have been met, the terms promote the best interests of
the State, and the agreement is properly approved and executed.
The Department agrees with the finding and related recommendation.
Finding 8
DSP and DNR did not record, tag, and inventory equipment purchased with escrow
account funds and could not readily determine the location of all equipment purchased.
Recommendation 8
Page 3 of 4

--- Page 50 ---
Department of Natural Resources
Response to OLA Special Review – Resource Sharing Lease Agreements
We recommend that DSP and DNR, to the extent practical :
a. Expand the aforementioned inventory reviews to identify all equipment purchased
with escrow account funds;
b. Tag and record located equipment in the inventory records; and
c. Take appropriate corrective action for any equipment that cannot be located.
The Department agrees with the finding and related recommendations.
The DNR completed a physical inventory in December 2015 that accounted for all items
purchased with escrow funds during the period of its internal audit (1/1/2013-8/31/2015). All
items have been tagged and recorded in compliance with the provisions of the Inventory Control
Manual (1 Jul 2012) issued by the Maryland Department of General Services. There have been
no purchases using escrow funds subsequent to this Special Review.
Page 4 of 4

--- Page 51 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
David O. Mauriello, CPA
Senior Auditor
Joshua A. Naylor
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
Joseph E. McWilliams, CFE