Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2016
Date: 12/19/2017
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3bcc9d72404c150ab5
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:02:16.224466
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Purpose of Review and Background Information
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2016. We
reviewed these audit reports to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted
net position, or uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the
results of that review.
According to the State's records, State aid totaling approximately $302 million
was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16 community colleges for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2016. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and student
enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and various
other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College) is a
budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation. Baltimore
City Community College is not subject to the Education Article, Section 16-
315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual financial
statement audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits for which separate audit reports are issued.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires MHEC to adopt guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on
the colleges. The guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors
to express opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial
statements as well as of the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating
the State aid to the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue
management letters containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of
internal controls. While not required, many of the auditors issue management
letters that contain additional recommendations that were not considered material
weaknesses.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
All 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2016 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2016.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions; however, one report was
not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2016 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
However, one community college audit report reviewed for fiscal year 2016 did
not express opinions on all opinion units included in the college’s basic financial
statements as required by generally accepted auditing standards. Specifically, the
independent auditor’s report for Chesapeake College did not express an opinion
regarding the College’s aggregate remaining fund information (that is, the
College’s Fiduciary Funds). This situation was also noted during our preceding
year’s review. MHEC advised us that it would notify the College of this
deficiency and ensure that it is corrected in future audits.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Statements
Three community colleges’ financial statements disclosed deficit balances in
the unrestricted portion of their net position at June 30, 2016.
Our review disclosed three colleges with deficit balances in the unrestricted
component of their net position as of June 30, 2016.
Colleges with Deficit Unrestricted Balances as of June 30, 2016
Unrestricted Net Position
College
Deficit
Anne Arundel Community College $24,515,440
Community College of Baltimore County $8,707,879
Carroll Community College $15,865,765
This situation was also noted in the financial statements for Anne Arundel and
Carroll Community Colleges for each fiscal year since 2011 and 2009,
respectively. For these two colleges, the unrestricted net position deficits
increased during fiscal year 2016. An unrestricted net position deficit balance
represents the costs of current or past services that will need to be financed in
future periods and could indicate a potential financial problem.
We did not perform a detailed analysis to determine the cause of these deficits;
nevertheless, the Colleges’ financial statements and accompanying notes
contained certain pertinent information relative to the deficits. Specifically,
review of the colleges’ financial statements disclosed that the unrestricted net
position could be attributed to other postemployment benefit liabilities which at
June 30, 2016 totaled $32.8 million for Anne Arundel Community College and
$20.2 million for Carroll Community College. For the Community College of
Baltimore County, the other postemployment benefit liability totaled $2.6 million,
and the College also had a net pension liability of $6.8 million.
Generally accepted accounting principles specify that liabilities for
postemployment benefits (such as healthcare benefits) and pensions, which are
deferred until retirement or another future event, be recognized in the years in
which the employee provides services rather than during the postemployment
period when payments are made.
5

--- Page 8 ---
The financial statements of one community college disclosed bank deposits
that were not fully collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by State
law.
The financial statements of Wor-Wic Community College disclosed that bank
deposits were not fully collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by State
law. Specifically, these financial statements disclosed that at June 30, 2016, cash
deposits totaling $268,593 were not adequately collateralized, or otherwise
insured, as required by State law.
The Local Government Article, Section 17-101 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland requires that deposits with financial institutions by local government
units (including community colleges) be fully collateralized. In addition, this
Section of the law requires that collateral be of the types specified in the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 6-202 of the Code. Full
collateralization is necessary to minimize the risk of loss of a deposit in the event
of the default of a financial institution.
One community college’s financial statements did not meet certain
requirements of generally accepted accounting principles.
Our review disclosed one college did not meet certain requirements of generally
accepted accounting principles. Specifically, Chesapeake College’s Net
Investment in Capital Assets net position component for business-type activities
($72,873,249) presented on the Statement of Net Position was not calculated as
required by Section 2200 of the Codification of Governmental Accounting and
Financial Standards published by Government Accounting Standards Board.
MHEC advised us that it would notify the College of the deficiency and ensure it
is corrected in future audits.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Management Letters
Management letters for fiscal year 2016 included a total of 22
recommendations for improvement related to a college’s compliance with
requirements. Three of these recommendations were considered material
weaknesses.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2016. Our
review disclosed that 6 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations; the remaining 9 community colleges received a total of 22
recommendations. Three of these recommendations were considered material
weaknesses. The material weaknesses were found to exist at Montgomery
College and Prince George’s Community College and were related to accounting
and financial reporting.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the Colleges’ responses to the
material weaknesses and determined that appropriate corrective actions were
indicated.
MHEC was not required to formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’
responses to the 19 other recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s
guidelines, comments and suggestions related to these deficiencies are not
required. When auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up
actions are subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2016
recommendations by fiscal area. Seven of the 22 recommendations were repeated
from the preceding year.
Management Letter Recommendations for Fiscal Year 2016
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Student enrollment and residency 10
Financial aid 6
Accounting and financial reporting 5
Grants and contracts 1
Total 22
7

--- Page 10 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Bekana Edossa, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor