Title: Department of Transportation - Maryland Transit Administration - Interagency Agreements with Towson University
Date: 02/03/2015
Type: Fraud, Waste, and Abuse
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509dc
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:01:45.825685
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Review
Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Interagency Agreements with Towson University
Interagency Agreements with Towson University’s Division of Economic and
Community Outreach Enabled MTA to Circumvent State Procurement
Regulations
Lack of Proper Controls Precluded Effective Monitoring of Services and Billings
MTA Did Not Adequately Follow Up on Certain Questionable Activities
February 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 4
Background Information 6
Agency Responsibilities 6
Overview 6
Findings and Recommendations 9
Interagency Agreements with Towson University’s Division of Economic
and Community Outreach
Finding 1 – One MTA Employee Exercised Excessive Control Over 9
Certain Interagency Agreements Which Circumvented State
Procurement Regulations and Allowed MTA to Augment its
Staff Beyond its Budgetary Positions
Finding 2 – The Cost of Certain Services Appeared Excessive or Varied 11
Among Similar Services, and the Related Terms Precluded Effective
Monitoring of Hours Worked
Finding 3 – Advanced Payment and Lack of Documentation Precluded 12
Effective Verification of Amounts Billed and Certain Charges Were
Inconsistent with or Were Not Authorized in the Related Task Order.
Records of the Agreements, Amendments, and Related Task Orders
Were Not Maintained
Finding 4 – MTA Could Not Document That Certain Deliverables Were 14
Received
Finding 5 – MTA Did Not Take Adequate Follow-up Action When 15
Questionable Activities of One Employee Were Identified
Agency Response Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a review of an allegation related to certain interagency agreements
between the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) and Towson University’s
Division of Economic and Community Outreach (DECO)1 that was received
through our fraud hotline. DECO serves as a conduit through which Towson
University can collaborate with businesses, non-profit organizations, government
agencies, and community members to provide research and technical services that
create solutions addressing issues its clients are facing.
The allegation related to possible violations of State budget and procurement laws
and regulations regarding the procurement and use of the agreements. The
purpose of our review was to determine whether the allegation we received was
valid and to determine if the related activities violated State law, regulations, and
policies. This review was performed in accordance with State Government
Article, Section 2-1220 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
At the start of our review we asked MTA management to provide us with a record
of all its interagency agreements for fiscal years 2010 through 2013, as well as the
related payment activity. MTA was unable to provide us with a comprehensive
list; therefore, we compiled a listing for our
purposes using payment data obtained from
Table 1
State accounting records. We identified 11
MTA Payments to DECO
agreements (several of which were renewed
(by Fiscal Year)
annually during our review period) between
$4,935,355
MTA and DECO with related payments
totaling $11.3 million (Table 1), of which $3,130,130
$1,801,136
90 percent were funded by the $1,462,327
Transportation Trust Fund, and 10 percent
with federal funds. Additional payments 2010 2011 2012 2013
were processed both before and after this Source: MTA Records
period that were not subject to our review.
Since the allegation we received related to agreements created by MTA’s Office
of Training and Development2 (OTD), we focused our review on the 10
agreements executed by OTD and payments associated with 8 agreements totaling
$10.6 million. OTD was responsible for developing the scope of these
agreements, preparing and issuing the related task orders, monitoring the related
work, and approving the invoices. The remaining agreement was administered by
another MTA unit and was not included in our review.
1 DECO was renamed the Division of Innovation and Applied Research on December 1, 2012.
2 This Office is currently known as the Office of Operations Training (OOT).
4

--- Page 7 ---
Our review consisted of tests, analyses, observations, and discussions with MTA
and DECO personnel and others, as we deemed necessary, to achieve our
objectives. The results of our review of the allegation are identified in Finding 1.
Our review identified other issues regarding the use of and monitoring of these
agreements which are identified in the remaining findings. Our review did not
constitute an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Our review was conducted during the period from March
2013 through August 2013 and was updated for agency actions through July 31,
2014.
The Maryland Department of Transportation’s response, on behalf of MTA, to
our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this report. As
prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, we will advise the Department regarding the results of our review of its
response.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Agency Responsibilities
The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA), a unit of the Maryland Department
of Transportation (MDOT), is responsible for the construction, operation, and
maintenance of the Baltimore metropolitan area transit system and for commuter
services in suburban areas of the State. Transit modes in operation primarily
include the Metro subway, bus, light rail, and the Maryland Rail Commuter
(MARC) service. MTA is headquartered in Baltimore City and maintains a
workforce of approximately 3,100 employees.
Overview
Interagency agreements are used by State agencies to obtain services from State
institutions of higher education, such as information technology assistance and
training. Interagency agreements are exempt from State procurement laws,
including the requirements for competitive procurement, publication of
solicitations and awards, and Board of Public Works’ approval. State budget law
requires agencies to report all interagency agreements with institutions of higher
education that are valued at more than $100,000 to the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) which, in turn, is responsible for reporting the agreements to
the General Assembly’s budget committees. MTA’s Office of Training and
Development (OTD) entered into 10 interagency agreements with Towson
University’s Division of Economic and Community Outreach (DECO) for fiscal
years 2010 through 2013 to provide various goods and services with related
payments under 8 agreements totaling $10.6 million.
One of the agreements, which was renewed annually, provided for DECO to
supply MTA with personnel for various services (referred to as the employment
services agreement in this report). While initially for training services, the scope
of services under this agreement was expanded to include other services. The
number of personnel included under the agreement ranged from 11 individuals in
2010 to 57 individuals in 2013, and the related expenditures increased from
$668,466 in fiscal year 2010 to $2,961,172 in fiscal year 2013 as shown in Table
2. Payments were based on a fixed price for each individual with an unspecified
amount going to DECO for administration of the contract.
The other nine agreements (referred to as course development and delivery
agreements in this report) provided for DECO to develop and deliver various
training to MTA personnel. The agreements varied in scope and duration and had
training topics covering a wide range of subjects such as Microsoft, homeland
6

--- Page 9 ---
security, racial acceptance, and bus operator mentor. The largest of these
agreements (master training services) included up to 23 different training courses
on various topics (such as violence in the workplace, business writing, and stress
management) while the remaining agreements were focused on one area of
training. For many of these agreements, MTA prepared task orders that further
detailed the work to be performed, including deliverables. In contrast to the
employment services agreement, payments under these agreements were
generally based on a fixed price per course for development and additional fees
for each class delivered, as well as for other deliverables such as development and
production of training manuals, DVDs, videos, and online resources.
Our review disclosed several issues with the usage, cost, documentation, and
monitoring of the agreements and related expenditures. Some of these issues
were included in our audit report of the University System of Maryland (USM) –
Towson University (TU) dated June 18, 2013. The USM Office’s response to that
report, on behalf of TU, indicated that it had implemented several monitoring and
oversight procedures related to these agreements and for future interagency
agreements it would implement a formal recruitment process for employees hired.
After discussing our preliminary concerns with MTA and MDOT management,
MTA elected not to renew the aforementioned employment services agreement
for fiscal year 2014. We were advised by MTA management that certain of the
individuals employed under the agreement have subsequently been placed on the
MTA regular or contractual payroll in a manner consistent with State personnel
guidelines. We were advised that MTA renewed certain course development and
delivery agreements for fiscal year 2014.
7

--- Page 10 ---
We also identified possible conflicts of interest, questionable payments, and poor
procedures and controls for the administration of the agreements. Certain of these
matters were referred by MTA to the State Ethics Commission in August 2012
prior to the start of our review. In addition, after we notified MDOT management
of our preliminary findings, certain matters were referred by MDOT to the
Criminal Division of the Office of Attorney General in May 2013. MTA should
consult with the Office of the Attorney General before taking any actions related
to the findings contained in this report. A referral to the Criminal Division does
not mean that a criminal act has actually occurred or that criminal charges will be
filed.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Interagency Agreements with Towson University’s Division of
Economic and Community Outreach (DECO)
Finding 1
One Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) employee exercised excessive
control over certain interagency agreements. The agreements circumvented
State procurement regulations that require competitive bidding and allowed
MTA to augment its staff beyond its budgetary positions.
Analysis
MTA lacked adequate controls over interagency agreements with Towson
University’s Division of Economic and Community Outreach (DECO). The
agreements circumvented State procurement regulations which require a
competitive procurement process and allowed MTA to augment its staff beyond
its budgetary positions. Specifically, we noted the following questionable
conditions related to the use of the course development and delivery agreements
and the employment services agreement.
 One MTA employee had unilateral authority to create and modify the
interagency agreements, amendments, and related task orders. Our review
disclosed that this employee was the sole MTA signatory on virtually all of
the agreements, related amendments, and task orders during fiscal years 2010,
2011, and 2012. (The employee was terminated in November 2012.)
 MTA directed DECO to use private vendors for some or all of the services
specified in three of the course development and delivery agreements, thereby
circumventing State procurement regulations. For example, our review of one
agreement disclosed that DECO subcontracted with private vendors to provide
the majority of the services, including printing and reproduction, course
development, and project management. In this regard, the subcontractor’s
invoices accounted for $983,000 (or 91 percent) of the $1.1 million MTA paid
to DECO. We were advised by DECO management that MTA directed them
to the specific vendors to be used for the services and that DECO then entered
into agreements with the vendors without obtaining competitive bids.
 The individuals providing services under certain agreements were not
independently hired by DECO. For example, in the employment services
agreement, MTA identified the individuals who were to be employed by
DECO to provide the specified services and the related costs for each
9

--- Page 12 ---
individual. Our review of 25 individuals who were included in one or more
employment services agreement during fiscal years 2010 through 2013
disclosed that 19 of these individuals had previously been employed by MTA
or by a contractor that performed services for MTA. Additionally, for 15 of
these 19 individuals, the duties under the agreement were similar to those
performed when the individuals were employed by or for MTA.
The daily monitoring of these individuals, including assigning tasks and
ensuring defined responsibilities were performed, was MTA’s responsibility
and, accordingly, DECO had no apparent involvement. Based on our review,
the extent of DECO’s involvement under the employment services agreement
generally consisted of hiring the individuals specified by MTA and paying
their salaries. Although not specified in any of the annual agreements, we
were advised by DECO management that the agreement costs included an
administrative fee of 10 percent. The invoices did not disclose an
administrative fee until the fiscal year 2013 invoices which delineated the
administrative costs at 10 percent of the labor fees. Assuming a consistent
administrative fee for all contract years, we estimated that administrative fees
totaled $629,324 during fiscal years 2010 through 2013.
DECO’s lack of involvement in these agreements was not consistent with its
mission to provide a “bridge that links the highly qualified research and project
talent of the University to the larger community it serves.” Furthermore, MTA’s
control of the selection, work duties, and oversight raises questions as to the
propriety of using interagency agreements rather than competitively procuring the
services as required by State Procurement Regulations. Accordingly, assurance
was lacking that these services were obtained at the most advantageous prices to
the State. MTA management acknowledged that the agreements were used as a
mechanism to employ individuals when it lacked budgeted positions to perform
the tasks. MTA management further advised that they were unaware that this was
an improper use of the agreements and thought it would be an effective way to
obtain the required services and personnel needed for various MTA activities.
Since these services were obtained under an interagency agreement between
government agencies, MTA was not required to use a competitive procurement
process mandated by State Procurement Regulations for service procurements
greater than $25,000.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that the agreements and related amendments and task orders are
subject to independent supervisory review and approval, and
b. discontinue its practice of using interagency agreements to circumvent
budgetary restrictions and procurement regulations.
Finding 2
The cost of certain services under the agreements appeared excessive or
varied among similar services, and the related terms of the employment
services agreement precluded effective monitoring of hours worked.
Analysis
The amounts paid for certain services under the agreements appeared excessive or
varied among similar services, and the related terms of the employment services
agreement did not specify the hours to be worked to enable effective monitoring.
 The amounts paid for certain services appeared excessive. For example, the
fiscal year 2012 employment services agreement provided for an annual fee of
$212,509 for one individual to perform certain tasks (that is, to provide project
management for MTA transit bus procurements). This fee exceeded the
amount the individual was previously paid while working for an MTA
contractor ($132,000 according to the employment application) to perform
similar services. MTA paid $106, 255 for this individual for the first half of
fiscal year 2012 but MTA management subsequently modified the agreement,
reducing this employee’s fee to $67,600 for the last six months of the contract.
MTA further reduced the fee in the fiscal year 2013 agreement to $99,752 per
year. MTA management advised us that the reduced fee was based on input
from MTA’s human resources legal staff.
 The amounts paid varied for similar services. For example, under the 2011
master training services agreement, a task order to provide training to new
employees, managers, and interpreters had rates of $2,000, $2,750, and
$1,500, respectively, even though each course was a four-hour course and was
taught by the same instructor. In addition, the employment services
agreement provided for MTA to pay a fee for one individual that was $8,900
more than the fee paid for another individual working under the agreement
who had the same job description.
 The employment services agreement specified salaries but not hours to be
worked by the individuals or whether they would be eligible to earn and use
11

--- Page 14 ---
paid leave, precluding effective monitoring. In addition, our test of 10
individual contracts between DECO and the employees and the related
timesheets disclosed that the individuals working under the agreement were
awarded and subsequently used paid leave while working on the MTA
agreement.
MTA could not explain how it developed the pricing for the aforementioned
agreements and the reasons for rate and salary variances and there was no
independent analysis to determine whether the fees charged by DECO were
reasonable.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, MTA ensure
a. amounts paid under interagency agreements are reasonable and
supported, and
b. agreements contain sufficient details to enable effective monitoring.
Finding 3
Advanced payment of certain DECO invoices and lack of documentation
precluded effective verification of the amounts billed and certain amounts
invoiced were inconsistent with or were not authorized in the related task
order. MTA did not maintain records of the agreements, amendments, and
related task orders.
Analysis
Advanced payment of certain DECO invoices and lack of support precluded
effective verification of the amounts billed and certain amounts invoiced were
inconsistent with or were not provided in the related task order. In addition, MTA
did not maintain records of the agreements, amendments, and related task orders.
 The employment services agreement specified that MTA would pay DECO
prior to the end of each quarter, before the related services were provided.
Specifically, MTA made advance payments in quarterly increments during
fiscal years 2010 through 2012 based upon the individuals and related salaries
listed in the agreements. For example, the July 2011 quarterly billing totaled
approximately $503,000 for services to be provided by 33 individuals.
However, MTA did not subsequently verify that the individuals had actually
worked the entire quarter. This is significant because individuals were added
and removed from the agreement throughout the year.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 For course development and delivery agreements, DECO invoiced MTA for
services provided by independent contractors without providing any support
for the amounts billed. For example, we noted a May 2011 invoice for $7,377
for facility fees that did not contain any supporting invoice from the facility or
even a listing of the classes for which the fees were being charged.
 The amounts billed on certain invoices under the course development and
delivery agreements were inconsistent with or were not authorized in the
related task orders. We noted one invoice with charges of $3,900 for the
development and delivery of a retreat when the related task order provided for
a fee of $1,200 for a full-day training session. Another invoice billed $1,500
per course for facility rental fees when the related task order provided for a
rental fee of $500 per course.
 MTA lacked adequate records of the agreements, amendments, task orders,
and related invoices. Specifically, MTA could not provide us with a
comprehensive listing of the agreements with the related expenditures. In
addition, during the course of our review, MTA was unable to provide us with
copies of numerous agreements, amendments, task orders, and certain
invoices. As a result, we obtained numerous documents from DECO (many
of which lacked signatures of MTA and/or DECO employees) and we created
financial records by reviewing payment activity and the supporting invoices.
As a result of the aforementioned conditions, there is a lack of assurance that the
amounts paid to DECO under the agreements were proper.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA
a. only process payments after the related goods and services are received,
b. ensure that adequate documentation is obtained to enable verification of
amounts invoiced,
c. ensure billings are consistent with the amounts and services specified in
the related task orders, and
d. ensure that copies of all executed interagency agreements and task orders
are on file and that accounting records properly reflect all related
transactions for each agreement (amount of agreement, expenditures to
date, and available balance).
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 4
MTA could not document that certain deliverables were received.
Analysis
MTA could not document that certain deliverables were received. We requested
documentation to support the work provided by five individuals included in the
employment services agreement during fiscal year 2012 for which MTA paid
DECO $571,340. One contracted individual was to conduct employee
performance evaluations and development reviews and develop training
programs, among other duties. MTA could not provide us with any
documentation for the work performed by this individual and by another
individual for which MTA paid a total of $154,815 for both. For the remaining
three individuals, only minimal documentation was provided which did not
support the deliverables required by the agreement. Two of these five individuals
had responsibilities related to a “Roads Scholar Program,” including one for
which MTA paid a fee of $92,819 during fiscal year 2012, whose primary duty
was to manage all aspects of the Program. However, MTA management was
unfamiliar with the Program and subsequently advised us that the Program had
not been active for several years, including fiscal year 2012. Upon further review
of the fiscal year 2012 agreement, we identified seven individuals having
responsibilities related to this Program.
We also requested documentation of deliverables for 10 invoices from the fiscal
year 2012 course development and delivery agreements totaling $412,708. MTA
could not provide any documentation (including a list of attendees or training
materials) for charges on 6 of the invoices totaling $90,962. For another invoice
totaling $114,875, MTA could only provide us with an invoice from a
subcontractor for $76,103 and excerpts of some course materials but had no
listing of the attendees. The only documentation for the remaining amounts
invoiced was generally reports from MTA’s continuing education tracking
database. In this regard, the reports indicated that one of the courses for which
MTA was invoiced $1,100 had been cancelled and another was attended by only
one employee. As a result, there is a lack of assurance that the courses were held
and whether the use of the agreements was cost-effective.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure all deliverables are received prior to making related payments;
and
b. determine whether the aforementioned deliverables were obtained and
take appropriate corrective action, including the recovery of funds.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Finding 5
MTA did not take adequate follow-up action when certain questionable
activities of one employee were identified.
Analysis
MTA did not take adequate follow-up action when questionable activities on the
part of the MTA employee administering the agreements were identified.
Specifically, MTA officials were notified that DECO subcontracted the work on
one course development and delivery agreement to a company owned by this
MTA employee’s spouse. In addition, the employee added the former DECO
contract monitor (after the individual separated from DECO) to the 2012
employment services agreement for which MTA was to pay a fee of $77,200
(subsequently reduced to $32,500) to perform functions that were DECO’s
responsibility to perform. This DECO employee was the liaison for the MTA
agreements including the aforementioned agreement involving the MTA
employee’s spouse’s company.
MTA conducted two reviews that focused on these two allegations, corroborated
the allegations, and identified other control deficiencies (such as the employee
having unilateral control over the agreements as noted in Finding 1). MTA
subsequently notified the State Ethics Commission of the possible conflict of
interest involving the contract with a company owned by an MTA employee’s
spouse and, in February 2013, the Commission concluded that the employee had
violated State Ethics Law. Specifically, the Commission concluded that the
employee violated certain conflict of interest provisions by participating in
matters relating to the spouse’s business and by holding a financial interest in an
entity that subcontracted on a contract with a governmental unit. MTA
subsequently terminated the employee in November 2012.
However, MTA did not conduct a thorough review of the agreements and the
propriety of the related expenditures. Rather, the aforementioned reviews focused
on a limited number of transactions under two agreements. In addition, MTA did
not refer this matter to the Office of the Attorney General’s Criminal Division and
the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel as required by a Governor’s Executive
Order. Subsequent to our inquiries and discussions with management from the
Maryland Department of Transportation – Office of the Secretary, the issue was
referred to the Criminal Division in May 2013.
MTA’s lack of follow-up is significant because our review of one agreement,
which involved other subcontractors including the employee’s spouse, disclosed
numerous questionable transactions. For example, the agreement was modified
several times by the employee, increasing the cost from $500,000 to $1.1 million
15

--- Page 18 ---
without any documentation or additional services to justify the increase, and the
related services all fell within the scope of the initial agreement. In addition,
DECO provided MTA with little documentation for contractor and subcontractor
charges totaling $968,100 (including approximately $200,000 for work performed
by the aforementioned company owned by the MTA employee’s spouse) and the
reliability of some of that documentation appeared questionable. Specifically, the
only supporting documentation provided was emails from subcontractors to the
contractor listing the hours worked and related charges and price quotes from
certain subcontractors for designing certain manuals and guides. We question the
propriety of the price quotes for several subcontractors because they were not
printed on letterhead and were similar in appearance (for example, same font type
and size); furthermore, the documents were often undated and lacked any
signatures. Finally, under that agreement we noted that DECO invoiced MTA
$110,000 for work performed by DECO personnel with rates ranging from $35 to
$47 per hour plus an overhead rate of 45 percent. However, the hourly rates and
related overhead were not provided for in the agreement and the invoices did not
include any information on what services were provided.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MTA
a. after consultation with the Attorney General, review the aforementioned
transactions and recover any amounts that were determined to be
improperly billed;
b. conduct a thorough review of the agreements and all related payments
and take appropriate follow-up action; and
c. notify the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel of the aforementioned
questionable activity and, in the future, notify the appropriate entities in
accordance with the aforementioned Executive Order.
16

--- Page 20 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Maryland Transit Administration
Special Review Responses
January 2015
Interagency Agreements with Towson University’s Division of Economic and
Community Outreach (DECO)
Finding 1
One Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) employee exercised excessive control over
certain interagency agreements. The agreements circumvented State procurement
regulations that require competitive bidding and allowed MTA to augment its staff beyond
its budgetary positions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure that the agreements and related amendments and task orders are subject to
independent supervisory review and approval, and
b. discontinue its practice of using interagency agreements to circumvent budgetary
restrictions and procurement regulations.
Response:
a. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. Due to the unacceptable activities
detailed in this review, the MTA terminated the employment services agreement with
Towson University’s Division of Economic and Community Outreach (DECO) effective
June 30, 2013, and moved to amend our procedures to require additional scrutiny, oversight
and approval of these types of agreements. Effective December 1, 2014, MTA’s new
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) requires the Assistant Attorney General and the MTA
Administrator to review and approve all interagency agreements and any changes to these
agreements. The new SOP mandates that a procurement officer must review and clearly
document why each interagency agreement is needed and how the agreement is in the State’s
best interest. As an additional internal control, MTA established a new SOP that requires the
Task Order Review Committee to review and approve all interagency agreement task orders
in addition to MTA’s regular task orders. MTA has provided the new SOPs to all MTA
managers and directors.
b. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. Under no circumstances will the MTA
circumvent budgetary restrictions and State Procurement Laws and Regulations, nor will
MTA use interagency agreements to fulfill employment needs. MTA will follow approved
personnel and hiring processes set forth in the State Personnel and Pensions Article and Title
2 of the Transportation Article of the Maryland Code, and applicable COMAR regulations.
If any MTA employee circumvents state procurement laws and processes, disciplinary
action, including possible termination, will be taken. In any ongoing or future interagency
agreement, MTA will not be involved in the recruitment and hiring process. Instead, the
agency the state partners with will be solely responsible for the job posting, interviewing,
employee selection, and salary determination.
1

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 2
The cost of certain services under the agreements appeared excessive or varied among
similar services, and the related terms of the employment services agreement precluded
effective monitoring of hours worked.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that, in the future, MTA ensure
a. amounts paid under interagency agreements are reasonable and supported, and
b. agreements contain sufficient details to enable effective monitoring.
Response:
a. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. As previously noted, effective December
1, 2014, MTA’s new Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) requires the Assistant Attorney
General and MTA Administrator to review and approve all interagency agreements and any
changes to these agreements. The goal of this new SOP is to institute a series of checks and
balances to ensure that all tasks and payments for tasks are reasonable and supported. The
new SOP mandates that a procurement officer must review and clearly document why each
interagency agreement is needed and how the agreement is in the State’s best interest.
Subject matter experts will conduct a top-to-bottom review of all proposed costs and task
orders issued under these agreements to verify the need for each task and that the amount
paid for each task is warranted. As an additional internal control, MTA established an
additional SOP that requires the Task Order Review Committee to review and approve all
interagency agreement task orders in addition to MTA’s regular task orders.
b. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The new SOP requires additional
scrutiny, oversight and approval of all interagency agreements and mandates that future
agreements be written by the Office of Procurement to include a detailed scope of work,
deliverables and requirements for monitoring. The MTA will ensure that fees for interagency
services provided under these agreements are reasonable and that justification for related fees
is thoroughly documented and maintained for audit verification purposes. As previously
noted, MTA established a new SOP that requires the Task Order Review Committee to
review and approve all interagency agreement task orders in addition to MTA’s regular task
orders.
2

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 3
Advanced payment of certain DECO invoices and lack of documentation precluded
effective verification of the amounts billed and certain amounts invoiced were inconsistent
with or were not authorized in the related task order. MTA did not maintain records of
the agreements, amendments, and related task orders.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that MTA
a. only process payments after the related goods and services are received,
b. ensure that adequate documentation is obtained to enable verification of amounts
invoiced,
c. ensure billings are consistent with the amounts and services specified in the related task
orders, and
d. ensure that copies of all executed interagency agreements and task orders are on file
and that accounting records properly reflect all related transactions for each agreement
(amount of agreement, expenditures to date, and available balance).
Response:
a. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The new SOP requires scrutiny, oversight
and approval of all interagency agreements and requires that Contract Managers ensure that
deliverables are received prior to authorizing payment.
b. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The new SOP requires scrutiny, oversight
and approval of all interagency agreements and requires that Contract Managers thoroughly
document and retain files that detail class registration, class sign in and course outline prior
to payment. The new SOP requires that MTA contract managers obtain comprehensive
documentation before invoices are paid and retain the invoices and documentation in an
electronic library for verification purposes.
c. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. Currently, MTA’s Training Department
reviews and verifies the following when paying invoices:
1) Class dates on the invoice agree with class dates in the Learning Management System
(LMS);
2) Copies of sign-in sheets have been obtained for each class listed on the invoice;
3) The class roster in the LMS lists employees who have actually completed the class,
and that the amounts billed agree with the fees approved in the task order.
d. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The new SOP requires that MTA’s
Procurement Department enters any interagency agreements information into the Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) and keeps all interagency agreements on file. If
the interagency agreement is a Master Agreement that includes task orders, the new SOP
mandates that each task order also be entered in FMIS by the Procurement Department. In
addition, invoices and back up documentation must be securely stored in an electronic
document library by the Contract Managers. Contract Managers also use Excel to track
expenditures against each task order.
3

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 4
MTA could not document that certain deliverables were received.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that MTA
a. ensure all deliverables are received prior to making related payments; and
b. determine whether the aforementioned deliverables were obtained and take
appropriate corrective action, including the recovery of funds.
Response:
a. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. Contract Managers are required to receive
deliverables prior to authorizing payment. Contract Managers will retain information in the
files which details class registration, class sign in and course outline prior to payment.
b. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. As stated above, the MTA issued a new
SOP dated December 1, 2014, to managers and directors for implementation and monitoring
of interagency agreements. The new SOP requires contract managers to ensure that
deliverables are received prior to authorizing payment. With regard to the aforementioned
deliverables, MTA’s Training Department and Office of Finance is currently conducting an
extensive evaluation of the fiscal year 2012 course development and delivery agreements to
determine if the agreed upon deliverables were obtained. This evaluation will be complete
by July 31, 2015. Any necessary corrective action will be taken based on the results of the
investigation.
4

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 5
MTA did not take adequate follow-up action when certain questionable activities of one
employee were identified.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that MTA
a. after consultation with the Attorney General, review the aforementioned transactions
and recover any amounts that were determined to be improperly billed;
b. conduct a thorough review of the agreements and all related payments and take
appropriate follow-up action; and
c. notify the Governor’s Chief Legal Counsel of the aforementioned questionable activity
and, in the future, notify the appropriate entities in accordance with the
aforementioned Executive Order.
Response:
a. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The MTA and the Maryland Department
of Transportation notified the State Ethics Commission and the Office of the Attorney
General’s Criminal Investigations Division of the issues identified in the findings above.
The aforementioned transactions are currently being investigated by the Attorney General’s
Criminal Investigations Division. Upon the completion of the investigation, if it is
determined there were improper transactions, the MTA will review the transactions and will
seek to recover any amounts improperly billed.
b. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. MTA is currently conducting a review of
the aforementioned agreements and the related payments. The MTA will take the
appropriate follow-up action after this review is completed and all payments are reconciled.
The review will be completed by July 31, 2015.
c. MTA concurs with the auditors’ recommendation. The MTA has notified the Governor’s
Chief Legal Counsel of the aforementioned questionable activity. In the future, the MTA
will ensure that the appropriate entities are notified in accordance with the Governor’s
Executive Order.
5