Title: Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Date: 09/27/2007
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d34cc9d72404c1509f0
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:03:24.154555
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
May 2025
Public Notice
In compliance with the requirements of the State Government Article Section
2-1224(i), of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Office of Legislative Audits
has redacted cybersecurity findings and related auditee responses
from this public report.
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman (Senate Chair) Delegate Jared Solomon (House Chair)
Senator Joanne C. Benson Delegate Steven J. Arentz
Senator Benjamin T. Brooks, Sr. Delegate Andrea Fletcher Harrison
Senator Paul D. Corderman Delegate Steven C. Johnson
Senator Katie Fry Hester Delegate Mary A. Lehman
Senator Cheryl C. Kagan Delegate David H. Moon
Senator Clarence K. Lam, M.D. Delegate Julie Palakovich Carr
Senator Cory V. McCray Delegate Emily K. Shetty
Senator Justin D. Ready Delegate Stephanie M. Smith
Senator Bryan W. Simonaire Delegate M. Courtney Watson
To Obtain Further Information
Office of Legislative Audits
The Warehouse at Camden Yards
351 West Camden Street, Suite 400
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: webmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
To Report Fraud
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse involving State
of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously
by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or
through the Office’s website.
Nondiscrimination Statement
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, creed,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in the
admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s Information Officer has been
designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107
of the United States Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the
Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
May 2, 2025
Senator Shelly L. Hettleman, Senate Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Delegate Jared Solomon, House Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Members of Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Anne
Arundel County Public Schools (AACPS) in accordance with the requirements of
the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland. The objectives of this audit were to evaluate whether AACPS’
procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its
assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use of financial
resources.
Our audit disclosed that certain requirements of AACPS’ procurement policies
were not being consistently used when obtaining goods and services under
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements and the policies were not
sufficiently comprehensive. In addition, AACPS did not publish 25 contract
solicitations and awards, each valued over $50,000 and in aggregate totaling
$166.9 million, on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required by State law.
Furthermore, AACPS did not execute formal written contracts or obtain approval
from the Anne Arundel County Board of Education for special education services
received from two non-public schools it paid $58.4 million during fiscal years
2020 through 2023.
Furthermore, our audit disclosed cybersecurity-related findings. However, in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we have redacted the findings from this audit
report. Specifically, State law requires the Office of Legislative Audits to redact

--- Page 4 ---
cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent with auditing best practices before
the report is made available to the public. The term “cybersecurity” is defined in
the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), and using our
professional judgment we have determined that the redacted findings fall under
the referenced definition. The specifics of the cybersecurity findings were
previously communicated to those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations.
Finally, our audit disclosed that AACPS had not competitively bid its third-party
administrator (TPA) services for healthcare plans since at least 2004. In addition,
AACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA that provided
health care claims processing services. Similar concerns with the TPA have been
included but not corrected from one or more prior reports dating back to June
2014.
AACPS’ response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report.
Consistent with State law, we have redacted the elements of AACPS’ response
related to the cybersecurity audit findings. We reviewed the response to our
findings and related recommendations, and have concluded that the corrective
actions identified are sufficient to address all audit issues.
We wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the audit by
AACPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Brian S. Tanen
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Statistical Overview 5
Oversight 8
External Audits 9
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 10
Findings and Recommendations 12
Revenue and Billing Cycle 12
Federal Funds 12
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – Certain requirements of State law and recognized best 15
practices were not incorporated into the Anne Arundel County Public
Schools’ (AACPS) procurement policies and were not consistently
used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements.
Finding 2 – AACPS did not always publish contract solicitations or 17
awards on eMaryland Marketplace Advantage as required by State
procurement law.
Finding 3 – AACPS did not execute formal written contracts or obtain 17
approval from the Board for special education services.
Human Resources and Payroll 18
Equipment Control and Accountability 19
Information Technology
Finding 4 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 19
Finding 5 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 20
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 20
Transportation Services
Finding 6 – Redacted cybersecurity-related finding. 21
3

--- Page 6 ---
Food Services 22
School Board Oversight 22
Management of Other Risks
* Finding 7 – AACPS did not competitively bid its third-party 23
administrator (TPA) services since at least 2004.
* Finding 8 – AACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of 24
its TPA that provided health care claims processing services.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 26
Agency Response Appendix
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
Enrollment
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Anne Arundel County Public Schools
(AACPS) ranks 4th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2023 full-time student enrollment was 84,452 students.
AACPS had 126 schools, consisting of 81 elementary, 19 middle schools, 14 high
schools, and 12 other types of schools (including special education, alternative,
career and technical, and charter/contract schools).
Funding
AACPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Anne Arundel County,
the State, and the federal government. According to AACPS’ audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled approximately $1.8 billion in fiscal
year 2023. See Figure 1 for AACPS’ enrollment and funding by source for the
six-year period from fiscal year 2018 through fiscal year 2023. See Figure 2 for
revenue sources per enrolled student in fiscal year 2023 according to its audited
financial statements.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1
AACPS Enrollment and Funding by Source
Fiscal Years 2018 through 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
84,984
84,452
83,300
83,044 83,163
82,777
$981
$844 $909 $876 $838 $915
$612
$520 $509 $539
$447 $467
$215 $215
$82 $93 $86 $113
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Enrollment Local State Federal and Other
State funding for fiscal year 2023 included:
• $448 million for Blueprint for Maryland’s Future grants
• $74 million for Capital Projects
• $63 million for the State-share of employee pension costs
• $27 million for Other State Funding
Source: AACPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
6

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2
AACPS’ Revenue Sources Per Enrolled Student
Fiscal Year 2023
Federal Other
$2,100 $441
10% 2%
Local
State $11,616
$7,250 54%
34%
Source: AACPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint)
Blueprint is a State-funded grant program based on recommendations of the
Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education.1 Chapter 771,
Laws of Maryland, 2019, effective June 1, 2019, established principles of the
Blueprint that are intended to transform Maryland’s early childhood, primary, and
secondary education systems to the levels of the highest-performing systems.
Blueprint specifies how funding is calculated to support programs and initiatives
from prekindergarten through college and career.
Blueprint allocates funding to schools based on a weighted-student formula. The
funding formula provides resources to local education agencies based on the
number of students enrolled at each school (known as Foundation Aid) and the
characteristics of those students (such as, Special Education, Concentration of
Poverty, and Compensatory Education Aid). Blueprint also provides additional
funding for specific programs that schools offer (such as, Prekindergarten Aid).
1 The Maryland Commission on Innovation and Excellence in Education was established by
Chapters 701 and 702, Laws of Maryland 2016, effective June 1, 2016 to review the adequacy of
funding for education.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Expenditures
According to AACPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2023 expenditures
were approximately $1.8 billion. The largest expenditure category was salaries
and wages, including benefits, which accounted for approximately 67 percent of
total expenditures during fiscal year 2023. According to MSDE records, during
the 2022-2023 school year, AACPS had 10,990 full-time equivalent positions,
which consisted of 8,141 instructional and 2,849 non-instructional. Instruction
accounted for 54 percent of AACPS’ expenditures on a categorical basis (see
Figure 3).
Figure 3
AACPS Expenditures by Category and Selected Statistical Data
Fiscal Year 2023
(dollar amounts in millions)
$978.1
Instruction
54%
Facilities and Capital Projects $367.3
20%
$186.3
Administration and Support Enrollment
10%
84,452
Special Education $176.2
10% Employees
Transportation $67.7 10,990
4%
$39.0 Cost per Pupil
Food Service
2% $21,407
Source: AACPS’ Fiscal Year 2023 Audited Financial Statements and MSDE Data
Oversight
AACPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and one elected student voting member.2 MSDE exercises considerable
oversight of AACPS through the establishment and monitoring of various
financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with certain
provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with AACPS
to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law. The Anne Arundel
2 According to Chapter 473, Laws of Maryland 2017, effective December 7, 2020, the AACPS
Board membership was reduced, after the terms of previous appointed members expired, to
seven elected voting members and one elected voting student member.
8

--- Page 11 ---
County government also exercises authority over AACPS primarily through the
review and approval of AACPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB)
The AIB was authorized by State Law as an independent unit of State government
in February 2021 and is responsible for holding State and local governments,
including local education agencies, accountable for implementing the Blueprint
State-funded grant program and for evaluating the outcomes. Specifically, the
AIB reviews the use of school-level expenditures and monitors school system
compliance with Blueprint requirements. The AIB consists of a seven-member
Board appointed by the Governor, with advice and consent of the Senate. The
Board Chair is designated by the Governor, the Senate President, and the Speaker
of the House.
Office of the Inspector General for Education (OIGE)
The OIGE was established by State law as an independent unit of State
government effective June 2019. The OIGE is responsible for examining and
investigating complaints or information regarding the management and affairs of
local boards of education, local school systems, public schools, nonpublic schools
that receive State funds, the Maryland State Department of Education, and the
Interagency Commission on School Construction. Specifically, the law provides
that the OIGE may receive and investigate information and complaints concerning
potential fraud, waste, and abuse of public funds and property; civil rights
violations involving students or employees; whether policies and procedures
governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect comply with
applicable federal and State laws; and compliance with other applicable federal
and State laws.
The OIGE initiates examinations and investigations based on its assessment of
complaints and information it receives from various sources, including State and
outside agencies and through its fraud, waste, and abuse hotline. The OIGE also
conducts an annual review of local school systems to ensure policies and
procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child abuse and neglect
comply with applicable federal and State laws. During the period covered by our
audit the OIGE issued two public reports related to AACPS reviews and
investigations. We considered these reports during our current audit.
External Audits
As required by State law, AACPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its annual financial statements. The firm performs
procedures to verify the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The
9

--- Page 12 ---
firm also evaluates the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management. In the
related audit reports, the firm stated that the financial statements presented fairly,
in all material aspects, the financial position of AACPS as of June 30, 2018, 2019,
2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023 and the respective changes in its financial position
and, where applicable, its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Additionally, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, as part of the
audited financial statements the accounting firm also issued separate reports on
AACPS’ control over financial reporting and its tests of AACPS’ compliance
with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, grant agreements, and other
matters. These reports are an integral part of the annual independent audited
financial statements. The accounting firm also conducts the Single Audit of
AACPS’ federal grant programs. The Single Audit is intended to provide
assurance to the federal government that adequate internal controls are in place,
and the entity is generally in compliance with program requirements
We reviewed the aforementioned financial statement audits and Single Audit
reports for fiscal years 2018 through 2023 and examined the related work papers
for the fiscal year 2023 audit, which were the latest available during our audit
fieldwork. Our review did not note any deficiencies that warranted inclusion in
this report. In addition, certain work of the independent certified public
accounting firm, which we determined was reliable, covered areas included in the
scope of our audit. As a result, we did not conduct any audit work related to the
following areas:
• State and local government revenues received via electronic fund transfer
• Accounts receivable
• Federal grant activity
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 11 findings contained in
our preceding audit report dated October 24, 2019. See Figure 4 for the results of
our review.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 4
Status of Preceding Findings
Preceding Implementation
Finding Description
Finding Status
AACPS did not always obtain vendor price lists from intergovernmental
Finding 1 Not repeated
cooperative purchasing agreement vendors to verify invoices.
AACPS’ equipment record keeping policies were not comprehensive,
Finding 2 detail records were incomplete, and physical inventories were not Not repeated
conducted.
AACPS’ procedures for logging and monitoring its critical student
Finding 3 Status Redacted3
information system database’s security events were not sufficient.
Thirty-one publicly accessible servers were improperly located within the
internal network, and AACPS’ network resources were not secured Status Redacted3
Finding 4
against improper access from high school students using computer labs
and media centers.
AACPS had not established comprehensive bus routing procedures and
Finding 5 did not periodically perform a system-wide analysis of routes and related Not repeated
bus capacities to maximize efficiency.
AACPS did not periodically re-evaluate the cost effectiveness of its
Finding 6 Not repeated
method for procuring and paying bus contractors.
Procedures and controls were not sufficient to ensure that bus contractors
Finding 7 Not repeated
were paid the proper amounts.
AACPS had not competitively bid its third party administrator (TPA)
Repeated
Finding 8 services since at least 2004, and relied on a consultant to negotiate the
(Current Finding 7)
best value for healthcare costs.
AACPS did not maintain a current contract to support TPA payments for
Finding 9 Not repeated
its healthcare services.
Repeated
Finding 10 AACPS did not adequately monitor the TPA’s performance.
(Current Finding 8)
AACPS did not independently determine if it would be cost beneficial to
Finding 11 Not repeated
purchase stop-loss medical insurance coverage.
3 Specific information on the current status of this cybersecurity-related finding has been redacted
for the publicly available report in accordance with State Government Article, Section 2-1224(i)
of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Anne Arundel County Public Schools (AACPS) revenues consist primarily of
funds received from Anne Arundel County, the State, and the federal government.
According to AACPS’ audited financial statements, revenues from all sources
totaled approximately $1.8 billion in fiscal year 2023 including approximately
$612 million from the State.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm (CPA) that audited AACPS’ financial statements and the
objectives of our audit for certain revenue activities. As a result, we relied on this
work to provide audit coverage for State and local government revenues received
via electronic funds transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s
procedural review (related to the fiscal year 2023 audit) and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
School Activity Funds
Schools collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and
school publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these
school activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. During fiscal year 2023, school
activity collections totaled $11.5 million and the June 30, 2023 fund balance was
$10.3 million. Based on our assessment of the relative significance of this
activity, we did not review the procedures and controls over these funds.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, we relied on the work of the CPA to provide audit coverage in this
area including procedures and controls related to the accounting for and
safeguarding of cash receipts with respect to revenue and billing.
Federal Funds
Background
AACPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to AACPS’ Single Audit, fiscal year
12

--- Page 15 ---
2023 (latest available at time of our audit) federal expenditures totaled $170.7
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as Medicaid
reimbursement for special education services.
According to the audited financial statements, federal fund revenues (excluding
Medicaid) increased, from $64.9 million in fiscal year 2020 to $177.3 million in
fiscal year 2023 (173 percent), due to COVID-19 pandemic grant funding.
Specifically, according to AACPS’ records, as of June 30, 2023, AACPS was
awarded federal COVID-19 pandemic grant funds totaling $213.8 million to be
distributed over federal fiscal years 2021 to 2024 under the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security Act, the Coronavirus Response and Relief
Supplemental Appropriations Act, and the American Recovery Plan.4
As of June 30, 2023, according to AACPS records, expenditures related to these
COVID-19 grants totaling $139.2 million, and were primarily comprised of
staffing, laptops, instructional software and materials, personal protection
equipment, and sanitary supplies. On March 28, 2025, the United States
Department of Education (DOE) notified every State that it was ending the
liquidation period for COVID-19 grants effective immediately. The DOE
notification indicated that it would consider an extension to the liquidation period
on an individual project specific basis. AACPS advised us that it had
approximately $668,800 in COVID-19 grants that had not been liquidated as of
March 28, 2025. As of April 2, 2025, AACPS, in conjunction with the Maryland
State Department of Education (MSDE), was determining what options it had to
request an extension.
Single Audit Reports
There were similarities in the work performed by the independent CPA that
conducted the Single Audit of AACPS’ federal grants and the objectives of our
audit in this area. In addition to expressing an opinion on AACPS compliance
with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing
internal control structure’s impact on compliance and audited the required
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant expenditures) for fiscal years 2018 through 2023. Our review of
the Single Audits did not identify any issues that warranted inclusion in this
report.
4 In addition to the federal grants, AACPS was also awarded a State broadband connectivity grant
totaling $65,776, which had been spent as of 6/30/2024. State and local grants are subject to
review and testing during our audit.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Medicaid Funds for Eligible Services
AACPS has established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to AACPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants.
MSDE’s Interagency Medicaid Monitoring Team issued a report in February
2023 of the results of its review of 45 student case files for 61 criteria. The report
did not specifically address the propriety of Medicaid billing but overall
concluded that AACPS was generally compliant with most criteria. For example,
AACPS was 100 percent compliant with 52 criteria and from 94 to 99 percent
compliant with 3 criteria.
According to AACPS records, fiscal year 2023 state and federal reimbursements
for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled approximately $8.1 million, which was
an increase of approximately $1.6 million from the previous fiscal year. Based on
our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit objectives, our
audit did not include a review of Medicaid-subsidized services.
Conclusion
We relied on the work of the independent CPA that conducted the Single Audits
for the work in the federal fund area, including policies, procedures, and controls
with respect to federal grants and expenditures.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and AACPS’ records,
disbursements (excluding payroll) totaled $590.7 million during fiscal year 2023.
AACPS uses a combination of manual and automated methods to process
purchases and disbursements. AACPS’ current financial management system for
purchases and disbursements has been used since 1989, and it is highly reliant on
manual processes. Requisitions are manually created and approved by a
supervisor in the requesting department. Approved requisitions are then entered
into the financial management system and converted to purchase orders by the
purchasing department, which also generally handles the solicitation, bid
evaluation, and establishment of contracts.
Invoices are submitted by vendors to the requesting school or department for
approval and then submitted to the accounts payable department for entry into the
financial management system. AACPS manually matches invoices to appropriate
14

--- Page 17 ---
purchasing documents and verification of receipt. The system then prints the
vendor checks or processes an electronic payment and posts the payment to the
financial records.
AACPS written Procurement Policy and its purchasing manual, requires that
procurements equal to or exceeding $100,000 be competitively bid in accordance
with Section 5-112 of the Education Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
(prior to October 1, 2023 the amount was $50,000). Procurements of contracts
and agreements valued at $100,000 or more, are to be approved by the Anne
Arundel County Board of Education (the Board).
AACPS is currently in the process of upgrading to a new financial management
system which is estimated to be completed by March 2026.
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into AACPS’ procurement policies and were not consistently
used when participating in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreements (ICPAs).
Analysis
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into AACPS’ procurement policies and were not consistently used
by AACPS when participating in an ICPA. State law, which legal counsel to the
Maryland General Assembly advised us is applicable to local education agencies,
allows the use of ICPAs only after the using entity has met the statutory
requirement of determining (or assessing) that the use of such arrangements will
provide cost benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or promote
intergovernmental cooperation.5
Our review of AACPS Procurement Policy and purchasing manual disclosed that
the above statutory requirement as well as the following critical best practices
were not included:
5 Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
in part, defines an ICPA as a contract that is entered into by at least one governmental entity in a
certain manner, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the contract and at
least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote efficiency and savings
that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing. The aforementioned law applies to
all ICPAs regardless of the services, goods, or commodities purchased. In addition, Section 5-
112(a)(3) of the Education Article, of the Code provides that local education agencies do not need
to conduct competitive procurements for goods and commodities if they use a contract awarded by
public agencies or intergovernmental purchasing organizations and the originating procuring
agency followed public bidding procedures.
15

--- Page 18 ---
• Analyze all costs of conducting competitive solicitations;
• Research, compare, and evaluate available ICPAs;
• Verify ICPA has a clause allowing utilization by other parties;
• Verify the ICPA solicitation was competitively bid and publicly
advertised;
• Verify terms, scope of services, specifications and price meet our needs;
• Execute an addendum of participation with lead agency and remove or
incorporate necessary local terms and conditions; and
• Obtain a copy of ICPA and related price lists for invoice verification.
We tested AACPS’ participation in five ICPAs (selected based on risk and
significance) during fiscal years 2021 through 2024, with contract awards totaling
$21.2 million. Our review disclosed that AACPS did not adhere to some of the
aforementioned best practices in the ICPAs tested. For example, AACPS did not
analyze the costs of conducting competitive solicitations for all five ICPAs tested.
Incorporating ICPA best practices into AACPS procurement policies could help
ensure they are consistently used.
We did find that other best practices were performed despite not being included in
AACPS’ policies. For example, AACPS had performed a written assessment of
the benefits of using an ICPA, verified that there was a clause allowing utilization
by other parties, had executed an addendum of participation with the lead
contract, and obtained a copy of the ICPA and related price lists, for all five tested
ICPAs. We could not obtain the total number or value of contracts awarded via
ICPAs as AACPS’ current system does not capture this information.
The Institute for Public Procurement, formerly known as the National Institute of
Government Purchasing, as well as other public and educational organizations
have published ICPA best practices. These practices include comprehensive
multi-step checklists that require, among other things (as per the list above), that
prospective ICPA users verify that the contract allows other entities to participate.
In addition, the practices also require that ICPA users ensure that the contract was
awarded through a competitive procurement process, that addendums be executed
documenting their participation, and that all local required terms and conditions
are incorporated.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that AACPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 2
AACPS did not always publish contract solicitations or awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement law.
Analysis
AACPS did not always publish contract solicitations or awards on eMMA as
required by State procurement law. State law requires the solicitation and award
of contracts of $100,000 or more (prior to October 1, 2023 the amount was
$50,000) procured by public schools after July 1, 2022 to be published on
eMMA.6
Our test of 38 contracts totaling $206.2 million (selected based on risk and
materiality) disclosed that AACPS did not publish contract solicitations and
awards for 257 contracts totaling $166.9 million. In addition, AACPS did not
publish the awards for 3 contracts totaling $13.1 million within 30 days as
required by State regulations. Rather these contracts were published two to five
months after the contracts were awarded. Publishing solicitations and awards on
eMMA provides transparency over State procurements, including information
about winning bidders and the amount of the related awards.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that AACPS publish contract solicitations and awards on
eMMA as required, including those noted above.
Finding 3
AACPS did not execute formal written contracts or obtain approval from the
Board for special education services.
Analysis
AACPS did not execute formal written contracts or obtain approval from the
Board for special education services. AACPS provides special education services
in accordance with the individualized education program (IEP) developed for
each student. According to AACPS’ records, it paid two Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE) certified non-public schools a total of $58.4
million for special education services during fiscal years 2020 through 2023.
6 eMMA is an Internet-based, interactive procurement system managed by the State of Maryland’s
Department of General Services.
7 Of the 25 contracts included in our test, 16 were before the law change increasing the threshold
for publication on eMMA.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Our review disclosed that AACPS did not have a contract with the two non-public
schools, and did not obtain Board approval for the services as required by its
Procurement Policy for contracts (including special education services) over
$100,000. Although not specifically required by its Policy, written contracts set
forth all financial terms and conditions, define the duties and responsibilities of
the parties, and protect each party in the event of default, and provide other
critical terms for items such as resolution of disputes, termination for
convenience, and retention of records.
AACPS management advised us that it did not follow the Policy because MSDE
certified the special education services and approved the rates of services
provided by non-public schools. However, there was no exemption for these
services in AACPS’ Policy and regardless, AACPS did not have the safeguards
and controls provided by a contract and Board approval.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that AACPS
a. modify its Procurement Policy to require formal written contracts for
special education services, and
b. comply with its Policy by obtaining Board approval for special education
services.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the AACPS
budget. According to AACPS’ records, fiscal year 2023 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled approximately $1.2 billion, representing 67.4 percent of total
expenditures. According to MSDE reports, during the 2022-2023 school year,
AACPS had 10,990 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 8,141
instructional and 2,849 non-instructional positions.
AACPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources information, record
employee time, track employee leave usage, and process and record payroll
transactions. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices.
Payroll processing involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave
and running edit reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new
employee information).
18

--- Page 21 ---
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of AACPS’ internal control over the human resources and payroll areas of
operations reviewed. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Equipment Control and Accountability
Background
According to AACPS’ audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of its
capital equipment inventory (furniture, fixtures, and equipment) totaled $78.4
million as of June 30, 2023. AACPS maintains centralized automated records for
all equipment including assets with a cost of $5,000 or more that are capitalized
for financial statement purposes. Control and recordkeeping of laptop computers
assigned to schools, students, and employees was maintained in a database by the
Office of Technology Support Services regardless of cost. AACPS has
established written equipment policies.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of AACPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for
equipment. Our audit also did not disclose any significant instances of
noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
Information Technology
We determined that the Information Technology section, including Findings 4 and
5 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State Finance and Procurement
Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are
subject to redaction from the publicly available audit report in accordance with
the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently, the specifics of the
following findings, including the analysis, related recommendations, along with
AACPS’ responses, have been redacted from this report copy.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
AACPS employs a staff of 896 employees to maintain its 126 schools and a
number of other facilities (such as administrative and support offices). According
to its fiscal year 2025 Capital Improvement Plan, construction, major renovations,
and systemic improvements to AACPS’ facilities over the next six years are
estimated to cost $851.7 million.
Our review of 25 construction-related procurements (selected based on
materiality) awarded during fiscal years 2020 through 2024 totaling $174.7
million disclosed that the contracts were generally competitively procured. In
addition, our test of sixteen invoices totaling $13.3 million for these contracts
disclosed that the invoices were properly supported, reviewed, and approved, and
the amounts invoiced were in accordance with contract terms.
Processes are in Place to Promote Ongoing Facility Maintenance and to
Minimize Energy Costs
Our review disclosed that AACPS has processes in place to promote ongoing
facility maintenance and minimize energy costs. For example, AACPS provides
preventative maintenance of its buildings and equipment with the goal of
preventing emergency repairs. In addition, AACPS participates in a consortium
with other Baltimore-area entities to purchase energy at the best possible terms for
members of the consortium. AACPS also utilizes a vendor energy management
program to monitor and control heating and air conditioning usage and a utility
billing management system to monitor related costs. AACPS has written best
practices that encourage both students and employees to be aware of and limit
their energy use and monitors building energy on a centralized basis. Further,
AACPS makes limited use of solar and geothermal alternative energy sources.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any significant deficiencies in the design or operation
of AACPS’ internal control over financial-related areas of operations for facilities
construction, renovation, and maintenance. Our audit also did not disclose any
significant instances of noncompliance with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Transportation Services
Background
According to statistics compiled by MSDE, AACPS has approximately 61,900
students eligible to receive student transportation services. These students were
transported using 609 contractor-owned buses and 60 county-owned buses.
AACPS reported that 11.3 million route miles were traveled to transport students
for the 2022-2023 school year. According to AACPS’ financial statements, fiscal
year 2023 transportation costs totaled $66.9 million, of which $50.1 million
(approximately 75 percent) were payments for contracted bus services for various
costs.
School Bus Camera Safety Program
As allowed by State and County law, AACPS contracted for the use of school bus
safety cameras to monitor drivers who illegally pass a stopped school bus and
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Anne Arundel County
and the Anne Arundel County Police Department to process citations and receive
the County’s share of program revenue. In June 2022, AACPS’ School Board
approved a five-year contract to a vendor to install and operate cameras that
would be owned and maintained by the vendor on AACPS’ contracted school
buses. The contract also provided for cameras to monitor the conduct of drivers
and students inside the bus along with global positioning units to track the buses.
Consultant Review of AACPS Transportation Operations
AACPS contracted with a consultant in July 2019 to complete a review of
AACPS school transportation operations. The review performed by the outside
consultant included areas pertaining to routing, bell times, operational and capital
costs, staffing, and related operating procedures. Our review did not disclose any
issues that warranted inclusion in this report.
We determined that Finding 6 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the State
Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available audit
report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Consequently,
the specifics of the following finding, including the analysis, related
recommendation(s), along with AACPS’ responses, have been redacted from this
report copy.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Food Services
Background
According to AACPS’ audited financial statements, food services operating
expenditures totaled approximately $39 million in fiscal year 2023, and were
primarily funded with federal funds totaling $28 million and food sales totaling $8
million. The federal funds are received from the United States Department of
Agriculture based on an established rate per meals served. AACPS is allowed to
retain federal funds it receives in excess of its annual food service operating costs
to be used to offset certain future food service operating costs. According to
AACPS’ audited financial statements, the balance in AACPS’ Food Services
Fund totaled $24.6 million as of June 30, 2023.
Conclusion
Based on our current assessment of significance and risk relative to our audit
objectives, our audit did not include a review of policies, procedures, and controls
related to Food Services financial area of operations.
School Board Oversight
Background
Prior to December 7, 2020, the Board was composed of four elected members,
four members appointed by the Governor, and one voting student representative.
Effective, December 7, 2020, a State law change8 revised the composition of the
Board to reduce the number of members to seven elected members and one voting
student representative when the remaining appointed members were replaced at
the end of their terms.
The Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm to conduct
independent audits of the AACPS financial statements and federal programs. The
Board has established a Citizen Advisory Committee, which is a structured group
that provides advice to the Board on certain issues.
AACPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. The policy is applicable to both
Board members and AACPS employees and includes provisions for conflicts of
interest and financial disclosures by Board members and certain employees.
Specifically, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by
8 Chapter 473, 2017 Laws of Maryland
22

--- Page 25 ---
Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and other
administrators (such as supervisors, directors and school principals) by April 30th
of each year.
In accordance with the policy, AACPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of
five members appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. Our review of the records for Board
members and AACPS employees required to submit financial disclosure forms for
calendar year 2023 disclosed that all forms were submitted as required.
Conclusion
Our audit did not disclose any reportable conditions related to school board
oversight.
Management of Other Risks
Healthcare Background
AACPS is self-insured and uses a third-party administrator (TPA) to oversee and
administer its employee and retiree healthcare plans. Specifically, for medical
coverage, AACPS contracts with a TPA to provide administrative services, such
as claims processing for participants’ medical, vision, pharmacy, and dental costs.
Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays on behalf of AACPS.
AACPS reimburses the TPA for the claims it reports as paid on behalf of AACPS
and pays an administrative fee for these services. According to AACPS’ records,
healthcare expenditures totaled $250.7 million in fiscal year 2023, including
administrative fees totaling $8.0 million.
AACPS contracts with a consultant to help manage the health plans. The
consultant performs data analysis of the utilization of health services and costs,
provides recommendations on potential rate changes, and evaluates the merits of
the health plan proposals. As of July 22, 2024, AACPS provided health insurance
benefits to 33,143 enrolled employees, dependents, and retirees.
Finding 7
AACPS did not competitively bid its third-party administrator (TPA)
services since at least 2004.
Analysis
AACPS had not competitively bid its TPA services for healthcare plans since at
least 2004 (20 years). During fiscal year 2023, AACPS paid the TPA
23

--- Page 26 ---
approximately $8 million in administrative fees. The Government Finance
Officers Association’s best practices recommend that requests for proposals be
issued periodically (such as every few years) for healthcare plans to test the
market and ensure that competitive pricing is obtained.
Our comparison of administrative fees for AACPS’ TPA with similar plans for
two comparably sized school systems disclosed that AACPS’s costs were
comparable. AACPS advised us that a new consultant hired in July 2023 would
help perform a competitive procurement process for the TPA services.
A similar condition regarding the need to competitively procure its TPA services
was commented upon in our preceding audit report. In its response to that report,
AACPS stated it would decide to either competitively bid a new contract or
exercise an option year on its TPA contract. However, AACPS exercised the
option year and then extended the contract without attempting to competitively
bid a new contract.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that AACPS periodically competitively bid for TPA services
or document justification for not obtaining such bids (repeat).
Finding 8
AACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA that
provided health care claims processing services.
Analysis
AACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPAs that provided
health care claims processing services.
• AACPS did not obtain and review detailed claims data to support the amounts
billed by the TPA for healthcare claims. Rather, AACPS was provided with
an invoice that included the total claims paid for each health plan. AACPS
approved the claim payments with no review of supporting documentation or
verification that the charges were for eligible plan participants.
• AACPS did not verify that self-reported performance measures and related
penalties9 were supported and accurate. The medical and pharmacy TPA
reported self-assessed penalties of approximately $59,000 in calendar year
2023. Our review disclosed that AACPS did not have a process to verify the
9 The TPA contract allowed for the assessment of penalties if the TPA did not meet the
performance measures.
24

--- Page 27 ---
TPA’s reported compliance with reported performance measures and self-
reported penalties.
Similar conditions regarding the verification of TPA billings, claims data, and
performance measures were commented upon in our two preceding audit reports
dating back to June 2014. In its response to our most recent report, AACPS stated
it would develop an automated way to employ administrative fee data to audit
invoices, enhance procedures to independently verify the accuracy of healthcare
claims paid by the TPA, and determine a process to independently verify
performance measure compliance levels. However, our review disclosed that
AACPS had not implemented the recommendations as stated.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that AACPS
a. establish procedures to independently verify the propriety of TPA billings
(repeat); and
b. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPAs’
compliance with reported performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met (repeat).
25

--- Page 28 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We have conducted a performance audit of the Anne Arundel County Public
Schools (AACPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
which generally requires that every 6 years we audit each of the 24 local school
systems to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of financial management
practices. This performance audit was performed in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings
and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the AACPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the AACPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of AACPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on December 6, 2016 by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in
accordance with the enabling legislation. The 11 major financial-related areas
included revenue and billing; federal funds; procurement and disbursements;
human resources and payroll; equipment control; information technology security
and control; facilities; transportation; food services; school board oversight; and
the management of other risks (such as health care).
The scope of the work performed in each of these areas was based on our
assessments of significance and risk. Therefore, our follow-up on the status of
findings included in our preceding audit report on AACPS dated October 24,
2019, was limited to those findings that were applicable to the current audit scope
for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and functions.
Also, we did not evaluate the AACPS Comprehensive Education Master Plan or
related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial or other, of any
26

--- Page 29 ---
parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local board of
education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and regulations
pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well as policies and
procedures issued and established by AACPS. We also interviewed personnel at
AACPS and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at
other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate). Our audit procedures
included inspections of documents and records, and to the extent practicable,
observations of AACPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our objectives,
generally for the period from July 1, 2021 to December 31, 2023.
Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor judgment,
which primarily considers risk, the timing or dollar amount of the transaction, or
the significance of the transaction to the area of operation reviewed. As a matter
of course, we do not normally use sampling in our tests, so unless otherwise
specifically indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was
used to select the transactions tested. Therefore, unless sampling is specifically
indicated in a finding, the results from any tests conducted or disclosed by us
cannot be used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
AACPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit, as well as the
reviews of student activity funds performed by AACPS’ Internal Audit
department.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—compiled
by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the Maryland local
school systems. This information was used in this audit report for background or
informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the AACPS automated financial management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We performed
various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the data were
sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the audit.
AACPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records;
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets; and
compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved. As
27

--- Page 30 ---
provided in Government Auditing Standards, there are five components of
internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication, and monitoring. Each of the five components,
when significant to the audit objectives, and as applicable to AACPS, were
considered by us during the course of this audit.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In addition
to the conditions included in this report, other findings were communicated to
AACPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently, did not warrant
inclusion in this report.
State Government Article Section 2-1224(i) requires that we redact in a manner
consistent with auditing best practices any cybersecurity findings before a report
is made available to the public. This results in the issuance of two different
versions of an audit report that contains cybersecurity findings – a redacted
version for the public and an unredacted version for government officials
responsible for acting on our audit recommendations.
The State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b), states that
cybersecurity is defined as “processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.” Based on that definition, and
in our professional judgment, we concluded that certain findings in this report fall
under that definition. Consequently, for the publicly available audit report all
specifics as to the nature of cybersecurity findings and required corrective actions
have been redacted. We have determined that such aforementioned practices, and
government auditing standards, support the redaction of this information from the
public audit report. The specifics of these cybersecurity findings have been
communicated to AACPS and those parties responsible for acting on our
recommendations in an unredacted audit report.
We conducted our fieldwork from March 2024 to December 2024. AACPS’
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to this
report. Depending on the version of the audit report, responses to any
cybersecurity findings may be redacted in accordance with State law. As
prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, we will advise AACPS regarding the results of our review of
its response.
28

--- Page 31 ---
APPENDIX

--- Page 32 ---
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1
Certain requirements of State law and recognized best practices were not
incorporated into the Anne Arundel County Public Schools’ (AACPS)
procurement policies and were not consistently used when participating in
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements (ICPAs).
We recommend that AACPS incorporate the aforementioned statutory
requirements and other identified and acknowledged best practices into its
procurement policies and ensure that the performance of the requirements
and best practices are documented when evaluating and participating in
ICPAs.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide AACPS current Policies and Regulations are consistent with State Law
additional comments as and procurement best practices. However, AACPS concurs that best
deemed necessary. practices regarding cooperative purchasing were not consistently
documented in the contract file.
Recommendation 1 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025-2026
Please provide details of AACPS agrees to incorporate procurement best practices into its Policies
corrective action or and Regulations. AACPS will reference State statutes and regulations in
explain disagreement. its policies and regulations when appropriate.
Page 1 of 7

--- Page 33 ---
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 2
AACPS did not always publish contract solicitations or awards on eMaryland
Marketplace Advantage (eMMA) as required by State procurement law.
We recommend that AACPS publish contract solicitations and awards on
eMMA as required, including those noted above.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide AACPS consistently published competitively awarded contracts in
additional comments as eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA). However, cooperative
deemed necessary. contracts and contract awards restricted to prequalified contractors were
not published in eMMA. AACPS incorrectly interpreted the eMMA
posting requirement as applying to only contracts awarded through open
procurements such as request for bids or request for proposals.
Recommendation 2 Agree Estimated Completion Date: Current
Please provide details of AACPS concurs that cooperative contracts and awards restricted to
corrective action or prequalified contractors should have been posted in eMMA and have
explain disagreement. complied since being alerted to the omissions by OLA.
Page 2 of 7

--- Page 34 ---
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 3
AACPS did not execute formal written contracts or obtain approval from the
Board for special education services.
We recommend that AACPS
a. modify its Procurement Policy to require formal written contracts for
special education services, and
b. comply with its Policy by obtaining Board approval for special education
services.
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Currently, State- approved cost sheets are applied as individual student
additional comments as contracts. This is the same process for all Type I placements.
deemed necessary. Specifically, MSDE approves the price based on the submitted school
budget and monitors all programs to ensure certification compliance
Recommendation 3a Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025-2026
Please provide details of AACPS will modify its current Purchasing Policies to require formal
corrective action or contracts with existing providers for special education services. It is
explain disagreement. important to note that LEA cost of Nonpublic Tuition is determined at
the State level.
Recommendation 3b Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2025-2026
Please provide details of AACPS Division of Specialized Instruction and Early Intervention
corrective action or Services will ensure a clear description of Type I (private separate day or
explain disagreement. residential) and Type II (or class co-location) in the annual Staffing Plan
(Nonpublic continuum description). This document is approved by the
Superintendent and Board annually.
AACPS will also seek Board of Education approval of new and
continuing contracts on an annual basis
Page 3 of 7

--- Page 35 ---
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Information Technology
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) has determined that the Information
Technology section, including Findings 4 and 5 related to “cybersecurity,” as
defined by the State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and therefore are subject to redaction from the
publicly available audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-
1224(i). Although the specifics of the following findings, including the analysis,
related recommendations, along with AACPS’ responses, have been redacted
from this report copy, AACPS’ responses indicated agreement with the findings
and related recommendations.
Finding 4
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Finding 5
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA. Agency Response has been
redacted Response has been redacted by OLA
Page 4 of 7

--- Page 36 ---
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Transportation Services
OLA has determined that Finding 6 related to “cybersecurity,” as defined by the
State Finance and Procurement Article, Section 3.5-301(b) of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, and therefore is subject to redaction from the publicly available
audit report in accordance with the State Government Article 2-1224(i). Although
the specifics of the finding, including the analysis, related recommendation(s),
along with AACPS’ responses, have been redacted from this report copy,
AACPS’ responses indicated agreement with the finding and related
recommendations.
Finding 6
Redacted cybersecurity-related finding.
Agency Response has been redacted by OLA.
Page 5 of 7

--- Page 37 ---
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Management of Other Risks
Finding 7
AACPS did not competitively bid its third-party administrator (TPA)
services since at least 2004.
We recommend that AACPS periodically competitively bid for TPA services
or document justification for not obtaining such bids (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide Certain limiting language in previous Collective Bargaining Agreements
additional comments as (CBAs) hindered AACPS’s ability to competitively solicit a new
deemed necessary. contract with competition from other TPAs. The language has been
removed from the CBA, enabling AACPS to draw more robust
competition through an open solicitation.
Recommendation 7 Agree Estimated Completion Date: 2027/28
Please provide details of AACPS will be issuing a competitive request for proposals for a new
corrective action or TPA contract to begin January 2027.
explain disagreement.
Page 6 of 7

--- Page 38 ---
Anne Arundel County Public Schools
Agency Response Form
Finding 8
AACPS did not adequately monitor the performance of its TPA that
provided health care claims processing services.
We recommend that AACPS
a. establish procedures to independently verify the propriety of TPA billings
(repeat); and
b. establish a process to independently verify, on an annual basis, the TPAs’
compliance with reported performance measures and assess penalties
when performance goals are not met (repeat).
Agency Response
Analysis Factually Accurate
Please provide AACPS has engaged the services of a consultant and has an agreed
additional comments as timeline to audit healthcare claims. A medical claims audit was
deemed necessary. completed in December 2024 with future audits scheduled every two
years. In addition to the medical audit, AACPS will have audits
performed on pharmacy, dental and vision. It should be noted that
pharmacy audits are also scheduled to occur every two years.
Recommendation 8a Agree Estimated Completion Date: May 2025
Please provide details of AACPS is collaborating with our Technology team to develop reports
corrective action or that will enable us to reconcile claims submitted by the TPA with the
explain disagreement. employees enrolled in AACPS healthcare benefits on a monthly basis.
Any discrepancies will be addressed with the TPA for resolution.
Recommendation 8b Agree Estimated Completion Date: June 2025
Please provide details of As a result of medical audit, it was recommended that AACPS consider
corrective action or having the TPA update the performance guarantee calculation
explain disagreement. methodology to include all claims. In addition, AACPS will request a
quarterly review of guarantees. During these reviews, AACPS will
document any reasons for underperformance and discuss a remedy to get
back on track. Performance guarantees will also be reviewed at the
annual TPA meeting. AACPS will discuss with our consultant how to
assess penalties as provided for in the contract when performance
guarantees are not met.
Page 7 of 7

--- Page 39 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Principal Auditor
R. Brendan Coffey, CPA, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Dorian A. Fournier, CIA
Matthew P. Henry
Paul A. McGrew
Staff Auditors
Joshua A. Nicodemus, CISA
Neha S. Tirkey
Information Systems Staff Auditors