Title: Review of the Outstanding Loans in the Volunteer Company Assistance Fund and the Fire Truck Revolving Loan Fund in Response to the April 2008 Joint Charimen's Report
Date: 11/02/2009
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b6f
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:05:07.195770
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
November 2, 2009
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
The Honorable Ulysses Currie, Chairman
Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
Miller Senate Office Building, 3 West Wing
11 Bladen Street
Annapolis, MD 21401
The Honorable Norman H. Conway, Chairman
House Committee on Appropriations
House Office Building, Room 121
6 Bladen Street
Annapolis, MD 21401
Dear Senator Currie and Delegate Conway:
In the April 2008 Joint Chairmen’s Report (page 45), the committees directed the Office
of Legislative Audits (OLA) to review the outstanding loans in the Volunteer Company
Assistance Fund (VCAF) and the Fire Truck Revolving Loan Fund (FTRLF); document the fund
receivables and balances in each; and track repayment schedules. The narrative further requested
that a report on our review be submitted to the budget committees by November 1, 2008.
In letters dated September 29, 2008 and December 17, 2008, we notified the committees
that due to numerous problems (such as, incomplete loan records) identified during our initial
inquiry with representatives of the Military Department and the Maryland State Firemen’s
Association (MSFA), OLA planned to conduct our review and issue the required report during
the 2009 interim, provided the Department was able to reconstruct the needed records.
Our current review disclosed that the Department has substantially reconstructed the loan
records (including repayment schedules) for the VCAF and FTRLF, and has established the
required fund receivables and related cash balance. As of October 8, 2009, the outstanding loan
receivable balances of the VCAF and FTRLF totaled approximately $8.5 million and $710,000,
respectively. In addition, the cash balance of the funds (which are combined on the State’s
accounting records), totaled approximately $4.5 million. Also, other issues raised in our
September 29, 2008 letter regarding the need for the Department to both maintain the related
loan records and receive loan repayments directly from the volunteer fire companies, as well as
instances of unauthorized modifications to loan interest rates have been resolved.

--- Page 2 ---
The Honorable Ulysses Currie, Chairman -2- November 2, 2009
The Honorable Norman H. Conway, Chairman
Nevertheless, there are a few remaining open items that still need to be addressed. We
noted that MSFA had not transferred to the Department approximately $57,000 that was
identified by the Department as due to the State. Moreover, the Department also has yet to
receive certain documentation it has requested from the MSFA; however, in our opinion this
documentation would not have a material impact on the accuracy of the records established by
the Department.
As noted in a previous letter to the committees, the scope of our review was less than that
of an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Please contact me if you would like to discuss this matter further.
Sincerely,
Bruce A. Myers
Legislative Auditor
BAM/lcy
cc: Senator Verna L. Jones, Senate Chair of the Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., House Chair of the Joint Audit Committee
Sheila McDonald, Executive Secretary, Board of Public Works
Brigadier General (MD) James A. Adkins, The Adjutant General
John S. Nickerson, Director of Finance and Administration, Military Department
Roger N. Powell, President, MSFA
Ronald J. Siarnicki, Treasurer, MSFA
Karl Aro, Executive Director, Department of Legislative Services
Chantelle M. Green, Policy Analyst, Office of Policy Analysis
Karen Morgan, Staff, Joint Audit Committee
Lisa J. Simpson, Staff, Joint Audit Committee