Title: Allegany County Public Schools
Date: 01/29/2013
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d33cc9d72404c1509ea
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:02:54.113439
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Allegany County Public Schools
January 2013
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audits of Fiscal Years 2011 and 2012 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Federal Funds
Finding 1 – ACPS Did Not Process Medicaid-Subsidized Reimbursement 10
Claims Timely and Risked Missing Claim Filing Deadlines
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 2 – Duties for Purchasing and Payment Processing Were Not 12
Properly Separated and Certain Transactions Were Not Independently
Reviewed
* Finding 3 – ACPS Has Not Established Comprehensive Written 13
Procurement Policies and Procedures
* Finding 4 – ACPS Did Not Competitively Bid Certain Service Contracts 14
Finding 5 – ACPS Did Not Ensure the Propriety of Payments to the Third- 15
Party Administrator for Employee and Retiree Health Care Costs
* Finding 6 – ACPS Did Not Adequately Monitor Payments Made to a 18
Contractor for Special Education Services
Human Resources and Payroll
Finding 7 – User Access to the Automated System Was Not Properly 20
Restricted and Documentation of Reviews of Certain Payroll
Transactions Was Lacking
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 8 – ACPS Did Not Always Obtain Independent Approval Before 22
Updating Records for Missing Equipment
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
* Finding 9 – Security Events Were Not Properly Monitored for a 23
Critical Server and Database
Finding 10 – Application, Network, and Server Account and Password 24
Controls Were Not Sufficient to Properly Protect Critical Resources
* Finding 11 – ACPS’ Disaster Recovery Plan and Program Change 25
Controls Were Not Adequate
Finding 12 – The ACPS Network Was Not Properly Secured 26
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 13 – ACPS Energy Management Program Was Not 27
Sufficiently Comprehensive
* Finding 14 – ACPS Does Not Maintain Documentation of All Preventive 28
Maintenance Work Performed
Transportation Services
* Finding 15 – Certain Bus Contractor Payments Rates Were Either 29
Not Verified or Not Supported
* Finding 16 – ACPS Did Not Use Automated Routing to Develop More 30
Efficient Routes
Food Service Operations
* Finding 17 – ACPS Has Experienced Persistent Deficits in its Food 32
Service Operations
Finding 18 – Proper Internal Controls Were Not Established Over 34
Food Services Inventory
School Board Oversight
Finding 19 – The Disclosure Form Used to Identify Potential Conflicts 36
of Interest Could be Improved
Other Financial Controls 36
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 39
Response of Allegany County Public Schools Appendix A
Auditor’s Comments on ACPS Response Appendix B
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Allegany County Public Schools (ACPS)
January 2013
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
ACPS ranks 16th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. In fiscal year 2011, ACPS had a total full-time regular and special
education pupil population of 8,913 at its 23 schools. ACPS’ operating and
capital expenditures totaled $127.8 million during that year.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of ACPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated January 5, 2007. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for ACPS to improve internal controls, to adopt more cost-
effective processes, and to enhance policy direction.
ACPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability in Certain
Financial Areas
Although proper internal controls had been established in certain financial
areas, such as construction contract awards and monitoring, ACPS needs to
improve internal controls and accountability in certain other financial areas.
For example, ACPS needs to segregate duties by limiting authorized users’
capabilities to process certain transactions in its financial and human
resources/payroll automated systems. In addition, cafeteria managers
essentially had complete control over food service inventories since they
ordered and received goods, maintained the related records, and conducted
all inventories without independent oversight.
ACPS did not adequately monitor certain contracts. For example, although
ACPS received monthly invoices from one vendor for therapy services, the
invoices did not contain sufficient detail to determine whether the services
were actually provided, such as identifying the student who received the
service. Payments to this vendor totaled $1.3 million in fiscal year 2011. In
addition, ACPS did not receive documentation (such as employee timesheets)
to allow it to verify time that was billed. We also noted that the invoices for
health care services were not verified to supporting documentation of actual
claims activity. ACPS is self-insured for employee medical benefits and uses a
third-party administrator to process related claims. Payments to the
administrator totaled $16.4 million in fiscal year 2011, including $1 million
for the administrator’s fee.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Adequate security measures and monitoring procedures were not in place to
protect ACPS’ network and related critical devices from security risks. For
example, firewall rules allowed numerous insecure and unnecessary
connections to critical ACPS network devices. In addition, a number of
network accounts had excessive or improper access to network resources
including data files and programs.
ACPS Should Consider Implementing Certain Steps to Improve Cost
Effectiveness
Although ACPS had a process to track submission of documentation used to
recover Medicaid-subsidized costs for certain services, it was significantly
behind in processing the documentation. As of January 12, 2012, ACPS had
not completed processing documentation dating back to February 2011.
ACPS management could not readily determine the value of these
unprocessed claims.
ACPS did not base certain elements used to pay its bus contractors on actual
costs. Specifically, payments to bus contractors for bus maintenance and fuel
costs were based on a negotiated rate. Using ACPS data for its in-house bus
fleet, we estimated that the negotiated rate paid by ACPS may have exceeded
the actual maintenance and fuel costs. Using actual bus route miles and
payments made to the contractor, the cost differential between the negotiated
rate and our estimated rate equated to $888,000 for fiscal years 2010 and
2011 in total. Also, ACPS needs to verify certain bus contractor billing
information, such as bus route mileage and time.
ACPS has experienced persistent deficits in its food service operations. For
fiscal years 2008 to 2011, food service operation costs, in the aggregate,
have exceeded related revenues by almost $4 million. Based on our analysis
of ACPS costs, expenses for salaries and wages and productivity (in terms of
meals per labor hour) appear to be contributing factors to the deficits. ACPS
does not currently use performance measurement data such as comparing
meals per labor hour to established benchmarks to assist in evaluating the
food service operations.
ACPS Needs to Establish or Modify Certain Policies
ACPS’ current procurement policy did not address procurements under
$25,000, the procurement of services, or provide guidance for the use of sole-
source procurement. In addition, ACPS had not developed a policy to govern
the use of its corporate purchasing cards. Expenditures using these cards
totaled $460,000 in fiscal year 2011.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) student
enrollment records, Allegany County Public Schools (ACPS) ranks 16th in
student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in Maryland. From
fiscal years 2001 to 2011, the total full-time regular and special education
pupil population has decreased 12.4 percent from 10,180 to 8,913. For the
2010-2011 school year, ACPS had 23 schools, consisting of 14 elementary, 4
middle, 3 high schools, 1 alternative school, and 1 technical school.
According to ACPS’ audited financial statements, expenditures totaled $127.8
million in fiscal year 2011. The largest expenditure category is salaries and
wages, including benefits, which accounted for 74 percent of total operating
expenditures during fiscal year 2011. According to MSDE records, as of
October 2011, ACPS had 1,319 full-time equivalent positions which consisted
of 913 instructional and 406 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
ACPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Allegany
County government provide the vast majority of ACPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with ACPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Allegany County government exercises authority over ACPS,
primarily through review and approval of ACPS’ annual operating and capital
budgets.
External Audits of Fiscal Years 2011 and 2012
ACPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts
what is referred to as a Single Audit of ACPS federal grant programs (as
required by federal regulations). The resulting financial statement and Single
Audit for fiscal year 2011 were issued in September 2011. The Report on
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and on Compliance and Other
Matters (part of the Single Audit) included one finding that was classified as
7

--- Page 10 ---
both a significant deficiency1 and a material weakness2 related to ACPS’
internal control over financial reporting and compliance. Specifically, ACPS
management did not have an adequate system in place to provide ongoing or
separate evaluations of the effectiveness of the Board’s system of internal
controls, including controls over federal awards. The report indicated that
ACPS did not have an employee independent of the Finance Office to monitor
the system of internal controls and report to the Board. In response, the
Board stated that due to budget constraints, it did not plan on implementing
an independent internal audit/monitoring position.
After our fieldwork was completed, the financial statement and Single Audit
reports for fiscal year 2012 were issued on October 1, 2012. Again, the
Single Audit reported the same significant deficiency relating to monitoring of
internal controls; however, the condition was not identified as a material
weakness in the fiscal year 2012 reports.
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited ACPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we relied
on the results of the independent audit of the fiscal year 2011 financial
statements to reduce the scope of our audit work related to revenues,
accounts receivable, school activity funds and federal grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 16 of the 27 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated January 5, 2007 (the 27
findings resulted in 17 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed
up on these 16 findings based on our current assessment of significance and
risk relative to the audit objectives. We determined that ACPS satisfactorily
addressed five of these findings. The remaining 11 findings are repeated in
10 findings in this report.
1 A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent or
detect misstatements on a timely basis. With respect to Single Audit, a deficiency is a control
deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies, that does not allow management or employees, in
the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct
noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program on a timely basis.
2 A material weakness in internal control is a significant deficiency, or a combination of significant
deficiencies, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the financial
statements (or, with respect to Single Audit, material noncompliance with a type of compliance
requirement of a federal program) will not be prevented or detected and corrected, on a timely basis.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Allegany County Public Schools (ACPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Allegany County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the ACPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $129 million during fiscal year 2011. In addition, ACPS
maintains school activity funds that are collected to operate various student
activities, clubs, and school publications. Each school maintains detail
records which separately account for the activity of each group or club. Each
school also maintains its own separate bank account. Because this revenue
is raised through student-related activities, it is not considered school
revenue. Nevertheless, ACPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds,
which are reported in summary form in the audited financial statements. For
fiscal year 2011, school activity fund collections totaled $2.9 million and
disbursements totaled $2.9 million. The June 30, 2011 balance based on the
audited financial statements totaled $2 million.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the ACPS financial statements and the objectives
of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of that
audit for revenues and accounts receivable (for example, amounts due from
other governments), and school activity funds. The auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or deficiencies
regarding significant revenue types, accounts receivable, or school activity
funds. Such testing included the most significant revenue types (the majority
of which related to electronic fund transfers from other government entities)
and also included school activity funds.
Federal Funds
Background
ACPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of Federal
Awards, fiscal year 2011 expenditures of federal award funds totaled $15.9
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Single Audit Report Regarding Federal Grant Management
Due to the work performed by the independent certified public accounting
firm that conducted the Single Audit of the ACPS federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor’s work and results.
Besides expressing an opinion on ACPS compliance with the terms of several
grant programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure’s impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2011 required
Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant-
related expenditures). The related report stated that ACPS complied, in all
material respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal
programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the
operation of, major federal programs, the auditors identified one finding that
was considered both a material weakness and a significant deficiency due to
the lack of a formal system in place to monitor the adequacy and
effectiveness of the Board’s system of internal controls. The Board, in its
response, indicated that at the current time, it did not plan to implement such
a monitoring function.
Finding 1
ACPS had not processed reimbursement claims for Medicaid-subsidized
services timely and was at risk that eligible claims may not be processed by
established deadlines.
Analysis
Although ACPS had a process to track the submission of documentation used
to recover Medicaid-subsidized costs for applicable students, ACPS had not
processed the documentation timely to ensure that it received the related
Medical Assistance reimbursements. As of January 12, 2012, ACPS had not
completed processing documentation for reimbursable services dating back
to February 2011 (a backlog of approximately 11 months). State regulations
specify that Medicaid may not reimburse claims received more than 12
months after the date of service. Since the backlog consisted of a large
amount of unprocessed paperwork, ACPS management could not readily
determine the value of the related claims amounts.
According to ACPS records for fiscal year 2012, Federal reimbursement for
Medicaid-subsidized services totaled $945,000 and, as of March 2012,
approximately 1,200 students were eligible to receive Medicaid-subsidized
services.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ACPS process Medicaid reimbursement claims in a
timely manner to ensure that all eligible costs for Medicaid-subsidized
services are fully recovered.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to ACPS records, non-payroll related disbursements totaled $35.5
million during fiscal year 2011. Purchase orders for goods and services are
manually generated by the requesting department and must be approved by
supervisory personnel (such as the respective department head). The
purchase orders are transmitted to the accounts payable section where they
are entered into an automated system before being sent to the vendor.
Purchases of goods anticipated to cost more than $25,000 generally require
bidding, which is handled by the requesting department. Invoices submitted
by vendors to the finance office are matched to the related purchase order
through the automated system. The receipt of goods and services is
confirmed by the requesting department before payment processing.
Payments are processed by the finance department through an automated
system that prints vendor checks and also posts the payment to the financial
records.
ACPS Properly Bid, Approved, and Monitored Construction Contracts
Our review disclosed that ACPS had established adequate controls over the
bidding, approval, and monitoring of construction contracts. Our review of
ACPS’ three most recent construction projects totaling $2.5 million disclosed
that ACPS properly procured contracts for the general contractors, including
review and approval by the Board. In addition, our test of six invoices totaling
$617,000 for these contracts disclosed that the invoices were properly
reviewed and approved, and the amounts invoiced were in accordance with
the related contract terms.
Contracts for Food Services were Properly Bid and Invoices Generally Agreed
to Contract Prices.
Our review of contracts for food services materials and supplies disclosed that
ACPS properly procured the contracts tested and that invoice prices agreed to
contracts for the items tested. According to ACPS records, expenditures for
food and related supplies totaled $1.5 million for fiscal year 2011.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
Duties for purchasing and payment processing were not properly separated
and certain transactions were not subject to independent review.
Analysis
Internal controls over procurements and disbursements were not adequate.
Specifically, we found the following conditions:
 Purchase orders were entered into the automated system without being
subject to independent approval. Specifically, there was no process
established to require an independent employee (such as the finance
officer) to verify that only properly approved purchase orders were entered
into the system and sent to the appropriate vendor. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Controls over changes to vendor information were not adequate. Vendor
data are entered into the automated system by the employee who records
the invoice for payment. Although another employee is responsible for
reviewing a report of changes to the system’s vendor table which helps
ensure that only authorized vendors are paid, this employee did not review
source documentation to ensure the propriety of any such changes.
 ACPS did not adequately limit user duties and related capabilities on its
automated system to establish effective internal control over
disbursement transactions. For example, our audit disclosed that eight
ACPS employees had been assigned capabilities that allowed them to
perform incompatible functions pertaining to the processing of critical
procurement and disbursement transactions (such as entering purchase
orders and changing vendor tables). Consequently, these employees
could process improper payments. Seven of these employees did not
require such capabilities to perform their job duties and the remaining
employee could perform required duties with fewer capabilities. Our test
of purchase orders and invoice payments processed by these employees
did not disclose any inappropriate or erroneous transactions for the items
tested.
 Six Allegany County employees (not ACPS employees) could process
certain transactions. Four of these six users could process all critical
transactions, (purchase orders, invoices, and vendor table changes)
without further approval. When we brought this condition to the attention
of ACPS management we were advised that there was no legitimate
reason access should be granted to users that were not ACPS employees.
12

--- Page 15 ---
 Although ACPS had a process in place to review all checks for propriety
prior to issuance, the employees responsible for this review also had
system access capabilities that allow them to process payments.
Accordingly, this review was not an effective control process due to the
lack of reviewer independence from the transaction processing function.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ACPS establish appropriate procedures and controls over
procurements and disbursements (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that
ACPS
a. ensure that an independent employee verifies that only properly approved
purchase orders were recorded in the system,
b. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the automated
accounts payable system are verified to appropriate source
documentation by an independent employee,
c. separate employee duties to eliminate incompatible procurement and
disbursement processing functions,
d. assign critical system capabilities only to employees who need those
capabilities to perform their job duties, and
e. ensure that an independent employee conducts a documented
comparison of transactions and checks processed to the related
supporting documentation.
Finding 3
ACPS has not established comprehensive written procurement policies and
procedures.
Analysis
ACPS had not established a comprehensive policy for procurement of goods
and services. The Board adopted a procurement policy that requires the
purchase of goods to be conducted in compliance with the Annotated Code of
Maryland which requires that procurements of school buildings and
improvements, supplies, and equipment exceeding $25,000 be competitively
bid and awarded to the bidder with the lowest responsible bid. However, the
current policy was not comprehensive. For example, the policy did not
address procurements under $25,000, Board approval of contracts, use of
and documentation requirements for sole-source procurements, or
procurement methods for services. Also, ACPS had not developed detail
procedures, as required by the policy. The procedures should include
establishing controls to be followed to ensure compliance with Board and law
requirements. Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding
audit report.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Also, ACPS did not have written policies or procedures to govern the issuance
and use of its credit cards, and accountability over related purchases. A
formal policy and related procedures should address controls and guidelines
for use of the cards such as: a requirement for card users to sign documents
accepting responsibility for the card issued to them; the types of purchases
allowed; and the processes used to verify the propriety of all purchases.
Procedures were established to ensure that purchased items were received
before related payments were made. During fiscal year 2011, according to
ACPS records, nine employees used credit cards to make a total of $460,000
in purchases. Our test of credit card expenditures disclosed that the
purchases appeared to be appropriate for school business.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that ACPS establish comprehensive policies to ensure the
propriety of procurements (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. update its procurement policies to address all categories of goods and
services purchases including procurement methods to be used, when
contracts should be in writing, the mandatory contract provisions and the
approval requirements, and when Board approval is required;
b. ensure that related procedures are developed to carry out the policies,
including processes to ensure the policies and procedures are carried out
as the Board and management intended; and
c. develop and implement a comprehensive written policy and related
procedures for issuance and use of its credit cards, and for accountability
over related purchases.
Finding 4
ACPS did not competitively bid certain service contracts.
Analysis
ACPS did not competitively bid certain contracts for services. Specifically, we
noted the following conditions:
 ACPS had not bid the contract for third-party health care administrative
services since 2000 according to agency personnel. During fiscal year
2011, ACPS paid the administrative service organization $1 million in
administrative fees. We were advised by ACPS management that this
provider was selected through a bidding process in fiscal year 2000, and
had been retained on a year-to-year basis thereafter.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 ACPS did not bid for services for stop-loss employee medical insurance.
Payments to the insurer totaled $414,000 during fiscal year 2011. ACPS
stated that its employee and benefits consultant (this consultant assists
ACPS in procuring health care related contracts) conducted the
procurement of this contract. However, ACPS was not able to provide any
documentation that the consultant used a competitive process to ensure
the lowest possible cost to ACPS for this insurance.
 ACPS did not obtain bids for two contracts for architectural and
engineering (A&E) services totaling $130,000. ACPS advised that it
generally hires A&E contractors who have previously completed projects
for the schools being renovated without soliciting bids from other firms.
 ACPS obtained occupational/physical therapy services from one vendor
without bidding for these services or documenting a justification for the
sole-source procurement. Payments to this contractor for fiscal year 2011
totaled $1.3 million. ACPS management advised us that they believed
there was no other vendor available that could provide these services but
had no documentation to establish this. A similar condition was
commented upon in our preceding audit.
To help ensure that the best value is obtained, bids for services should be
solicited from other interested firms, and the basis for sole-source
procurements should be documented.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that ACPS
a. obtain competitive bids for service contracts, and
b. maintain documentation justifying the decision for sole-source
procurements (repeat).
Finding 5
ACPS did not ensure the propriety of payments for employee and retiree
health care costs.
Analysis
ACPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that amounts paid to the
third-party administrator were proper. ACPS self funds all health care costs up
to a stop-loss limit of $275,000. ACPS uses a third-party administrator to pay
claims on behalf of plan participants and eligible dependents. Providers
submit claims to the administrator who pays them on behalf of ACPS and then
obtains reimbursement from ACPS for actual costs of claims paid. ACPS pays
15

--- Page 18 ---
an administrative fee for these services. For fiscal year 2011, according to
agency records, amounts paid for health care totaled $16.4 million, including
administrative fees of approximately $1 million. Our review of ACPS’s
procedures and controls over the contract and related payments for medical
claims and administrative fees disclosed the following conditions:
 ACPS paid for claim reimbursements invoiced by the administrator without
any verification that the amounts invoiced were proper. Specifically, ACPS
makes estimated payments to the administrator each week and then pays
a settlement amount (or receives a credit) based on the reported actual
claims paid for the month. However, ACPS did not receive detailed claims
data and therefore could not verify that the amounts billed agreed to the
amounts of reported claims. Furthermore, ACPS did not audit the
propriety of the claims paid by the program administrator.
In addition, ACPS did not have a process to periodically verify the eligibility of
enrollee dependents covered under the employee and retiree health plans.
ACPS was not readily able to provide us with the number of covered
dependents; however, according to the December 2011 invoice and related
documentation, 887 employees and retirees selected health care coverage
that included one or more dependent (that is spouse or family coverage).
Recommended practices published by the Government Finance Officers
Association state that health care cost containment, which includes
verification of enrolled participants, is a critical component of long-term
financial planning and budgeting.
 ACPS did not adequately ensure that administrative fees invoiced and paid
to the administrator were proper. ACPS pays a monthly administrative fee
ranging from $36 to $45 per participant. Although ACPS compared the
number of participants from the invoices to its payroll records, it did not
follow up on any differences in participant counts. For example, in
December 2011, the vendor invoiced (and ACPS paid) administrative fees
based on 1,187 active employees, while ACPS payroll records indicated
that there were 1,157 participants. Although ACPS noted this
discrepancy, there was no evidence of a subsequent billing adjustment or
other explanation for the difference.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Similar discrepancies were noted for other months we reviewed as shown
in Table 1 below:
Table 1
Potential Administrative Fee Overpayment – October to December 2011
(Active Employees)
Billing
Participants Participants Potential
Month Difference
per Vendor per ACPS Overpayment
(2011)
October 1,196 1,162 34 $ 1,546
November 1,190 1,158 32 $ 1,455
December 1,187 1,157 30 $ 1,364
Source: Vendor Invoices and ACPS Payroll Records
 ACPS did not ensure that certain other contractual performance measures
were met. The contract requires the administrator to obtain specific
performance measures in various areas, such as customer service,
enrollment, and customer satisfaction. The contract allows for
assessment of penalties (up to $96,000 for fiscal year 2012) if these
measures are not met. The administrator self-reports their compliance
levels with these measures; however, ACPS had no process to verify the
reported levels. Penalties totaling $1,875 were assessed as result of the
administrator’s self-reporting for the period July 1, 2011 through
September 30, 2011, but a determination as to whether this was the
proper amount was not made.
 Although ACPS has a contract for stop-loss insurance (that is, ACPS is
liable to a specified amount and claims over this amount would be paid by
an insurer), ACPS did not verify that claims exceeding the stop-loss limit
were reimbursed by the insurer. ACPS initially reimburses the third-party
administrator for all paid claims, and relies on the administrator to notify
the stop-loss insurer of payments exceeding the limit. The insurer then
reimburses ACPS for the excess claims amount. According to ACPS
records, ACPS received $117,000 in fiscal year 2011 related to claims
exceeding the stop-loss limit. As previously commented, ACPS did not
receive documentation of all claims paid by the administrator.
Consequently, ACPS could not verify that reimbursements for all claims
exceeding the stop-loss limit were received.
 ACPS did not ensure the administrator conducted disease management or
utilization reviews as required by the contract. ACPS paid administrative
fees of $3.51 per member per month for disease management. Disease
17

--- Page 20 ---
management involves a system of coordinated care for certain patients in
order to reduce healthcare costs and improve the results. Health provider
utilization reviews are typically conducted to determine the necessity,
appropriateness, and efficiency of medical services, procedures, facilities,
and practitioners, and can be used to better manage the cost and
effectiveness of the health care programs.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that ACPS implement controls to verify the amounts paid for
health insurance. Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and verify the
propriety of the claims paid by agreeing the invoiced amounts with the
related support, verifying the eligibility of enrolled health care program
participants and their listed dependents, and conducting audits of the
claims paid by the administrator;
b. determine the reasons for any differences in the amounts billed for
administrative fees and take appropriate action (such as recovering any
overpayments);
c. verify reports on contractual performance measures to supporting
documentation and ensure that mandated measures were met, or if not
met, resulted in penalties as specified in the contract;
d. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer; and
e. ensure that all required services are provided in accordance with the third-
party administrator contract.
Finding 6
ACPS did not adequately monitor payments made for special education
services.
Analysis
ACPS did not adequately monitor payments made for special education
services. For example, ACPS did not ensure that amounts paid for physical
and occupational therapy services to one provider, totaling $1.3 million during
fiscal year 2011, were proper. Furthermore, ACPS did not ensure that the
contractor was providing the required amount of service hours to students.
Specifically, our review of this provider noted the following conditions:
 ACPS received a monthly invoice from the contractor that listed the
number of hours and rate billed for each type of service provided (for
example, hours worked by a licensed physical therapist). However, ACPS
did not obtain sufficient detailed documentation (such as employee
18

--- Page 21 ---
timesheets) to support amounts billed. In addition, the invoices did not
identify the students to whom the services were provided and, in certain
cases, ACPS paid for services not provided for in the student’s
Individualized Education Program (IEP). In this regard, our test of
payments for therapy services for six students provided during October
2011, disclosed that while all students received the minimum level of
services required according to the student’s IEP, we noted three instances
of services provided and billed in excess of the required level. Although
ACPS informed us that it periodically audited providers’ invoices, ACPS was
unable to provide us with documentation of any such audits.
 ACPS paid a portion of the contractor’s administration fees although the
contract did not include this requirement. The contractor stated that
administrative time, such as certain travel and service documentation that
cannot be attributed to a specific client, is billed on a prorated basis (the
contractor performed work for other clients as well as ACPS). The
contractor advised us that ACPS represents approximately 67 percent of
their total billings, so the contractor’s administrative costs are billed at this
rate. Nevertheless, there was no contractual requirement for ACPS to pay
the administration fee. ACPS paid the contractor a total of $8,000 in
administrative costs for October 2011.
 ACPS did not monitor time billed for indirect service hours. The contract
terms provide that ACPS shall pay indirect costs such as travel time and
preparation of routine documentation, but did not specify estimated or
expected hours to be spent on indirect services. ACPS did not monitor this
time to determine if it was reasonable in relation to the direct service time
(that is, time spent with students). Our test of payments for services
provided to six students during October 2011, commented on above,
disclosed that the contractor billed a total of 47 hours, which included 24
hours of indirect time.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
ACPS’s Special Education department prepares Individualized Education
Plans (IEP) for eligible students which state specific services to be provided
(for example, physical therapy and speech therapy) based on the students
needs, including the frequency of those services (daily, weekly). According to
ACPS records, as of October 2011 there were approximately 1,300 students
receiving at least one special education service. Fiscal year 2011 special
education expenditures totaled $16.6 million (including $5.7 million paid to
approximately 30 contractors for services such as physical therapy and non-
public school placements).
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that ACPS
a. obtain documentation supporting all contractor billings and compare the
documentation to the related invoice to ensure the propriety of the
invoices prior to payment, for example, by comparing hours billed to
related timesheets (repeat);
b. ensure that services were provided and billed in accordance with the IEP,
at least on a test basis;
c. ensure that terms and rates for payments related to administrative time
are specified in the contract; and
d. monitor the reasonableness of indirect services hours and ensure the
propriety of payments made for these hours.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll represents the largest single cost component in the ACPS budget.
According to ACPS records, fiscal year 2011 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled $97 million. According to MSDE reports, as of October 2011, ACPS
had 1,319 full-time equivalent positions, including 406 non-instructional
positions. ACPS uses an automated system to maintain human resources
information, process payroll, and track employee leave balances.
Payments to Employees were Properly Calculated and Supported by
Appropriate Documentation
Our test of both routine (bi-weekly) and other payments (such as leave
payouts) made in fiscal year 2011 disclosed that all payments made to
employees that we tested agreed to supporting documentation and were
properly calculated. In addition, our tests of records maintained to document
employee status (such as leave balances and salary levels) found the records
tested were accurate and agreed to supporting documentation.
Finding 7
User access to the automated system was not properly restricted and
documentation of independent reviews of certain payroll transactions was
lacking.
Analysis
Internal controls over payroll and personnel transactions were not adequate.
For example, our review disclosed the following conditions:
20

--- Page 23 ---
 A number of individuals had unnecessary access that allowed them to
modify critical personnel and payroll data and program files. For example,
eight non-IT users, including three employees of Allegany County, had this
capability.
 Although we were advised that an ACPS employee generated a report of
changes made to payroll (such as the addition of new employees,
additional pay for coaching stipends), the review of this report for propriety
of individual changes was not documented and the reports were not
retained for review or verification purposes. In addition, this employee had
user capabilities that permitted modification of the automated payroll
records. We also found that adjustments to employee leave records (such
as correcting a previously posted erroneous leave entry) were not
independently reviewed.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that ACPS
a. limit access allowing modification of critical personnel and payroll data to
those employees who require it to perform their job responsibilities; and
b. ensure that the review of the report of changes made to payroll is
documented and retained for review and verification purposes, and
adjustments to employee leave records are reviewed and approved by an
employee not having the capability to modify those records.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to ACPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $17.1 million as of June 30, 2011.
ACPS uses automated records to track equipment inventory with a cost of
$1,500 or more (including items capitalized for financial statement purposes).
In addition, ACPS tracks certain other equipment costing under $1,500
deemed sensitive items that are subject to theft (such as information
technology items) using automated records for control purposes.
ACPS Established Adequate Procedures and Controls Over Equipment
Our review disclosed that ACPS generally has adequate procedures and
controls to ensure accountability over equipment, including written
procedures and processes for ensuring that equipment was tagged and
added to the automated inventory records. In addition, ACPS completed
physical inventories of all locations on a two-year rotating cycle. Our tests of
equipment recording and related inventory records disclosed that ACPS
21

--- Page 24 ---
properly recorded purchases of equipment in the automated inventory
records, and the records properly reflected inventory on hand.
Finding 8
ACPS did not always obtain independent approval before updating records for
missing equipment.
Analysis
Write-offs of equipment inventory (such as equipment that could not be
located during the physical inventory process) were not always independently
approved. Our test of the most recent physical inventory for four schools
found that independent approval was not obtained for missing equipment
write-offs totaling $102,000 at three of these schools.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that ACPS ensure that independent supervisory approval is
obtained for equipment write-offs before the property records are updated.
Information Technology
Background
ACPS’ Information Technology Department (ITD) provides information system
services to the Allegany County Commissioners (County Government) and
ACPS. Specifically, ITD maintains and administers the ACPS computer
network, computer operations, and information systems applications. ITD
maintains a computer room at the headquarters location in which computer
servers operate to support ACPS information system needs. Several
significant administrative and academic information system applications exist,
such as the finance, payroll and human resource applications, and the
student management system.
ACPS operates a wide area network, with Internet connectivity, which
connects the individual schools’ local networks to the computer resources
located at the ACPS headquarters. ACPS is a member of a regional wireless
network that serves various Allegany County entities including the ACPS, local
governments, non-profit community organizations and the customers of
private bandwidth resellers by providing Internet connectivity and data storage
services. The network is subdivided between the public governmental and
non-profit customers and the private customers who subscribe through
resellers of the network’s service. The core portion of the network (a core
switch/router and a firewall) is located within an ACPS headquarters building
22

--- Page 25 ---
computer room. The network is administered by staff from both the ACPS and
the Allegany County Government, in order to share the administrative
overhead of the network.
Finding 9
Security events for a critical server and database were not properly
monitored.
Analysis
Security event monitoring for a critical server and database was not adequate.
Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 The log analyzer tool used to generate security event reports (containing
critical security events such as changes to system security settings) for the
server hosting the finance, payroll and human resource applications
stopped generating these reports after an operating system upgrade. As
of the date of our test work, security event reports had not been available
for management’s review for over 130 days.
 We were advised by ACPS personnel that when security reports had been
generated for the aforementioned server, the reports were not regularly
reviewed. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
 Critical security and audit events (for example grant privilege, stop audit)
on the student management system database were not logged. As a
result, an audit trail to ensure accountability of these events did not exist.
 Although the student management system database recorded failed login
attempts, we were advised that these failed login attempts were not
reviewed on a regular basis and there was no documentation
substantiating the reviews that were performed.
As a result of these conditions, unauthorized or inappropriate activities
affecting the integrity of the aforementioned server and database could occur
without detection.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that ACPS
a. take the necessary actions to generate security event reports for the
server hosting the finance, payroll and human resource applications;
b. regularly review the security event reports for these applications (repeat);
23

--- Page 26 ---
c. log critical security and audit events for the student management system
database, regularly review these logs, investigate unusual or questionable
items and document and retain these reviews and investigations; and
d. regularly review the failed login attempts to the student management
system database, investigate unusual or questionable items and
document and retain these reviews and investigations.
Finding 10
Application, network, and server account and password controls were not
sufficient to properly protect critical resources.
Analysis
Application, network, and server account and password controls were not
sufficient to properly protect critical resources. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 Password controls over the student management application were not in
accordance with the best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland
Department of Information Technology’s Information Security Policy with
respect to length, complexity, history, and maximum age. For example,
passwords were set to never expire.
 Password controls over the ACPS network were not in accordance with the
best practices prescribed by the aforementioned Information Security
Policy with respect to password length, complexity, history, and maximum
age. For example, minimum password length was zero characters. In
addition, account lockout was not enforced.
 A maximum password age was not enforced for accounts on the server
hosting the financial, payroll, and human resources applications. As a
result, we noted 10 accounts which had passwords that never expired.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that ACPS establish appropriate application, network and
server account, and password controls.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Finding 11
ACPS’s disaster recovery plan and program change controls were not
adequate.
Analysis
ACPS disaster recovery plan (DRP) and program change controls were not
adequate. Specifically, we noted the following conditions:
 ACPS did not have a complete DRP for recovering from disaster scenarios
(such as a fire). For example, the DRP did not include a detailed listing of
required hardware and software components and did not adequately
address restoration of network connectivity. In accordance with the best
practices prescribed by State of Maryland’s IT Disaster Recovery
Guidelines, dated July 2006, a complete DRP should address, at a
minimum, required hardware and software components, restoration of
network connectivity, identification of recovery strategies and team
designations, contact information and areas of responsibility. Without a
complete DRP, a disaster could cause significant delays (for an
undetermined period of time) in restoring information systems operations
beyond the expected delays that would exist in a planned recovery
scenario.
 Program change controls over the financial, payroll and human resources
applications’ computer programs did not provide for a comparison report
of program changes or a technical review of changes by IT personnel. In
addition, documentation of program change approvals was not maintained
and the programmers who performed the changes moved the programs
into production. As a result of these conditions, unauthorized or
erroneous changes to production programs could occur without detection.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that ACPS
a. develop and implement a complete information system disaster recovery
plan, in accordance with the best practices provided by the State of
Maryland’s IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines that, at a minimum, addresses
the required items noted above (repeat); and
b. implement controls over program changes to ensure that all changes to
production programs are properly reviewed and approved (repeat).
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 12
The ACPS network was not adequately secured.
Analysis
The ACPS network was not adequately secured. Specifically, we noted the
following conditions:
 Firewall rules allowed numerous unsecure and unnecessary connections
to critical network devices. For example, firewall rules were not configured
to adequately secure connections into the ACPS network from the Internet
and from the City of Cumberland.
 Eighteen publicly and widely accessible servers had network level access
to critical servers on the internal network. These eighteen servers, which
could potentially be compromised, exposed the internal network to attack
from external sources.
 Untrusted regional wireless network public and non-profit customers had
unnecessary network level access to critical ACPS devices (for example,
ACPS servers).
Recommendation 12
We recommend that ACPS adequately secure its network. Specifically, we
made detailed recommendations to ACPS which, if implemented, would help
ACPS adequately secure its network.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
ACPS maintains 23 schools and other administration and support offices with
a staff of 120 custodial and 23 maintenance personnel. According to the
fiscal year 2012 Capital Improvement Plan (CIP), planned construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to ACPS over the next six years were
estimated to cost $106 million.
An Inclusive Process is Used to Plan for School Facility Construction, Major
Renovation, and Repair Projects
ACPS uses a comprehensive process, which includes the solicitation of input
from various sources, to plan for future school construction, major renovation,
and repair projects. For example, ACPS uses public meetings, student
demographic data, and other internal sources (such as current curriculum
mandates) to develop its six-year CIP. The CIP is presented to and approved
26

--- Page 29 ---
by the Board, as well as elected local officials. In addition, the Educational
Facilities Master Plan that is used to guide overall ACPS operations
incorporates CIP objectives and strategies related to school facilities. Our
review of the fiscal year 2012-2017 CIP disclosed that it appeared to address
the needs of ACPS based on items such as student demographics and facility
assessments.
Finding 13
ACPS’ energy management program was not sufficiently comprehensive.
Analysis
Although ACPS implemented certain energy management procedures in order
to reduce energy costs, it did not have a documented comprehensive energy
management program that detailed the procedures to be conducted,
expected results, and specific monitoring to be performed.
 Although changes in certain energy management practices had taken
place, ACPS had not developed specific goals or strategies or implemented
other practices, such as implementing a school-based incentive program
(setting school-based goals and allowing schools to share in savings when
goals are achieved or exceeded) or establishing recommended winter
temperature settings to help control costs.
 ACPS conducts periodic site visits to monitor energy usage but did not
adequately document these visits. We were advised by ACPS
management that site visits are conducted approximately every two to
three months and documented on checklists. However, ACPS was unable
to provide a comprehensive listing of visits or actions taken or
recommended as a result of the visits. In addition, results of these visits
and appropriate recommendations for reducing energy usage were not
summarized for reporting to management or other programmatic
oversight.
 Electricity was not always obtained at the best available rates. ACPS’
analysis of electric rates indicate that for the period December 2010
through August 2011 the electric rates it paid under a cooperative
purchasing agreement (co-op) exceeded the rates available from the local
power transmission company, resulting in excess expenditures totaling
approximately $53,000 during this period. ACPS purchases power from a
co-op for a fixed price per kilowatt hour (kwh). According to ACPS
calculations, (which we deemed to be reasonable) savings for the period
27

--- Page 30 ---
May 2007 through November 2010 totaled approximately $937,0003.
The savings occurred since during that period the cost per kwh paid to the
co-op was less than the cost if ACPS purchased power directly from the
local power transmission company. The current co-op contract provides
for a fixed cost per kwh for the period November 2010 through October
2013 and provides that ACPS may leave the co-op at any time.
According to ACPS records, energy costs totaled $2.5 million during fiscal year
2011.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that ACPS
a. develop a comprehensive energy management program that includes
specific goals and strategies;
b. maintain documentation of site visits, and track the recommendations
made and actions taken as the basis for reporting to management; and
c. periodically reassess its electricity supplier and obtain the most favorable
rates available.
Finding 14
ACPS does not maintain documentation of all preventive maintenance work
performed.
Analysis
ACPS had developed a comprehensive maintenance plan (CMP) that included,
among other details, preventive maintenance and custodial task schedules
and requirements. The CMP required that completed inspections and
preventive maintenance work be performed at certain intervals. However,
ACPS does not adequately document the performance of preventive
maintenance to ensure that all tasks noted on the CMP were properly
completed. For example, we conducted a site visit to one high school and
noted that while daily boiler inspections were documented, there was no
documentation that other required tasks were performed (such as daily
inspections of kitchen equipment and air handlers) to ensure compliance with
the CMP. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
3 ACPS calculated the savings by multiplying the rate per kwh from the coop agreement to the
rate from the power transmission company.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Recommendation 14
We recommend that ACPS document that preventive maintenance was
performed in accordance with the requirements of the comprehensive
maintenance plan to ensure appropriate and timely maintenance is provided
at all facilities as planned. (repeat)
Transportation Services
Background
ACPS has approximately 6,000 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on one of 97
contractor-owned buses or 21 school system-owned buses. According to
ACPS records, fiscal year 2011 transportation costs totaled $6.1 million, with
$4.6 million (75 percent) paid to bus contractors. Of the 1.6 million reported
route miles for the 2010-2011 school year, 21 percent represented miles
traveled to transport disabled students. Payments to bus contractors consist
of amounts for the purchase of a bus (known as a per vehicle allotment or
PVA which consists of a reimbursement for the cost of the bus and a flat rate
of return on investment) and for operating costs (such as driver salaries, fuel
use, maintenance costs, and certain administrative costs).
ACPS Prepared a Cost/Benefit Analysis that Concluded that the Current
Contractor Method was Cost Effective
ACPS prepared a cost/benefit analysis comparing the current contractor-
based method for providing student transportation services to providing the
transportation with ACPS-owned and operated buses. Based on the analysis,
ACPS concluded that the current method of using contractors for the general
student population and ACPS-owned buses to transport special education
students was the most cost effective method. The primary factor in reaching
this conclusion was the increased cost of providing salaries and benefits to
the additional employees (drivers, mechanics and additional administrative
staff) if the buses were operated by ACPS. We reviewed the analysis and
found it to be reasonable.
Finding 15
Certain bus contractor payment rates were either not verified or not
supported.
Analysis
Although the PVA payments made to contractors included in our tests
appeared reasonable, the basis of the rates paid for certain operating costs
29

--- Page 32 ---
was not supported and certain contractor billing information was not verified
by ACPS.
 ACPS payments to contractors for operating costs pertaining to bus
maintenance and fuel were negotiated without obtaining actual operating
cost data. Consequently, it appears that ACPS’ payments to contractors
may be higher than necessary to cover those contractor costs. Based on
information contained in ACPS’ cost/benefit analysis, we estimated that
ACPS’ fiscal year 2011 costs for maintenance and fuel on school system-
owned buses to be $.50 per mile. However, ACPS’ contract with bus
vendors paid the contractors $.8821 per mile for those costs. Using
actual bus route miles and payments made to the contractors for fiscal
year 2011, we estimated the cost differential equates to $498,000 for
that year. A similar computation for fiscal year 2010 revealed an
estimated cost differential of $390,000.
 ACPS did not verify the total time and mileage driven on each route. These
data are used to calculate the payments to the contractors. We were
advised that ACPS verifies changes to mileage when making modifications
to routes or when requested by a contractor. However, these verifications
were not documented. This condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that ACPS ensure that all rates and data used to determine
payments to bus contractors are supported, documented, and verified.
Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance and fuel costs; and
b. independently verify, at least on a test basis, the accuracy of vendor
reported data to ensure that payments to contractors reflect the actual
time and mileage driven (repeat); and
c. document the basis for the rates and the invoice verification procedures
performed.
Finding 16
ACPS did not use automated routing capabilities to develop more efficient
routes.
Analysis
ACPS did not use automated bus routing software capabilities to develop
more efficient routes. Although ACPS has purchased two different software
30

--- Page 33 ---
routing packages, it has never used the software to aid in the routing process.
Automated routing systems have the capability to generate reports of bus
routes with student ride times and average bus occupancy. In practice, ACPS
uses existing bus routes and make modifications to accommodate students’
school assignments without periodically reviewing all routes for efficiency on a
system-wide basis. Using routing software is a recognized best practice that
can reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce student ride
times, and helps ensure that routes utilize existing bus capacity and minimize
the number of buses needed to transport students.
In addition, ACPS had not developed comprehensive and formalized policies
that defined the relevant factors for ACPS to consider when determining the
most appropriate bus routes, such as busloads (that is, desired capacity) and
student ride times.
The lack of a system-wide route analysis could have a potentially negative
impact on route efficiency. For example, our review of ACPS’ fiscal year 2011
bus manifests (which are used to record student ridership) for 187 bus runs
disclosed that 112 runs were below 75 percent of ACPS’ informal ridership
capacity goals.4 On 50 of these 112 runs, student capacity was less than 50
percent of the capacity goals.
Similar conditions were commented on in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that ACPS
a. use automated routing software to develop more efficient bus routes on a
system-wide basis (repeat); and
b. develop formal and comprehensive policies and procedures that include
guidance regarding bus capacities, student ride times and any other
factors affecting bus routing decisions.
Food Service Operations
Background
ACPS has a cooking cafeteria at 21 of its 23 schools. Food and related
supplies are received and stored in each school. In fiscal year 2011, ACPS
had 141 cafeteria positions. According to the audited financial statements,
4 ACPS does not have a documented bus capacity target. School bus capacities are lower than
manufacturer-stated capacities and differ depending on the school. We were advised that ACPS uses
informal bus capacity goals for high, middle, middle/elementary, and elementary schools routes at
40, 45, and 50, respectively, based on a 66 passenger bus (manufacturer-stated capacity).
31

--- Page 34 ---
food service operations expenditures exceeded revenues by $687,000 for
fiscal year 2011 prior to a transfer of $760,000 in general operating funds to
the food service fund.
Finding 17
ACPS has experienced persistent deficits in its food service operations,
although certain actions have been taken to reduce the deficits.
Analysis
Although certain actions have been taken to reduce operating deficits, such
as reducing staff and adjusting meal prices, ACPS food service expenditures
have regularly exceeded revenues in recent years. For fiscal years 2008 to
2011, total expenditures have exceeded related revenues (exclusive of any
transfers of general funds) by almost $4 million (see Table below).
Table 2
Food Service Financial Activity
Fiscal Years 2008 to 2011
Fiscal Year Revenue Expenditures Deficit
2008 $ 4,562,488 $ 5,739,588 $ (1,177,100)
2009 4,460,111 5,586,680 (1,126,569)
2010 4,402,231 5,361,921 (959,690)
2011 4,665,342 5,352,161 (686,819)
Total $ 18,090,172 $ 22,040,350 $ (3,950,178)
Source: Audited Financial Statements
Based on our analysis of ACPS food service costs, it would appear that
significant contributing factors to these deficits are personnel costs and low
productivity in preparing meals. Regarding the personnel costs, ACPS cost per
32

--- Page 35 ---
meal related to salaries and wages and fixed charges (benefits) have
increased since fiscal year 2005 as shown in the Table below.
Table 3
Fiscal
Comparison of Cost per Meal (by category)
Year
Fiscal Years 2005, 2008 and 2011 (Unaudited)
Supplies
Salaries and Total Average
and Fixed Contracted Materials Other Cost Per
Wages Charges Services (inc. food) Charges Equipment Meal
2005 $1.11 $ 0.48 $ 0.16 $ 0.91 $ 0.01 $ 0.02 $ 2.69
2008 1.28 0.65 0.13 1.10 0.01 0.13 3.30
2011 1.35 0.67 0.16 1.03 0.00 0.00 3.22
Source: Prior audit, MSDE Financial Reports, ACPS financial records
We were advised by ACPS management that it monitors meals per labor hour
or MPLH (a common efficiency measure) and has taken actions over the past
several years to reduce staffing such as reducing hours and eliminating
positions where practical. However, our tests of MPLH and a review of ACPS’
MPLH calculations showed that a number of schools did not meet industry
guidelines. For example, for November 2011, we determined that the MPLH
for 8 of the 21 schools with cafeterias were below industry guidelines by 1.3
to 4.8 MPLH. For perspective, industry guidelines call for a school that
produces 701-800 meals to produce 17-19 MPLH. Per discussion with ACPS
staff, although ACPS had calculated MPLH, it did not use predetermined or
industry standard goals to compare against its performance and make
appropriate operating adjustments. This condition was commented upon in
our previous audit report.
We were advised by ACPS management that it is the intention that the food
services program be self funded. Accordingly, ACPS has taken other actions
to attempt to reduce the operating deficit, such as adding a la carte items with
higher profits and adjusting meal pricing. For example, for fiscal year 2012,
ACPS approved price increases (required to comply with new federal
regulations on lunch pricing) in elementary and secondary schools from $2.05
and $2.25 to $2.15 and $2.35, respectively.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Recommendation 17
We recommend that ACPS analyze its food service operations data to identify
inefficiencies (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. develop performance measures for its food services operation and
establish performance benchmarks for existing performance measures
(meals per labor hour), using industry standards or other accepted
practices; and
b. monitor actual performance against these benchmarks and continue to
take appropriate actions to improve operating results (repeat).
Finding 18
Proper internal controls were not established over food services inventory.
Analysis
Internal controls over the food services inventory were not adequate.
 The same individuals (that is, the cafeteria managers) at each school were
responsible for ordering food items and supplies, receiving the orders
(either directly from the supplier or from the food services warehouse),
maintaining the inventory records and inventorying the supplies without
any independent oversight including supervisory review and approval of
any adjustments. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that all
items purchased were necessary, received, and used at the schools.
According to ACPS records, expenditures for food and related supplies
totaled $1.5 million for fiscal year 2011.
 ACPS did not have a mechanism to reconcile food sold according to its
cash register system reports to the daily production logs. Cafeteria
managers use the logs to track the number of meals produced; however,
the logs were not compared to the cash register reports of meals sold.
Based on our testing, there were frequently differences between the total
meals sold per the cash register system and the daily production logs.
Furthermore, the cash register system only reports the total number of
lunches sold and does not identify the types of meals sold which could
provide helpful data for closer monitoring.
 ACPS staff stated that they routinely substituted ingredients or modified
the serving sizes of standard USDA recipes. ACPS advised that they also
used different ingredients in order to reduce waste or preparation time.
However, standardized recipes had not been adjusted to reflect the actual
ingredients or quantities used. As a result, ACPS could not readily ensure
that the quantity of food used was appropriate based on meals sold.
34

--- Page 37 ---
Recommendation 18
We recommend that ACPS
a. segregate the duties of ordering and receiving food service items and
related inventory recordkeeping to the extent practical;
b. independently verify, at least on a test basis, physical inventory results
and ensure that any adjustments to inventory records are approved by
supervisory personnel;
c. develop a mechanism to reconcile food sales according to the cash
register system with production reports and consider enhancements to the
cash register system for tracking meals sold; and
d. adjust recipes to reflect actual products used and serving sizes and
develop a method to compare actual product usage to expected use per
the recipes.
School Board Oversight
Background
ACPS’ Board of Education is composed of five elected members and one non-
voting student representative. In its oversight responsibilities, the Board
contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent audits of
the ACPS financial statements and federal programs.
ACPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure and was
approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of this policy are
applicable to Board members as well as all ACPS employees. ACPS
established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members who are not subject to
the authority of the Board of Education to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. According to the ethics policy, annual
financial disclosure statements are required to be filed by Board members,
candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendents, and
a number of other administrators (such as school principals and senior
administrators) by January 31st of each year. Our test indicated that financial
disclosure forms for calendar year 2011 were submitted as required.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Finding 19
The disclosure form could be improved to identify potential conflicts of
interest.
Analysis
The annual financial disclosure form used by ACPS could be improved so that
potential conflicts of interest can be identified. Specifically, the form did not
require employees to identify and describe any possible conflicts or other
relevant financial disclosures. Rather, the form used negative assurance by
requiring individuals sign a statement that they did not or will not have
conflicts of interest. For example, one statement on the form is:
“I do not participate on behalf of the school system in any
matter which would have a direct financial impact on me, my
spouse, my children, my parents(s), or my siblings(s) as
distinguished from the public generally, or on any business
entity with which I am affiliated.”
While this statement provides assurance that the employee is aware that they
are not to engage in behavior that could be construed as a conflict of interest,
the form does not require or provide for the employee to identify
circumstances which could represent a potential conflict. Under State law,
annual disclosure statements filed by State employees must contain
information about the filer’s interests in real property, corporations (such as
stock ownership), and partnerships and entities doing business with the State,
as well as disclose certain other relationship. As a result, ACPS’ Ethics Panel
may not be aware of all potential conflicts of interest that may exist and would
not be in a position to review and rule on possible ethics violations.
Recommendation 19
We recommend that ACPS revise its financial disclosure form so that
individuals filing the form are specifically required to identify potential
conflicts of interest or other specific financial relationships as specified in its
ethics policy.
Other Financial Controls
Health Insurance
As previously mentioned, ACPS self funds health care costs up to a stop loss
limit of $275,000 per plan participant. ACPS uses a third-party administrator
to pay claims on behalf of plan participants and authorized dependents.
ACPS pays an administrative fee for these services. Our work in the “Other
36

--- Page 39 ---
Financial Controls” area was confined to determining whether ACPS had
sufficient controls over its payments for employee and retiree health care
costs. Our findings in this area are addressed in Finding 5 of this report.
37

--- Page 40 ---
38

--- Page 41 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Allegany County Public
Schools (ACPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether ACPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether ACPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of ACPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on ACPS dated January 5, 2007, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the ACPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by ACPS. We also
interviewed personnel at ACPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
39

--- Page 42 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).5
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of ACPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2010 through January 31,
2012. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits ACPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
ACPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to ACPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from August 2011 to March 2012. The ACPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise ACPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
5 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
40

--- Page 44 ---
Federal Funds
Recommendation 1
We recommend that ACPS process Medicaid reimbursement claims in a timely manner to
ensure that all eligible costs for Medicaid-subsidized services are fully recovered.
Response
Agree. ACPS added additional personnel as disclosed in the audit. They have been in place
since the audit and there has been improvement. There is no evidence that ACPS has not
recovered all eligible costs.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Recommendation 2
We recommend that ACPS establish appropriate procedures and controls over
procurements and disbursements (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. ensure that an independent employee verifies that only properly approved purchase
orders were recorded in the system,
b. ensure that changes to the vendor information recorded in the automated accounts
payable system are verified to appropriate source documentation by an independent
employee,
c. separate employee duties to eliminate incompatible procurement and disbursement
processing functions,
d. assign critical system capabilities only to employees who need those capabilities to
perform their job duties, and
e. ensure that an independent employee conducts a documented comparison of
transactions and checks processed to the related supporting documentation.
Response
a. Disagree. Purchase orders are input into the system by the finance office only when
properly approved by an administrative manager with assigned budget authority.
Budgetary printouts are distributed each month and spending levels reviewed at
various levels in the organization. The department is looking at a more automated
way of approving purchase orders and will try to incorporate this suggestion into any
change in the process. If further automation is not possible, a procedure change will
be implemented to incorporate this suggestion.*
b. Agree. ACPS currently reviews source documentation for electronic payments. A new
process will be implemented to review source documentation for new vendors and
vendor address changes
*See Appendix B for related auditor comment.

--- Page 45 ---
c. Agree. ACPS’s finance department consists of 10.75 employees including the Chief
Business Officer who serves as the director of finance and has oversight
responsibilities for maintenance, transportation, operations, and food service. ACPS
also accounts for two 501c3 corporations that are included as a component unit in
the school system’s audit. With a small staff complete segregation of duties is not
always possible and cross of training of jobs is essential to carry out the
responsibilities of the finance department. Individuals who serve as a back up to
others may appear not to need access because of their primary job but require
system access for back-up responsibilities. ACPS will review duties and eliminate
incompatible functions where possible.
d. Agree. The system operates a data processing center jointly with county government.
The two entities used to share payroll packages and still share general ledger
packages with each entity’s data in separate libraries.
e. Disagree. There are several controls in the payment process and there have been no
concerns by external or MSDE auditors who also test internal controls. We will
however implement the procedure suggested with the testing parameters
recommended by your staff. The test will be performed by personnel not involved in
the payment process to strengthen internal controls.*
Recommendation 3
We recommend that ACPS establish comprehensive policies to ensure the propriety of
procurements (repeat). Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. update its procurement policies to address all categories of goods and services
purchases including procurement methods to be used, when contracts should be in
writing, the mandatory contract provisions and the approval requirements, and when
Board approval is required;
b. ensure that related procedures are developed to carry out the policies, including
processes to ensure the policies and procedures are carried out as the Board and
management intended; and
c. develop and implement a comprehensive written policy and related procedures for
issuance and use of its credit cards, and for accountability over related purchases.
Response
a. Disagree. ACPS believes it follows state law. ACPS will refer this recommendation to
its policy committee.*
b. Agree. ACPS will refer this matter to its policy committee.
c. Disagree. ACPS’s records indicate 3 employees and two elected board members used credit
cards for purchasing totaling $439,000. Approximately $380,500 or 87% of the purchasing
were made with a purchasing card that is known only by the finance department and used as
*See Appendix B for related auditor comment.

--- Page 46 ---
a payment tool. When the cards issued to individuals are used for traveling, the expense
reimbursement policy applies. The system however will develop a form or agreement for
cardholders to sign indicating the card is only to be used for school system purposes and the
cardholder agrees to comply with the expense reimbursement policy. The agreement will
stipulate the user of the card will be personally responsible for non school system charges.*
Recommendation 4
We recommend that ACPS
a. obtain competitive bids for service contracts, and
b. maintain documentation justifying the decision for sole-source procurements (repeat)
Response
a. Disagree. ACPS did bid it the stop-loss employee medical insurance through a third
party consultant. ACPS does bid A/E contracts in accordance with COMAR.
Unfortunately, two of the projects sited in the review changed significantly in scope
during the design process. It would have been costly to change the A/E consultant at
that time not to mention further delaying the projects which would have also
jeopardized funding. ACPS will refer this to its policy committee to jointly consider
this recommendation and recommendation 3a.*
b. Agree. Documentation should be maintained in justifying the decision for sole-source
procurements.
.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that ACPS implement controls to verify the amounts paid for health
insurance. Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and verify the propriety of the
claims paid by agreeing the invoiced amounts with the related support, verifying the
eligibility of enrolled health care program participants and their listed dependents, and
conducting audits of the claims paid by the administrator;
b. determine the reasons for any differences in the amounts billed for administrative fees
and take appropriate action (such as recovering any overpayments);
c. verify reports on contractual performance measures to supporting documentation and
ensure that mandated measures were met, or if not met, resulted in penalties as
specified in the contract;
d. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the stop-loss limit
are reimbursed by the insurer; and
e. ensure that all required services are provided in accordance with the third-party
administrator contract.
*See Appendix B for related auditor comment.

--- Page 47 ---
Response
a. Agree. A change in the monthly oversight of the healthcare reserve account has
already been implemented. The summary claims data is reconciled to the detail
claims data by the insurance administrator. The procedure of comparing budgeted
claims to actual claims is being continued in order to provide oversight responsibility.
The school system receives CareFirst’s SAS 70 or SSAE16 report on control activities
related to the billing platform. The procedures were performed by an independent
accountant. ACPS is currently in the process of initiating a Dependent Audit with
CONSOVA Company that is scheduled to take place in the spring of 2013. In addition,
the human resource office is going to request that ACPS move to an online benefit
enrollment system, if budget permits, which will allow more control and analysis of
eligibility for participants and dependents of the health and insurance plans. This will
ensure that the results of the dependent audit are maintained.
b. Agree. There will always be differences in the billings due to COBRA participants and
split contract participants. ACPS is currently working with CareFirst to recover costs
on changes made to enrollment by ACPS but not captured by CareFirst. In addition,
procedures with moving from manual enrollment to electronic enrollment and
implementing a dependent audit and electronic enrollment could positively impact
this recommendation. At issue is ACPS staffing level in order to work on projects like
the recommendations presented in this report. CareFirst and CBIZ have repeatedly
advised ACPS that the benefits administration function is understaffed in terms of
personnel. The system has a single insurance/retirement coordinator and the
benefits administrator was the Chief Business Officer. Benefits administration is
being transitioned to human resources and duties are still being transitioned.
CareFirst and CBIZ cannot name another employer ACPS’s size that has just a single
person working full-time in benefits and retirement responsibilities. A budget request
for FY2014 will be made for a benefits administrator.
c. Agree. ACPS implemented a performance contract with the third party administrator
where $96,000 is at risk based upon performance measures. The school system
does receive a quarterly report on the measures. ACPS and CareFirst will investigate
if this report can be prepared by the insurance consultant or by an independent
party. The Chief Business Officer checked the report for reasonability
d. Disagree. The system does not have a full-time benefits administrator. ACPS has
since the audit reassigned some benefit administration duties. ACPS will consider
changes to the assignment of benefits administration responsibilities. The insurance
consultant currently receives notification when a particular claim reaches the stop
loss level. The consultant then follows up on the particular case. ACPS does
receive summary list of claims exceeding $50,000 and reserve account which
includes all claims and reimbursement activity is analyzed by for reasonability by the
Chief Business Officer.*
*See Appendix B for related auditor comment.

--- Page 48 ---
e. Agree. The system implemented its disease management program on October 1,
2011. CareFirst has recently provided a utilization report that details the level of
activity with the disease management program. The report details the number of
covered employees that have been identified as eligible for the program and
summarizes the engagement of those employees with the program. In addition, the
report indicates a return on investment for the aggregate data. As of 11/27/2012
(one month of data) the program experienced a 49.6% eligibility rate with a 7.6% of
all contacts being successful. The aggregate data yielded a ROI of 4.31.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that ACPS
a. obtain documentation supporting all contractor billings and compare the documentation
to the related invoice to ensure the propriety of the invoices prior to payment, for
example, by comparing hours billed to related timesheets (repeat);
b. ensure that services were provided and billed in accordance with the IEP, at least on a
test basis;
c. ensure that terms and rates for payments related to administrative time are specified in
the contract; and
d. monitor the reasonableness of indirect services hours and ensure the propriety of
payments made for these hours.
Response
a. Agree. ACPS will develop a test process. There has never been an issue in a
Medicaid or medical assistance audit.
b. Agree. ACPS will develop a test process. There has never been an issue in a
Medicaid or medical assistance audit.
c. Agree. ACPS will revisit the existing contracts to ensure the administrative terms and
rates are in contracts.
d. Agree. ACPS will develop a test process.
Human Resources and Payroll
Recommendation 7
We recommend that ACPS
a. limit access allowing modification of critical personnel and payroll data to those
employees who require it to perform their job responsibilities; and
b. ensure that the review of the report of changes made to payroll is documented and
retained for review and verification purposes, and adjustments to employee leave
records are reviewed and approved by an employee not having the capability to modify
those records.

--- Page 49 ---
Response
a. Agree. The school system has a low per pupil administrative cost spending at just
74% of the statewide average for administration. With a small staff complete
segregation of duties is not always possible and cross of training of jobs is essential
to carry out the responsibilities of the finance department. Individuals who serve as
a back up to others may appear not to need access because of their primary job but
require system access for back-up responsibilities. ACPS will review duties and
eliminate incompatible functions where possible. ACPS has been advised by the
information technology department that changes have been made to remove county
employees from having access.
b. Agree. ACPS will implement a new procedure. There has never been a complaint of
mistakes by employees and this has never been noted by local financial auditors,
MSDE auditors, or other auditors that visited the system.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Recommendation 8
We recommend that ACPS ensure that independent supervisory approval is obtained for
equipment write-offs before the property records are updated.
Response
Disagree. In some schools the principal chooses to reconcile the inventory. An
administrative finance employee independent of the principal reviews the
information before updating inventory due to a disposal request.*
Information Technology
Recommendation 9
We recommend that ACPS
a. take the necessary actions to generate security event reports for the server hosting the
finance, payroll and human resource applications;
b. regularly review the security event reports for these applications (repeat);
c. log critical security and audit events for the student management system database,
regularly review these logs, investigate unusual or questionable items and document
and retain these reviews and investigations; and
d. regularly review the failed login attempts to the student management system database,
investigate unusual or questionable items and document and retain these reviews and
investigations.
*See Appendix B for related auditor comment.

--- Page 50 ---
Response
a. Agree. Security event reports will be generated.
b. Agree. Will regularly review the security event reports.
c. Agree. Critical security logs and audit events for the student management system
will be reviewed and documented.
d. Agree. Failed login attempts to the student management system will be documented
and retained.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that ACPS establish appropriate application, network and server account,
and password controls.
Response
Agree. Will establish appropriate password controls.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that ACPS
a. develop and implement a complete information system disaster recovery plan, in
accordance with the best practices provided by the State of Maryland’s IT Disaster
Recovery Guidelines that, at a minimum, addresses the required items noted above
(repeat); and
b. implement controls over program changes to ensure that all changes to production
programs are properly reviewed and approved (repeat).
Response
a. Agree. A complete disaster recovery plan for all network systems will be developed
as it fits into the Board of Education and County Government fiscal plan.
b. Agree. As repeated previously, control systems will be requested in budgeting
processes and provided as fiscally possible.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that ACPS adequately secure its network. Specifically, we made detailed
recommendations to ACPS which, if implemented, would help ACPS adequately secure its
network.
Response
Agree. Will establish the security controls recommended where approp
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Recommendation 13
We recommend that ACPS
a. develop a comprehensive energy management program that includes specific goals and
strategies;

--- Page 51 ---
b. maintain documentation of site visits, and track the recommendations made and actions
taken as the basis for reporting to management; and
c. periodically reassess its electricity supplier and obtain the most favorable rates
available.
Response
a. Agree. ACPS believes it has a comprehensive energy program generating savings of
$6.2 million or 23% savings over a nine year period. The organization has
established an Energy Management Conservation Policy and the Superintendent has
established Energy Conservation Guidelines. The system was awarded on April 18,
2012 the Energy Education Chairman’s Sustainability Award which places the system
in the top 5% of the districts in the United States. While the organization has not
followed a school based incentive program, ACPS has reinvested savings back into
the classroom. MSDE reports indicate ACPS spends more on a per student basis on
instruction and special education and less on administration, mid-level
administration, and maintenance. Spending more money on a per pupil basis on
instruction and special education could not be achieved without reinvesting the
energy savings. Establishing a school based program would require administrative
time in establishing arbitrary goals and administering a program for 26 buildings.
The impact of this on other organizational goals like having the facilities available to
the public must be considered. This will require an extra person and staff will make
the budget request for this in the FY2014 budget.
b. Disagree. The Energy Manager made over 1,700 site visits in FY2011. ACPS used
and still uses the Energy Audit Walk-Through when needed. Reports are left with
principals if serious issues are identified and notes for building personnel are placed
when computers are found left on. After nine years, ACPS has found personal
interaction and discussion with principals and custodial staff yields better results.
Energy savings are more likely achieved if everyone feels a part of the team. For
personnel that are uncooperative, ACPS can always use the Energy Walk-Through
Report designed to document improvement opportunities.*
c. Disagree. ACPS has saved $924,000 since joining the Frederick Area Cooperative
Committee (FACPC) in March 2007. This cooperative includes the school systems of
Allegany County, Carroll County, Frederick County, Garrett County, and Washington
County. ACPS questions why this recommendation was not made in the September
2010 Garrett County Public Schools report and the March Carroll County Public
Schools report since they are members of the same cooperative. ACPS will revisit the
decision when the long-term financial benefits are not longer expected.*
Recommendation 14
We recommend that ACPS document that preventive maintenance was performed in
accordance with the requirements of the comprehensive maintenance plan to ensure
appropriate and timely maintenance is provided at all facilities as planned. (repeat)
*See Appendix B for related auditor comment.

--- Page 52 ---
Response
Agree. ACPS is 16th out of 24 jurisdictions when measuring maintenance cost per
pupil. The department currently has two unfilled budget positions. Present staff
levels limit the amount of preventive maintenance work performed and documented.
MSDE reports indicate ACPS spends under the statewide average per pupil for
maintenance and for the percentage of the budget that school systems spend on
maintenance. The maintenance department has made a budget request to maintain
current staffing levels and to increase the overtime budget for foreman.
Transportation Services
Recommendation 15
We recommend that ACPS ensure that all rates and data used to determine payments to
bus contractors are supported, documented, and verified. Specifically, we recommend that
ACPS
a. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates for per mile
maintenance and fuel costs; and
b. independently verify, at least on a test basis, the accuracy of vendor reported data to
ensure that payments to contractors reflect the actual time and mileage driven (repeat);
and
c. document the basis for the rates and the invoice verification procedures performed.
a. Disagree. Maintenance costs are just one component of contractor compensation.
Other components include PVA, drivers salary, fuel, and administrative fee. Out of a
15 county survey on counties using contractors, ACPS is 7th out of 15 counties on
total cost per contract. ACPS agrees the entire contractor package must be looked at
with all individual components. This is reviewed annually in the budget process.*
b. Agree. ACPS currently randomly tests accuracy of vendor data. The school system
has tested GPS data with system owned buses. The transportation department is
analyzing products to implement this recommendation and a budget request will be
forthcoming once the study and analysis is completed.
c. Agree. ACPS does document changes in mileage. The legislative auditors worked
with the Director of Transportation in their analysis of the transportation operation
and that person has since retired. The new Supervisor of Transportation maintains
this documentation.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that ACPS
a. use automated routing software to develop more efficient bus routes on a system-wide
basis (repeat); and
*See Appendix B for related auditor comment.

--- Page 53 ---
b. develop formal and comprehensive policies and procedures that include guidance
regarding bus capacities, student ride times and any other factors affecting bus routing
decisions.
Response
a. Agree to study. Allegany County’s demographics are very different from other
Maryland jurisdictions in that there are not many new housing projects or
developments. The transportation department staff believe they have a good
process in place for routing bus routes. ACPS will complete a study identifying the
costs and resources needed of implementing automated routing software and
potential savings by interviewing other school systems and vendors.
b. Agree. The department has a procedure manual that was approved by the elected
Board of Education. The department will try to dedicate more time to updating and
documenting operating procedures. A commitment cannot be made since due to
budget restrictions the Assistant Supervisor of Transportation has been reduced to a
10 month position.
Food Service Operations
Recommendation 17
We recommend that ACPS analyze its food service operations data to identify inefficiencies
(repeat). Specifically, we recommend that ACPS
a. develop performance measures for its food services operation and establish
performance benchmarks for existing performance measures (meals per labor hour),
using industry standards or other accepted practices; and
b. monitor actual performance against these benchmarks and continue to take appropriate
actions to improve operating results (repeat).
Response
a. Agree. ACPS does calculate meals per labor hour and uses that information in the
evaluation of its operation. Operational issues are discussed and ideas are
evaluated when staff attends MSDE meetings. In some ACPS locations, there are
two or three staff members.
b. Agree. ACPS does monitor performance. The current Assistant Supervisor monitors
actual performance and shares information with food service managers. The current
Assistant Supervisor is leading a dramatic financial turnaround. Since being
reassigned to the Chief Business Officer, specific goals are established and monthly
performance is reviewed. The organization has reduced its labor through attrition
and reduced the operating deficit by 42% since FY2008.

--- Page 54 ---
Recommendation 18
We recommend that ACPS
a. segregate the duties of ordering and receiving food service items and related inventory
recordkeeping to the extent practical;
b. independently verify, at least on a test basis, physical inventory results and ensure that
any adjustments to inventory records are approved by supervisory personnel;
c. develop a mechanism to reconcile food sales according to the cash register system with
production reports and consider enhancements to the cash register system for tracking
meals sold; and
d. adjust recipes to reflect actual products used and serving sizes and develop a method to
compare actual product usage to expected use per the recipes.
Response
a. Agree. ACPS has reduced its full-time food service staff by 12 full-time positions over
the last 4 years. When a position becomes open, it is not filled or filled with a part-
time position. Managers at the schools are responsible for inventory and placing
orders. All schools have at least one employee in place of the manager to share
some responsibility. With small staffs in place, segregation of duties is not always
possible.
b. Agree. ACPS food service office staff will spot check inventory at during site visits
and annual reviews. It is the food service manager’s responsibility at school
locations to make adjustments to inventory. ACPS food service office staff does
question certain inventory transactions. Given the present staffing levels, it is not
possible to question and approve every single adjustment.
c. Agree. ACPS will contact the POS vendor to see if the existing system can be
modified and will consult with other school systems on procedures they use. After
that information is gathered, ACPS will then evaluate such a modification will impact
lunch serving times. The POS system may have to be modified for the new federal
lunch regulations.
d. Agree. ACPS has consulted the Maryland State Department of Education on how to
adjust USDA recipes. The department will develop a reconciliation method to be
used for site visits or reviews.
School Board Oversight
Recommendation 19
We recommend that ACPS revise its financial disclosure form so that individuals filing the
form are specifically required to identify potential conflicts of interest or other specific
financial relationships as specified in its ethics policy.

--- Page 55 ---
Response
Agree. The form reviewed by the Legislative Audit team was from our previous ethics policy
and regulation. The current financial disclosure form is much more comprehensive.

--- Page 56 ---
APPENDIX B
Auditor’s Comments on ACPS Response
The Allegany County Public Schools (ACPS) disagreed with certain of our
comments in its response (Appendix A) to the audit report. In a number of
cases, ACPS indicated disagreement with certain of the conditions presented
in the audit report, but indicated that certain actions would be taken to
address the related recommendations (responses related to
recommendations 2a, 2e, 3c, and 13c). In other cases, ACPS indicated more
substantive disagreements with conditions noted in the report and/or the
related report recommendations. Auditor’s comments are presented below
addressing those ACPS’ responses indicating substantive disagreements. In
all cases, we continue to believe that the comments made in this report are
valid. In accordance with State law, areas of disagreement will be addressed
through separate correspondence between this Office and ACPS.
Recommendation 3a: ACPS disagreed and stated that it followed State
(procurement) law. Our report noted that ACPS had adopted a procurement
policy that required compliance with certain aspects of State law related to
procurements exceeding $25,000, but we recommended that ACPS should
establish comprehensive procurement policies to address all procurement
activities, including those that may not specifically addressed in law, in order
to ensure that ACPS receives the best value and that procurements are
properly controlled.
Recommendation 4a: Although ACPS’s response claims that a third party
consultant assisted in procuring the stop-loss employee medical insurance
contract, as disclosed in the report, ACPS could not document the consultant
used a competitive procurement process. Additionally, the reasons provided
in the response for using certain A&E contractors were not consistent with the
documentation provided during the course of the audit.
Recommendation 5d: ACPS’s response states that it receives a summary list
of claims and reimbursement activity, which is analyzed for reasonability by
the Chief Business Officer. No evidence of this process was provided to us
during the course of the audit.
Finding 8: The ACPS response states that some school principals choose to
reconcile the inventory and that an administrative finance employee
independent of the principal reviews the information before updating property
records for equipment write-offs. Based on our review of the process, the
administrative finance employee mentioned in the response is only
responsible for entering the requested write-offs in the equipment records
and does not exercise supervisory responsibilities to ensure the write-offs are
proper.

--- Page 57 ---
Finding 13b: ACPS’s response regarding energy usage site visits indicates
that much of the work performed is done on an informal basis, which confirms
that the results of visits may not be adequately documented as commented
upon in the report. We continue to believe that a more formalized process,
including maintaining documentation of site visits, tracking resultant
recommendations made and actions taken, and reporting the results to
management, would assist management in monitoring the program to ensure
objectives are achieved.
Finding 15a: ACPS states that various components make up negotiated bus
contractor compensation. We agree, but as noted by ACPS, these
components include the PVA, driver salary, fuel, maintenance, and
administrative fees. To help ensure ACPS obtains these services on the most
cost effective basis, we continue to believe that the actual bus operating costs
should be used as the basis for establishing contractor rates for maintenance
and fuel costs even in circumstances where the rates are ultimately
negotiated with the contractors.

--- Page 58 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Senior Auditor
Michael D. Cheese
Henry H. Startzman IV
Staff Auditors
Eric Alexander, CPA
Michael K. Bliss, CISA
Information Systems Staff Auditors