Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Department of the Environment to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2013 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 04/07/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b14
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:13:27.595497
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to April 7, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s November 21, 2011 Audit Report on the
Department of the Environment
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Enterprise Environmental Management System (EEMS)
1. We recommend that MDE provide the General Assembly’s
budget committees and the Department of Information
Technology with a full disclosure of EEMS project status.
Specifically, we recommend that MDE disclose
a. the system’s actual usage by the programs implemented in Corrected
the system,
b. all system functionality deficiencies affecting the
usefulness of the system, and
c. the funding necessary to fully implement all intended
programs and functions of EEMS.
Permitting, Compliance, and Enforcement
4. We recommend that MDE
a. establish procedures to identify and pursue property owners
who fail to register affected lead paint properties and pay
the annual registration fee, and Not Resolved
b. investigate the property owners noted in the audit report and
take appropriate action to ensure the owners register the
properties and pay any registration fees owed to MDE.
Information Systems Security and Control
10. We recommend that MDE develop and implement a current
Corrected
and complete information systems disaster recovery plan in
accordance with the State of Maryland’s Information
Technology Disaster Recovery Guidelines.
Shaded recommendations are more fully described in Exhibit 2.

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 2 to April 7, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Findings Regarding Repeat Findings That Had Not Been Resolved
Permitting, Compliance, and Enforcement
Prior Report Recommendations – Finding 4
We recommend that MDE
a. establish procedures to identify and pursue property owners who fail to register affected
lead paint properties and pay the annual registration fee (repeat), and
b. investigate the property owners noted in the audit report and take appropriate action to
ensure the owners register the properties and pay the registration fees owed to MDE
(repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
In May 2012, MDE engaged Maryland Environmental Services to produce a mass mailing with
the purpose of getting owners to register affected lead paint properties and pay the registration
fees owed to MDE. This mailing covered the renewal periods of 2005 through 2012 and was
sent in September 2012. In addition, according to MDE’s December 30, 2013 status report, the
mass mailing generated thousands of additional unresolved cases and it may take several years to
resolve this backlog. Consequently, we were advised by MDE management that it does not
intend to continue this process in the future and that MDE is developing new procedures to
identify and pursue property owners who fail to register affected lead paint properties.
During our review, we found that the follow-up process was not comprehensive or timely, and
we found populations of owners who were not identified by MDE through the mass mailing who
should have, but had not, registered. Regarding the investigations of property owners, we found
that MDE did not investigate a portion of the 3,000 property owners noted in the audit report.
Documentation indicates that, although certain property owners’ cases have been resolved
through collection of fees or other action, at least 900 cases are still open pending additional
follow-up. Furthermore, we were advised that, in some cases, MDE, in consultation with its
legal counsel, has decided to abate outstanding fees greater than three years old based on its
interpretation of State law.