Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the Maryland Higher Education Commission to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2014 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 03/12/2015
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150af5
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:09:31.485914
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to March 12, 2015 Letter to Joint Chairmen

--- Page 13 ---
Exhibit 2 to March 12, 2015 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s October 29, 2013 Audit Report on the
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC)
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Financial Aid
2. We recommend that MHEC
a. review financial aid award determinations, in accordance Not Resolved
with its policy, to help ensure the propriety of the awards;
and
b. ensure that employees who do not have the ability to modify
such data use output reports from its automated Maryland
College Aid Processing System (MD CAPS) to verify that Not Resolved
all critical changes recorded are accurate and properly
authorized.
3. We recommend that MHEC
a. ensure that service obligation notices and employer Not Resolved
verifications are sent and returned in a timely manner; and
b. take appropriate follow-up action when service obligations
are not being performed, including placing the accounts into Not Resolved
repayment status and properly transferring the accounts to
the accounting department to initiate collection efforts.
4b. We recommend that delinquent service obligation accounts be
referred to the Department of Budget and Management’s Corrected
Central Collection Unit for collection assistance as required.
Aid to Community Colleges
5b. We recommend that MHEC establish procedures that will
ensure the propriety of amounts paid by MHEC to the Corrected
community colleges for employees enrolled in optional
retirement plans.
Shaded recommendations are more fully described in Exhibit 3.

--- Page 14 ---
Exhibit 3 to March 12, 2015 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Assessments Regarding Repeat Findings That Had Not Been Resolved
Financial Aid
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 2
We recommend that MHEC
a. review financial aid award determinations, in accordance with its policy, to help ensure
the propriety of the awards (repeat); and
b. ensure that employees who do not have the ability to modify such data use output
reports from its automated Maryland College Aid Processing System (MD CAPS) to
verify that all critical changes recorded are accurate and properly authorized (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Although MHEC implemented procedures for the review of the financial aid award
determinations on a test basis by the Program Manager, who MHEC claimed was independent of
the awarding process, our review found that this individual was assigned incompatible MD
CAPS system capabilities. The Manager could make changes to awards on student accounts and
create or edit system capabilities granted to other system users and, therefore was not
independent of the award process.
According to its October 31, 2014 status report, MHEC has also established an internal audit
process at the institutions to review awards from the Educational Assistance Grant Program,
Guaranteed Access Grant Program, and the Campus Based Educational Assistance Grant
programs on a test basis. This internal audit process is intended to supplement the
aforementioned independent review of financial aid award determinations by verifying that the
institutions documented certain award eligibility criteria (such as Maryland residency, family
income, full-time enrollment). Since the internal audit process is not expected to begin until
October 2015, we could not assess its effectiveness.
Finally, MHEC did not generate output reports from MD CAPS identifying critical changes to
student data. These reports should be used by independent employees to ensure that critical
changes affecting financial aid awards were authorized and accurately processed.
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 3
We recommend that MHEC
a. ensure that service obligation notices and employer verifications are sent and returned
in a timely manner (repeat); and
b. take appropriate follow-up action when service obligations are not being performed,
including placing the accounts into repayment status and properly transferring the
accounts to the accounting department to initiate collection efforts (repeat).
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 15 ---
Status: Not Resolved
In December 2013, MHEC automated the service obligation process, including generating
service obligation notices and employer verifications and tracking the notices for each student
during the student’s term of obligation, which could be multiple years. However, we noted that
the automated system was set up to send notices for certain student awards only once in the
student’s lifetime rather than periodically during the period of service. Upon our inquiry, MHEC
indicated that a programming error in the automated process resulted in the one-time only
notification and, thereafter, the intended annual service obligation notices were not being
generated to ascertain the current status of the student’s service obligation. Relying on MHEC
records, we estimate that more than 2,500 student accounts with awards totaling approximately
$21 million could be affected by this error.
Furthermore, because of the programming error, there is no assurance that appropriate follow-up
actions are being taken, including placing accounts into repayment status and initiating collection
efforts when service obligations are not being performed by the students. Specifically, since
there is no record of subsequent annual notices or the resultant responses or non-responses from
the students in the automated system, there would be no prompt from the system for MHEC to
initiate appropriate follow-up action.
Page 2 of 2