Title: Review of the Actions Taken by the State Department of General Services - Office of Procurement and Logistics to Resolve Repeat Audit Findings in Response to the April 2014 Joint Chairmen's Report
Date: 12/08/2014
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150b08
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:11:34.546814
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 3 ---
Exhibit 1 to December 8, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
Status of Repeat Findings in OLA’s November 8, 2013 Audit Report on the
Department of General Services – Office of Procurement and Logistics
Status Based on
Prior Recommendations Pertaining to Repeat Findings
OLA Review
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements (ICPA)
5a. We recommend that OPL comply with State law and ensure
Not Resolved
that a written determination for using an ICPA is prepared and
that such a determination is properly substantiated.
Monitoring of Providers with Procurement Preferences
8a. We recommend that OPL independently determine and publish Not Resolved
the fair market prices of MCE’s goods and services.
Statewide Purchasing Transactions
11. We recommend that OPL fully use the available FMIS security
Corrected
features by establishing adequate independent online approval
requirements for all critical purchasing transactions.
DGS Equipment
13. We recommend that OPL comply with the applicable
Corrected
requirements of the Inventory Control Manual. Specifically,
OPL should pursue missing equipment noted during its annual
inventories of equipment.
Shaded recommendations are more fully described in Exhibit 2.

--- Page 4 ---
Exhibit 2 to December 8, 2014 Letter to Joint Chairmen
OLA’s Findings Regarding Repeat Findings That Had Not Been Resolved
Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements (ICPA)
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 5a
We recommend that OPL comply with State law and ensure that a written determination
for using an ICPA is prepared and that such a determination is properly substantiated
(repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
Although OPL developed a formal document checklist to indicate that all required items for
ICPA contracts have been completed, we noted that supporting documentation was not
maintained. Our review of OPL’s most recent ICPA procurement, which occurred in October
2014, disclosed that, although a written determination was prepared by the procurement officer
stating that participating in the ICPA would provide cost benefits to the State and promote
administrative efficiencies, OPL could not substantiate these assertions. For example, the related
document checklist indicated that pricing had been sampled, however, OPL could not provide us
with documentation of the prices sampled to substantiate that the unit costs available on the
ICPA were in the best interest of the State.
Monitoring of Providers With Procurement Preferences
Prior Report Recommendation – Finding 8a
We recommend that OPL independently determine and publish the fair market prices of
MCE’s goods and services (repeat).
Status: Not Resolved
OPL updated its procedures for reviewing MCE pricing, but the procedures were not sufficiently
comprehensive and were not always followed. Specifically, the procedures only required a
verification of the fair market value of all MCE products or items submitted for approval by
MCE (which should include new items and items for which MCE was requesting a price
change). Although the DGS status report also stated that OPL had established a procedure for
reviewing existing catalog pricing by randomly selecting multiple products and comparing their
current price to online pricing of the same type product, our review found that the updated OPL
procedures did not include such a step. Furthermore, our review of the sample verifications that
OPL indicated had been performed related to new items or existing items that had a price
increase subsequent to the procedural changes disclosed that OPL could not document the results
of the fair market price verifications as required by its procedures.