Title: Dorchester County Public Schools
Date: 01/10/2011
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d36cc9d72404c150a10
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:06:08.985974
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Performance Audit Report
Dorchester County Public Schools
January 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through
the Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-
5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-
2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and
related correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-
5400 or 301-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
January 10, 2011
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the
Dorchester County Public Schools (DCPS) in accordance with the
requirements of the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. DCPS is the 20th largest public school
system in Maryland based on the number of students enrolled. The
educational services are delivered in 12 schools, with fiscal year 2009
expenditures of $73 million. The objectives of this audit were to
evaluate whether DCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets and whether its policies
provided for the efficient use of financial resources.
In many cases, DCPS had procedures and controls in place to ensure
the safeguarding of assets and the efficient use of financial resources.
Nevertheless, our report contains 18 recommendations to DCPS to
enhance controls and processes in areas such as procurement,
information technology services, and student transportation. For
example, DCPS needs to update policies over procurements to reflect all
types of procurements, and should control access to its payroll and
vendor payments systems. DCPS should establish better controls over
critical information technology systems. DCPS should also implement
certain recommendations designed to make student transportation
services more cost effective, including evaluating certain factors used to
make payments to bus contractors. For example, certain components of
the formula used to establish bus contractor payment rates should be
reevaluated, as the rates appear to result in unnecessarily high
payments, and could cost DCPS approximately $1 million over the life of
the new buses put into service since 1998. Other issues to be
addressed include establishing controls over equipment, and taking
steps to ensure the propriety of health care cost payments.

--- Page 4 ---
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page i,
immediately following this cover letter, and our audit scope, objectives
and methodology are explained on page 57. The DCPS response to this
audit is included as an appendix to this report. We wish to acknowledge
the cooperation extended to us during our audit by DCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 5 ---
Executive Summary
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted an audit to evaluate
the effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management
practices of the Dorchester County Public Schools (DCPS) in
accordance with the State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland. State law requires the Office to
conduct such an audit of each of the 24 public school systems in
Maryland and provides that the related audit process be approved
by the Joint Audit Committee. Since the Committee approved the
audit process in September 2004, we have issued audit reports
related to 23 school systems; DCPS represents the twenty-fourth.
The approved process included 11 areas to be audited at each
system. The following are summaries of the findings in these areas
at DCPS.
Revenue and Billing Cycle (see pages 7 through 9)
According to the audited DCPS financial statements, $73.2 million
in revenue was received from all sources during fiscal year 2009,
the vast majority of which was received via electronic fund transfers
from other governmental entities. Procedures and controls for
these revenue sources and for accounts receivable were generally
found to be adequate.
Federal Funds (see pages 11 through 13)
Annually, DCPS is subject to an audit of its federally funded
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, and required by
Circular A-133, which is issued by the U.S. Office of Management
and Budget). Due to parallels between that work and the scope of
our audit, we placed significant reliance on the results of the
independent audit of the fiscal year 2009 grant activity, for which
reported expenditures totaled $5.5 million. The related report
i
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 6 ---
stated that DCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. In addition,
with respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the
operation of, major federal programs, the firm noted no matters
considered to be material weaknesses and no significant
deficiencies.
DCPS had an adequate process for the identification of children
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized services and recovery of related
costs. In addition, DCPS obtained applicable rebates under the
Medicare Part D pharmacy rebate program for its retirees, and
participated in the E-Rate program.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle (see pages 15
through 18)
According to DCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled
$31.7 million during fiscal year 2009. DCPS had established
certain beneficial procurement practices (such as “piggybacking” on
contracts procured by other government entities) as well as policies
for purchasing card use and travel. However, DCPS’ procurement
policies were not comprehensive because they did not address all
types of procurements. Furthermore, our tests found that contracts
were not executed for certain procurements and certain services
were not competitively bid. In addition, significant weaknesses in
internal control existed over the automated DCPS procurement and
disbursement system.
Human Resources and Payroll (see pages 19 through 22)
DCPS employed 688 full-time equivalent employees as of June
2010, and payroll and benefit costs during fiscal year 2009 totaled
approximately $41.3 million. DCPS uses a centralized hiring and
approval process to help control payroll costs. DCPS should
improve controls over its human resources and payroll system
processing functions. Although DCPS had implemented workforce
planning for teachers and other instructional personnel, such
planning was not comprehensive since it did not address the needs
and processes for non-instructional personnel.
ii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 7 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability (see pages 23
through 24)
DCPS had not developed written policies and procedures to account
for and control its equipment. Consequently, formal detail inventory
records were not maintained for certain equipment. According to
DCPS’ audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2009, the
undepreciated value of capital equipment was $3.6 million.
Information Technology Services (see pages 25 through 28)
DCPS maintains and administers a computer network, computer
operations, and a number of significant financial and academic
information system applications. DCPS had developed written
technology plans, which establish a vision and mission for
technology in DCPS and defined goals. The audit also found,
however, that DCPS needs to implement better password and
security practices and to develop a disaster recovery plan. DCPS
should also address certain performance and security issues
related to a contract with a third-party vendor that maintains its
financial application.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance (see pages 29 through 32)
DCPS maintains 12 schools and several other facilities (such as
administration and support offices) with a staff of 51 custodial and
maintenance personnel. DCPS has implemented a number of best
practices to help reduce construction and maintenance costs for its
facilities. However, DCPS had not established formal performance
measures and related benchmarks or a formal customer feedback
program to better gauge operational effectiveness and efficiency.
Transportation Services (see pages 33 through 39)
DCPS is responsible for the safe transportation of more than 4,300
eligible students. These students were primarily transported on
buses owned by contractors. DCPS used a number of recognized
best practices to increase student transportation efficiency, such as
staggering school arrival and dismissal times to enable buses to
iii
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 8 ---
perform multiple runs. However, there are opportunities to improve
efficiency and cost effectiveness. For example, DCPS did not use
bus routing software and did not have a written policy for
determining bus contractor payment rates. Consequently, DCPS
may be paying more than necessary to meet its transportation
needs. Its method for calculating the annual per vehicle allotment,
which is designed to cover the depreciation cost of the bus and
provide a return of investment for the contractor, may result in
DCPS paying $1 million more to contractors than necessary. In
addition, DCPS had not developed formal performance measures to
monitor and evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of
transportation services.
Food Services Operations (see pages 41 through 45)
DCPS has implemented a number of best practices to help reduce
food service costs, such as utilization of United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA) commodities and participation in purchasing
cooperatives. DCPS has adequate procedures in place to identify
students eligible for free meals and reduced-price meals under the
federal national school meals programs and has one of highest
levels of program participation in the State. However, we found
controls over the procurement, ordering, and receiving of goods and
supplies need to be improved.
School Board Operations and Oversight (see pages 47
through 52)
Oversight of DCPS operations included the five-member Board
receiving financial updates, such as monthly budget variances, to
assist it in monitoring the use of funds. The Board is also
extensively involved in a comprehensive budgeting process. DCPS
has a detailed ethics policy but did not ensure that the provisions of
the policy were being carried out and had not obtained approval
from the State Ethics Commission for changes to its policy. For
example, although the policy establishes an Ethics Panel to oversee
policy implementation and compliance, the Panel has not been
functioning since February 2008. Furthermore, the Board should
adopt formal policies in a number of financial-related areas and
improve oversight of operations by receiving and reviewing key
financial and operational performance measure data. The Board
should also consider establishing an internal audit function and a
iv
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 9 ---
confidential hotline for employees and others to report operational
concerns and suspected fraud and abuse.
Other Financial Controls (see pages 53 through 55)
DCPS had not adopted formal policies to govern cash and debt
management. In addition, DCPS could do more to ensure the
propriety of health care costs.
v
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 10 ---
vi
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 11 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary i
Background Information 5
Oversight 5
Statistical Overview 5
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2009 Activity 6
Chapter 1: Revenue and Billing Cycle 7
Background 8
Controls Over Revenue and Billing Cycle Activity Were Generally Adequate 9
for Significant Revenue Types
Chapter 2: Federal Funds 11
Background 12
DCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over Federal Grants and 12
Complied with Federal Grant Requirements
Processes Were in Place to Identify Students Eligible for Medicaid Services 12
and to Obtain Federal Cost Reimbursements
DCPS Participated in Other Federal Programs 13
Chapter 3: Procurement and Disbursement Cycle 15
Background 15
DCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its Procurement and 16
Disbursement Needs
DCPS Should Develop Comprehensive Procurement Policies and Procedures 16
DCPS Had Not Established Adequate Internal Control Over the Processing of 17
Procurements and Payments
Recommendations 18
1
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 12 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 4: Human Resources and Payroll 19
Background 19
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need to Be Strengthened 20
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include Non-Instructional Positions 21
Recommendations 21
Chapter 5: Inventory Control and Accountability 23
Background 23
Policies, Controls, and Record Keeping Over Equipment Need Improvement 23
Recommendation 24
Chapter 6: Information Technology Services 25
Background 25
Technology Plans Were Developed to Address Current and Future Needs 26
of DCPS
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Access to IT Resources Are Appropriate 26
and Controlled
Contract Terms for Outsourced Applications Need to Address Certain Security 26
and Performance Risks
DCPS Should Develop a Comprehensive Disaster Recovery Plan 27
Recommendations 27
Chapter 7: Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance 29
Background 29
Certain Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance the Efficiency and 30
Effectiveness of the DCPS Facility Construction and Maintenance
Department
DCPS Should Use Certain Methods to Better Gauge Operational Efficiency 31
and Effectiveness
Recommendation 32
2
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 13 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 8: Transportation Services 33
Background 33
Several Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance Bus Route Efficiency and 35
to Control Related Costs
Bus Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced and Routing Software Should 35
Be Used
Bus Contractor Rates Paid Were Not Based on Documented Criteria and 36
More Could Be Done to Help Ensure Cost Effectiveness
Performance Should Be Measured and Reported Regularly to the Board 38
Recommendations 38
Chapter 9: Food Services Operations 41
Background 41
Certain Best Practices Were in Place 42
DCPS Needs to Improve Internal Controls Over Purchasing of Food-Related 45
Items
Recommendation 45
Chapter 10: School Board Operations and Oversight 47
Background 48
Certain Oversight Had Been Put in Place Regarding DCPS Operations 49
The Board Should Consider Additional Steps to Assist It in Governing DCPS 49
The Board Needs to Update and Enforce Its Ethics Policy 51
Recommendations 52
3
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 14 ---
Table of Contents
Chapter 11: Other Financial Controls 53
Risk Management Best Practices Were in Place 53
DCPS Should Develop Formal Cash and Debt Management Policies 54
DCPS Should Take Steps to Ensure the Propriety of Health Care Costs 54
Recommendations 55
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 57
Response of Dorchester County Public Schools Appendix
4
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 15 ---
Background Information
Oversight
Dorchester County Public Schools (DCPS) is governed by a local
school board, consisting of five elected voting members and two
non-voting student members. The vast majority of DCPS funding is
provided by the State and the Dorchester County government. In
addition, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE)
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and
regulations in accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with DCPS to comply with the
requirements and mandates of the federal No Child Left Behind Act
of 2001. Oversight by the Dorchester County government is limited,
although the DCPS annual operational and capital budgets require
County approval.
Statistical Overview
According to MSDE student enrollment records, DCPS ranks 20th in
student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. From fiscal year 2000 to 2009, the total kindergarten
through grade 12 regular and special education pupil population
has decreased 10 percent from 5,072 to 4,560, but the State
projects an increase to 5,480 by 2017. For the 2009-2010 school
year, DCPS had 12 schools, consisting of 6 elementary schools, 2
middle schools, 2 high schools, 1 combined elementary/middle
school and 1 vocational/technical school. According to its audited
financial statements, DCPS expenditures (including capital
expenditures) were $73 million in fiscal year 2009. The largest
expenditure category was salaries, wages, and benefits, which
accounted for 57 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year
2009. According to MSDE records, in fiscal year 2010 DCPS had
688 full-time positions, which consisted of 462 instructional and
226 non-instructional employees.
Certain statistical information contained in this report was taken
from reports distributed by MSDE and represents the most current
information available at the time of our audit. These MSDE reports
5
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 16 ---
are based on self-reported data from the 24 public school systems,
and MSDE does not warrant the comparability or completeness of
the data.
External Audit of Fiscal Year 2009 Activity
Annually, DCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to
independently audit its fiscal year-end financial statements.
Additionally, the auditor conducts what is referred to as a Single
Audit of DCPS federal grant programs (as required by federal
regulations). The resulting audit reports for the 2009 fiscal year
were issued in September 2009. Neither report disclosed any
significant deficiencies or material weakness in DCPS record
keeping, processes, and controls.
6
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 17 ---
Chapter 1
Revenue and Billing Cycle
According to the DCPS audited financial statements, $73.2 million
of revenue was received by DCPS during fiscal year 2009. Due to
similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the DCPS financial statements and the
scope of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the
results of that audit for revenues and accounts receivable (for
example, amounts due from other governments). The auditor’s
procedural review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses1 or
significant deficiencies2 in accounting for revenues and accounts
receivable. Such testing included the most significant revenue
types—the majority of which related to electronic fund transfers from
other government entities—as well as school activity funds and food
service cash receipts. 3
1 A material weakness is a significant deficiency, or a combination of significant
deficiencies, that results in more than a remote likelihood that a material misstatement
of the financial statements (or, with respect to Single Audit, material noncompliance with
a type of compliance requirement of a federal program) will not be prevented or
detected by an entity’s internal control.
2 A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies, that
adversely affects the entity’s ability to initiate, authorize, record, process, or report
financial data reliably in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles such
that there is more than a remote likelihood that a misstatement of the entity’s financial
statements that is more than inconsequential will not be prevented or detected by the
entity’s internal control. With respect to Single Audit, a significant deficiency is a control
deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies, that adversely affects the entity’s
ability to administer a federal program such that there is more than a remote likelihood
that noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program that is
more than inconsequential will not be prevented or detected by the entity’s internal
control.
3 The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that school activity funds are used
only for intended purposes by those to whom the assets belong. Receipts for the school
activity fund are not included in the $73.2 million revenue total because the Board
cannot use these assets to finance its operations.
7
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 18 ---
Background
DCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Dorchester
County and the State. Other sources include federal grant funds
and miscellaneous sources, such as interest income and receipts
from the sale of food. Chart 1 (below) shows DCPS fiscal year 2009
revenues of $73.2 million by major source.
Chart 1
Sources of Fiscal Year 2009 Revenue
($73.2 Million)
Federal
$5,906,453
8% State of
Maryland
$40,653,802
Dorchester 56%
County
$25,498,049
35%
Other
$1,130,886
1%
Source: DCPS fiscal year 2009 audited financial
statements
In addition to the revenues in Chart 1, schools also collect funds for
various purposes, such as student groups, clubs, and school
publications. These school activity funds are accounted for
separately by each school and are reported in summary in the
audited financial statements. For fiscal year 2009, school activity
fund collections totaled $1 million and the June 30, 2009 balance
was $218,000.
8
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 19 ---
Controls Over Revenue and Billing Cycle Activity Were
Generally Adequate for Significant Revenue Types
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified
public accounting firm that audited the DCPS financial statements
and the scope of our audit in this area, we placed significant
reliance on the results of the fiscal year 2009 financial statement
audit. The firm’s procedural review and testing disclosed no
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies regarding significant
revenue types and related accounts receivable. The majority of this
revenue was received via electronic funds transfers from other
government entities. The firm also audited student activity funds,
including a review of internal controls. The independent auditors
identified no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies over
these funds.
Recommendation
None
9
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 20 ---
10
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 21 ---
Chapter 2
Federal Funds
Annually, DCPS is subject to an audit of its federally funded grant
programs (often referred to as the Single Audit, and required by
Circular A-133 issued by the U.S. Office of Management and
Budget). The report on the audit of fiscal year 2009 federal grant
activity was issued by the independent certified public accounting
firm on September 8, 2009.
In that report, the auditor stated that DCPS complied, in all material
respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal grant
programs. With respect to internal controls over compliance with,
and the operation of, major federal programs, the auditors did not
identify any material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
DCPS had an adequate process for the identification of children
eligible for Medicaid-subsidized4 services and for recovering related
costs. In addition, DCPS participated in the federally funded E-Rate
program, which provides discounts for school systems related to
telecommunications and Internet access. DCPS also obtained
applicable rebates under Medicare Part D pharmacy rebate program
for retirees.
4 The Federal Medical Assistance Program, or Medicaid, is not a grant program
under Circular A-133 and is not included in the Single Audit.
11
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 22 ---
Background
DCPS receives funds primarily from Dorchester County, the State,
and the federal government. Most funds received from Dorchester
County and the State are unrestricted; however, federal funds are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the
School Lunch Program or Special Education). According to the
audited Schedule of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2009 expenditures
of federal award funds totaled $5.5 million.
DCPS Established Adequate Internal Controls Over
Federal Grants and Complied with Federal Grant
Requirements
Because of the accounting firm’s work on DCPS federal fund
expenditures, we relied on the auditor’s results. Besides expressing
an opinion on DCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control
structure’s impact on compliance and audited the fiscal year 2009
required Schedule of Federal Awards (which includes claimed and
reported grant-related expenditures). In the report on the audit of
fiscal year 2009 federal grant activity issued by the DCPS external
auditor on September 8, 2009, the auditor stated that DCPS
complied, in all material respects, with the requirements applicable
to each of its major federal programs for the year ended June 30,
2009. With respect to internal controls over compliance with and
the operation of major federal programs, no material weaknesses or
significant deficiencies were noted.
Processes Were in Place to Identify Students Eligible
for Medicaid Services and to Obtain Federal Cost
Reimbursements
Our review of Medicaid-subsidized services disclosed that DCPS had
adequate processes in place to identify students eligible for
Medicaid services and to recover the related costs. Specifically,
DCPS periodically compares listings of all children whose families
are participating in Medicaid, as determined by the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene, to the student information to identify
newly eligible students and the continuation of eligibility for
12
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 23 ---
previously identified students. In addition, there is outreach to
families during meetings to discuss educational services for special
needs students (including programs and services subject to
Medicaid funding) to identify potential eligibility and to encourage
program participation. Finally, DCPS ensures that all services
provided are billed and costs are recovered. According to the
audited financial statements, DCPS received $522,000 of federal
fee-for-service payments during fiscal year 2009 for Medicaid-
subsidized services for qualified students.
DCPS Participated in Other Federal Programs
DCPS has a process in place to request and receive reimbursement
for technology expenditures from the federal School and Libraries
Universal Service Program (E-Rate). The E-Rate program provides
funding to schools for telecommunications expenses (such as
Internet access). The funding is based on the level of poverty and
the rural status of the school district. DCPS received approximately
$206,000 of E-Rate funds for funding year 2009, the most recent
year for which expenditures had been reimbursed. In addition,
according to DCPS records, for fiscal year 2009, DCPS received
$118,000 under the Medicare Part D pharmacy rebate program for
keeping DCPS retirees on its prescription drug program.
Recommendation
None
13
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 24 ---
14
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 25 ---
Chapter 3
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
DCPS used certain beneficial procurement practices, such as
piggybacking onto contracts already procured by the other local
governments and participating in purchasing consortiums. DCPS
has also established policies for credit card use and employee
travel. However, other existing DCPS procurement policies need to
be enhanced as the current policies do not address certain types of
procurements. For example, our testing of contracts and related
expenditures found that procurements were sometimes not
competitively bid when appropriate. DCPS also needs to improve
internal control over its automated procurement and disbursement
system. For example, a number of employees were assigned
incompatible system capabilities that allowed them to add or adjust
vendor information, generate purchase orders, and process
payments.
Background
DCPS uses a manual system for purchasing goods and services and
an automated system for paying the related invoices. Purchase
orders (which are manually prepared by the requesting school or
department), contracts, solicitations, and bids are generally
managed by the ordering department. DCPS procurement practices
require that purchases of goods over $15,000 be formally bid, and
that requests for purchases of both goods and services over this
amount be approved by the Board. Additionally, invoices are
recorded in the automated system after comparison with the related
15
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 26 ---
manual receiving report, if applicable, and manual purchase order.
According to DCPS audited financial statements, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $31.7 million during fiscal year 2009.
DCPS Used Several Best Practices to Address Its
Procurement and Disbursement Needs
DCPS had instituted certain best practices, including the following,
to enhance the cost effectiveness of its procurement and
disbursement transactions.
 DCPS participated in purchasing consortiums with other
governmental entities (such as other school systems) for items
such as energy, fuel, and equipment. DCPS also piggybacks
onto contracts procured by the State of Maryland and other
governmental entities. These practices save certain costs
associated with the procurement of the contracts and may
provide larger discounts as a result of the combined purchasing
power of multiple entities.
 DCPS had established a travel policy to control employee travel
costs. According to DCPS records, travel expenses totaled
$140,000 during fiscal year 2010.
 DCPS had established a credit card procurement program for
authorized employees. DCPS developed written procedures that
specify the appropriate uses of the card and that include
requirements regarding supervisory approval and reconciliation
of charges to monthly statements. According to DCPS records,
credit card purchases totaled $147,000 during fiscal year 2010,
and there were 36 active credit cards with the monthly charges
being paid directly by the school system.
DCPS Should Develop Comprehensive Procurement
Policies and Procedures
DCPS procurement policies and procedures did not address all
procurement methods that were used. The existing policy requires
advertising and bidding for acquisitions of goods exceeding
$15,000. However, the written policies and procedures do not
16
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 27 ---
address certain other types of DCPS procurement activities, such as
the procurement of goods of $15,000 or less, and services at any
amount. Furthermore, the policies do not specify the requirements
for sole source procurements (including the need for written
justifications), and when written contracts are necessary. Our test
of 15 invoices totaling $940,000 paid in fiscal years 2009 and
2010, and the related procurement documents, disclosed that, for
two invoices, DCPS entered into contracts for consultant and staff
development services without obtaining competitive bids or
documenting that the services being provided were not available
from other vendors. Comprehensive procurement policies should
ensure acquisitions are obtained at the best value and, at a
minimum, should specify the acceptable procurement methods for
all types of procurements, when contracts should be in writing, the
mandatory contract provisions, and the related approval
requirements, such as Board approval.
DCPS Had Not Established Adequate Internal Control
Over the Processing of Procurements and Payments
DCPS had not separated duties adequately to establish effective
internal control over its automated system used to prepare
purchase orders and process invoice payments. Specifically, we
found that four employees had been assigned system capabilities
that allowed them to perform critical incompatible functions (such
as entering and updating purchase orders, adding vendors, and
printing checks). In addition, there was no independent supervisory
review and approval of the checks or check register to the related
supporting documentation and no independent verification that
changes to vendor information were proper.
Also, although blank check stock and the signature plate used to
process checks were kept in a locked cabinet, the key was kept in
an unlocked desk and therefore was accessible to all staff,
including the previously mentioned four employees.
Finally, DCPS did not always verify the accuracy of vendor invoices.
Our test of 15 invoices totaling $940,000 paid in fiscal years 2009
and 2010 disclosed that DCPS did not ensure that it received
appropriate pricing for 3 invoices totaling $252,000. These items
related to purchases under a “piggyback” agreement or multi-
jurisdiction contract. In these instances, neither DCPS nor we could
17
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 28 ---
determine if DCPS received proper discounts rates for the goods
provided since no documentation was available to indicate what
discount DCPS should have received.
Recommendations
1. DCPS should develop comprehensive procurement policies that
ensures acquisitions are made at the best value and addresses
all categories of goods and services purchases. These policies
should specify the procurement methods to be used (such as
competitive sealed bidding, sole source), when contracts should
be in writing, and the mandatory contract provisions.
Additionally, DCPS should obtain goods and services through a
properly documented competitive procurement process. If a
competitive procurement process is not deemed appropriate
(such as when only one vendor can provide the required
services), then documentation justifying the decision should be
maintained.
2. DCPS should improve its controls over purchasing and the
invoice payment process by separating incompatible functions
and by assigning critical system functions to only those who
need those capabilities to perform their job duties. Furthermore,
DCPS should restrict access to blank check stock and the
signature plate to employees who are independent of the invoice
processing functions. In addition, DCPS should establish a
process to ensure that a proper and independent review of all
disbursement checks is performed. Finally, DCPS should
maintain contract pricing information on file, including the
applicable contracts, and verify the accuracy of prices on vendor
billings.
18
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 29 ---
Chapter 4
Human Resources and Payroll
DCPS uses automated systems to maintain human resources
information, to record employee time and track leave, and to
process and record payroll transactions. In addition, DCPS uses a
centralized hiring and approval process to help control payroll costs.
However, DCPS should address certain procedural and control
deficiencies with respect to human resources and payroll functions.
These deficiencies included the assignment of unnecessary and
incompatible automated system capabilities and the lack of
independent supervisory review of certain critical human resource
and payroll transactions. Additionally, although DCPS had
implemented workforce planning for teachers and other
instructional personnel, such planning was not comprehensive since
it did not address the needs and processes for non-instructional
personnel.
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the
DCPS budget. Fiscal year 2009 salary, wage, and benefit costs
totaled $41.3 million. According to MSDE reports, as of June 2010,
DCPS had 688 full-time equivalent positions. The ratio of DCPS
students to employees (6.7 to 1) was comparable to similarly sized
school systems (see Table 1 on the following page).
19
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 30 ---
DCPS uses an integrated human resources and payroll system to
maintain human resources information, record employee time, and
track leave usage. The system automatically generates biweekly
time records, and any adjustments are processed by central payroll
personnel. The system generates payroll checks and direct deposit
advices. Payroll processing involves both automated processes
(such as compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual
processes (such as data entry of new employee information).
Table 1
Comparison of Student to Employee Ratios – Fiscal Year 2010
(Unaudited)
Number of
Number of
Full-Time Student to
Students
School System Equivalent Employee
(as of September
Employees (as Ratio
30, 2009)
of June 2010) 
Dorchester County 4,628 688 6.7 to 1
Talbot County 4,495 601 7.5 to 1
Caroline County 5,551 791 7.0 to 1
Garrett County 4,311 646 6.7 to 1
Worcester County 6,659 1,167 5.7 to 1
Source: MSDE Student/Staff Publications
 Since the number of employees does not significantly change during the
school year, these numbers would also approximate the number of employees
at October 1, 2009.
Note: School systems selected for comparison are those with student
enrollments closest in number to DCPS.
Human Resources and Payroll Internal Controls Need
to Be Strengthened
DCPS did not adequately separate duties to establish effective
internal control over its automated human resource and payroll
system and related processes. Eight employees had been assigned
incompatible system processing capabilities, such as for adding and
deleting employees and recording payroll adjustments, even though
none of these employees required all such capabilities to perform
20
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 31 ---
their job duties. As a result, improper or erroneous transactions
could be processed without detection.
In addition, bi-weekly reports of personnel and payroll changes were
not compared to supporting documentation, and the employees
who reviewed the reports were also assigned human resource and
payroll system processing capabilities. Also, certain personnel and
payroll transactions (such as leave balance adjustments or leave
payout calculations) were not subjected to any review.
Workforce Planning Should Be Expanded to Include
Non-Instructional Positions
Although DCPS had implemented workforce planning for
instructional positions, DCPS should expand its workforce planning
efforts to include non-instructional positions. As of June 30, 2010,
approximately 14 percent of DCPS 688 employees are currently
eligible to retire. Approximately 33 percent of DCPS employees are
non-instructional. The DCPS Master Plan sets the strategic direction
and provides coordination and focus for initiatives to address
challenges faced by DCPS. The Plan includes a number of objectives
and strategies to address human resource needs—which is
evidence of workforce planning. However, it addresses only the
recruitment and retention of highly-qualified instructional staff (that
is, teachers and certain instructional aides).
Non-instructional positions play a key role in the ultimate success of
DCPS in providing quality education and, therefore, should be
included in workforce planning.
Recommendations
3. DCPS should improve controls over the human resources and
payroll system by segregating incompatible functions and
assigning critical system functions to only those employees who
need the capabilities to perform their job duties. In addition,
DCPS should ensure that critical transactions (such as adding an
employee or changing salaries) are reviewed by supervisory
personnel independent of the payroll processing function using
supporting documentation.
21
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 32 ---
4. DCPS should expand its workforce planning to include key non-
instructional positions in critical operational units.
22
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 33 ---
Chapter 5
Inventory Control and Accountability
DCPS had not developed written policies and procedures governing
the accounting and safeguarding of equipment that addresses
maintaining equipment records, tagging of equipment items, and
conducting physical inventories. In addition, DCPS did not maintain
inventory records for certain equipment and certain employees had
unnecessary access to the automated inventory records for
computer items.
Background
According to the DCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30,
2009, the undepreciated value of capital equipment was $3.6
million. The DCPS IT Department maintains automated records for
all computers, and a separate automated system is used to
maintain detail equipment records for sensitive non-computer IT
equipment items (such as document cameras) costing more than
$50.
Policies, Controls, and Record Keeping Over
Equipment Need Improvement
DCPS should improve its policies, procedures, and controls
to ensure accountability over equipment – The audit
disclosed the following conditions with respect to equipment:
23
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 34 ---
 DCPS does not have any written policies to govern accountability
and control over its equipment addressing such areas as
recordkeeping, equipment tagging, physical inventories,
segregation of duties, and disposals.
 DCPS does not maintain formal inventory records for non-IT
items. DCPS only maintains a listing of capitalized items
($5,000 or more) for calculating depreciation for financial
statement purposes. Also, such equipment generally was not
tagged for identification purposes and no physical inventories of
these items were conducted.
 There was no documentation that DCPS had conducted a
physical inventory of computers since 2007. Moreover, we were
advised that an inventory of computers was not conducted prior
to this date.
DCPS should restrict access to the automated records for
computers – Three individuals were assigned capabilities that
allowed them to modify the automated inventory records for
computers even though such access was not required as part of the
employees’ routine job responsibilities. In addition, the system
contained a general logonid that could be used by information
technology specialists at each school to access and modify the
inventory records. None of these school employees required such
capabilities.
Recommendation
5. DCPS should develop and implement comprehensive policies
and procedures to govern the accounting and safeguarding of
equipment that addresses: maintaining detail equipment
records; tagging of equipment; conducting physical inventory
counts; and disposing of equipment. DCPS should ensure that
only those employees who require the capability to modify the
equipment records as part of their job responsibilities be
assigned this capability.
24
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 35 ---
Chapter 6
Information Technology Services
DCPS maintains and administers a computer network, computer
operations, and a number of significant financial and academic
information system applications. DCPS prepared a long-term
technology plan and used in-school staff to assist the Information
Technology (IT) Department. The plan provides a vision and mission
for technology in DCPS and includes measurable goals and
objectives.
Nevertheless, we identified deficiencies in a number of areas,
including system user access and security, and disaster recovery
planning. Finally, the DCPS needs to address performance and
security issues related to a contract with a third party vendor that
maintained DCPS’ financial application.
Background
DCPS operates a wide area network connecting the various schools
within Dorchester County and the DCPS central office. The DCPS
Information Technology Department maintains and administers the
DCPS network, the academic application, and other general
computer operations. A contractor hosts the DCPS financial
application and provides the related maintenance and support.
25
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 36 ---
Technology Plans Were Developed to Address Current
and Future Needs of DCPS
DCPS prepared an annual technology plan as part of the school
system’s Master Plan and prepared a separate, more extensive,
technology plan every three years. These plans establish a vision
and mission for technology in DCPS and have defined goals. These
plans address various topics, including system security, hardware
and software replacement, replacement cost schedules,
professional development, and training. In addition, DCPS has
established specialists to assist the IT and the Curriculum
Departments in meeting the goals of the plan, including employee
training and technology troubleshooting.
Steps Should Be Taken to Ensure Access to IT
Resources Are Appropriate and Controlled
Our review disclosed several deficiencies in computer application
security which increased the vulnerability of various DCPS
automated systems, programs, and data. Enhancements should be
made to existing procedures to ensure that all access to computer
resources is appropriate. For example, for certain automated
systems, automatic password expirations were not enabled and
DCPS did not set password complexity requirements (to make them
more difficult to hack). In addition, for one critical database, system
security reports were not generated.
Contract Terms for Outsourced Applications Need to
Address Certain Security and Performance Risks
The contract between DCPS and a third-party vendor, which hosted
DCPS’ financial application, did not adequately address various
security and performance issues. The applications processed by
this third-party vendor (for example, accounts payable, purchasing,
payroll, and personnel) included certain personal and sensitive
information, such as employee names, birth dates, and social
security numbers. As a result, DCPS did not have sufficient legal
protection for risks associated with the contracted services. For
example, we noted the following contract omissions:
26
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 37 ---
 The contract did not require the third-party vendor to protect
DCPS data at the same level as provided by DCPS' own internal
policies. In addition, the contract did not specify the security
measures to be used to restrict vendor personnel access to
DCPS data or ensure that other companies using this vendor
could not access DCPS data.
 The contract did not provide a specific timetable for recovery of
data in the event of a data loss. The contract with the vendor
also contained a disclaimer of liability relating to service quality
and availability.
 The contract did not address the handling of DCPS data upon
termination of the contractual relationship or in the event that
the vendor goes out of business.
DCPS Should Develop a Comprehensive Disaster
Recover Plan
DCPS did not have a formal, comprehensive, disaster recovery plan
(DRP) for its computer systems. Without a plan, a disaster could
cause significant delays (for an undetermined period) in restoring
operations above and beyond the expected delays that would exist
in a planned recovery scenario. Specifically, DCPS had made no
provisions for the following critical elements of a DRP:
 Alternate site processing arrangements
 Current and complete list of required hardware and software
components
 Current and complete network restoration procedures
 Current and complete list of applications prioritized for recovery
 Procedures for testing the DRP
Recommendations
6. DCPS should implement appropriate security measures to
safeguard its applications and data systems by improving
account and password protection, and logging all significant
security-related activity for review.
27
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 38 ---
7. DCPS should ensure that contracts for outsourced computer
applications contain provisions that provide sufficient legal
protection to address security and performance risks.
8. DCPS should develop and implement a comprehensive disaster
recovery plan.
28
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 39 ---
Chapter 7
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and
Maintenance
DCPS used a number of best practices in its capital planning
process, as well as in controlling costs. These include (1) the
development of a long-term Capital Improvement Plan based on a
comprehensive and public process, (2) an energy management and
conservation program, and (3) use of periodic staffing calculations
for determining custodial staffing needs.
However, DCPS should implement certain processes to help monitor
and further promote operational efficiency and effectiveness.
Specifically, DCPS had not established formal performance
measures and related benchmarks to measure and assess the
efficiency of its maintenance operations. In addition, DCPS should
implement a formal customer feedback program.
Background
DCPS maintains 12 schools and other facilities (such as
administration and support offices) with a staff of 45 custodial
personnel and 6 maintenance personnel. DCPS uses a six-year
Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) to identify ongoing and projected
needs for new buildings and major renovations. The annual CIP was
developed using student demographic data and input from various
sources, including public meetings, and was approved by the Board.
29
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 40 ---
In the fiscal year 2011 CIP (prepared in fiscal year 2009), necessary
major renovations, repairs, and systemic improvements to existing
schools over the next ten years were estimated to cost $215.5
million.
Table 2 below compares DCPS fiscal year 2009 plant costs (that is,
maintenance and operational costs) with other similarly sized school
systems in Maryland. The table presents two cost measures used
to assess plant costs: cost per student and cost per square foot.
These statistics show that DCPS facilities operation and
maintenance costs are generally less than other peer school
systems.
Table 2
Plant Cost Comparison Per Student and Per Square Foot
Fiscal Year 2009 (Unaudited)
Plant Costs Square Total
Per Footage Gross
School System Per
Total Square Per Square
Student
Foot Student Footage
Dorchester County $4,423,067 $973.60 $5.01 194.33 882,836
Talbot County 4,968,486 1,125.62 6.92 162.69 718,099
Garrett County 4,884,348 1,108.57 5.90 188.05 828,527
Caroline County 4,347,367 793.03 4.94 160.60 880,425
Worcester County 7,818,950 1,174.55 6.22 188.91 1,257,548
Average of
$5,504,788 $1,050.44 $5.99 175.06 921,150
Comparable Schools
Sources: MSDE Financial Data, MSDE Fact Book, Maryland Public School Construction Square Footage
Data (most recent data available)
 - Based on Average Daily Enrollment 2008-2009
Certain Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance the
Efficiency and Effectiveness of the DCPS Facility
Construction and Maintenance Department
DCPS has instituted several best practices to enhance project
results and cost effectiveness in its Facilities and Maintenance
Department, in addition to the previously noted six-year CIP:
30
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 41 ---
 Various methods were used to reduce the need for additional
construction. The periodic evaluation of space utilization
included consideration of capacity, enrollment projections,
redistricting students among schools, and the use of portable
classrooms.
 DCPS developed an educational specifications document for all
new construction which addresses all building requirements,
including educational components required by the State.
 DCPS implemented a System-wide energy conservation policy in
2007. In addition, DCPS contracted with a vendor for energy
management consulting services, including computer software
that monitors and records energy usage at all facilities. As part
of the agreement, DCPS employs an energy manager to monitor
energy practices. Based on reports from the consultant, as of
June 2010, DCPS’ energy savings totaled $1.5 million since
2007. DCPS also participates in a multi-party energy trust to
purchase energy at the best possible prices and has
implemented in-house energy management practices, such as
the use of automated monitoring systems in all schools to
regulate heating and air conditioning usage, as well as to shut
down systems at specified temperatures for occupied and
unoccupied times at each location.
DCPS Should Use Certain Methods to Better Gauge
Operational Efficiency and Effectiveness
DCPS had not implemented a formal performance
measurement system that establishes standards and
expectations for its maintenance operations – DCPS did not
measure and assess the efficiency of its maintenance operations,
both for internal self-evaluation purposes and for comparisons with
other systems, which could identify other best practices.
Comparability with other systems in Maryland could not necessarily
be done unilaterally since there would need to be a consensus on
the measures and methodology; however, other states (for example,
Michigan and Florida) have mandated the establishment and use of
31
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 42 ---
measures and benchmarks to assist schools in the evaluation of
costs and practices. For example, DCPS did not develop measures
to evaluate maintenance assignment costs and timeliness.
DCPS did not use a staffing formula to periodically determine the
number of maintenance employees required to efficiently and
effectively meet its needs. Our comparison disclosed that DCPS
maintenance staff size was significantly less than the national
median, as reported in the April 2009 issue of American School and
University Magazine. The national median specifies one
maintenance employee per 92,074 square feet of building
maintained. Using current staffing and square footage for all DCPS
facilities, we calculated that DCPS had one maintenance employee
per 147,139 square feet of building maintained, or significantly
more than the national median.
One potential consequence of limited staffing is an increase of
deferred maintenance, the practice of postponing maintenance and
repair activities due to lack of funds or personnel. In its October
2009 Comprehensive Maintenance Plan, DCPS stated that “the
long-standing backlog of deferred maintenance items has created a
significant amount of unscheduled maintenance tasks.” The Plan
did not include a specific cost associated with this deferred
maintenance or suggest any solution.
DCPS should consider implementing a formal customer
feedback program – DCPS does not use a formal customer
feedback program to address matters pertaining to the care and
upkeep of its facilities. A formal feedback program can be an
effective tool to gauge how well the department is serving the
customers and to make needed adjustments to improve service.
Recommendation
9. DCPS should develop a performance assessment system that
establishes standards and expectations for maintenance
personnel. DCPS should formally identify the extent of its
deferred maintenance projects and develop solutions for
addressing any backlog. Finally, DCPS should consider
implementing a formal customer feedback program to assist in
evaluating performance and improving maintenance and
custodial operations.
32
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 43 ---
Chapter 8
Transportation Services
DCPS used a number of recognized best practices to increase
student transportation efficiency, such as staggering school arrival
and dismissal times to enable certain buses to perform multiple
runs on the same day. According to data compiled by MSDE, DCPS
transportation costs on a per mile and per student basis were lower
than comparably sized school systems. Nevertheless, there are
opportunities to further improve efficiency and cost effectiveness.
For example, DCPS did not use automated routing software to help
efficiently plan bus routes and did not have a written policy
establishing the criteria for determining bus contractor payment
rates. Furthermore, the methodology used to reimburse the bus
contractors for the purchase of buses may result in paying $1
million more than necessary for buses purchased over a 13-year
period. In addition, the basis for the rate used to reimburse bus
contractors for maintenance costs was not documented and may be
higher than necessary. Finally, DCPS had not developed formal
performance measures to monitor and evaluate the efficiency and
effectiveness of transportation services.
Background
DCPS is the 20th largest school system in Maryland, based on
student enrollment. Approximately 4,300 students are eligible to
ride the bus each day. These students were transported on one of
48 contractor-owned buses or 6 school system-owned buses.
33
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 44 ---
According to DCPS records, fiscal year 2009 transportation costs
totaled $2.9 million. Of the 934,000 reported route miles for the
2008-2009 school year, 13 percent were for transporting disabled
students.
Under the arrangements with the bus contractors, DCPS assumes
nearly all of the risks for bus operations while essentially
guaranteeing a profit to the contractors each year for the life of
each bus. Specifically, contractors are paid a per vehicle allotment
each year, which is designed to cover the depreciation cost of the
bus and provide a return on investment for the contractor’s
investment in the bus. In addition, the contractors receive a per-
mile rate for operating and maintenance costs (which includes fuel
costs), a driver per-hour payment to cover the contractor’s labor
costs, and an annual administrative cost payment. DCPS also pays
for the liability insurance, including property damage, and medical
coverage, for all contractor buses.
As seen in Table 3 below, the DCPS cost per rider for fiscal year
2009 was significantly lower when compared with other similarly
sized school systems.
Table 3
Comparison of Transportation Costs per Rider and per Mile
Fiscal Year 2009 (Unaudited)
Number of Eligible Miles Average Annual
Riders (in thousands) Expenditures Cost per
School System
Non- Non- (in
Disabled Disabled Rider Mile
Disabled Disabled thousands)
Dorchester County 4,241 86 814 120 $2,924 $676 $3.13
Garrett County 4,297 46 1,055 59 4,056 934 3.64
Worcester County 6,213 67 1,306 211 5,488 874 3.62
Caroline County 4,626 70 981 167 3,806 810 3.32
Talbot County 2,806 13 767 34 2,667 946 3.22
Average of
4,486 49 1,027 118 $4,004 $891 $3.48
Comparable Schools
Sources: MSDE 2008-2009 Fact Book, MSDE Expenditure Summary for FY 2009
34
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 45 ---
Several Best Practices Were in Place to Enhance Bus
Route Efficiency and to Control Related Costs
The DCPS Transportation Department had several practices in place
to help reduce student transportation costs:
 Staggering school arrival and dismissal times to enable certain
buses to perform multiple runs on the same day, thereby
reducing the need for DCPS to obtain additional buses through
bus contractors or purchase
 Using multiple drop-off points to reduce the number of routes
and maximizing the number of students transported (such as
transporting middle and high school students together) on the
same bus to take advantage of the close proximity of the
schools and to avoid sending multiple buses
 Piggybacking with the Dorchester County government to contract
for fuel for system-owned buses
 Establishing walking distance requirements to determine
students eligible for transportation services
Bus Routing Procedures Should Be Enhanced and
Routing Software Should Be Used
Bus routing procedures should be more comprehensive –
Although DCPS has an informal process for planning, reviewing, and
changing existing bus routes, its process was not comprehensive
and was not formalized. For example, the process did not consider
all relevant factors, such as busloads (that is, desired capacity) and
student ride times, when determining the most appropriate bus
routes.
DCPS does not use automated routing software – DCPS does
not use electronic routing software to assist in developing efficient
bus routes. Using routing software is a recognized best practice
that can be used to reduce the time it takes to design efficient
routes, reduce student ride time, and help ensure that routes
minimize the number of buses needed to transport students. In
addition, the use of routing software can automate current manual
processes such as electronically mapping student addresses and
developing routes.
35
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 46 ---
It is current DCPS practice to use existing bus routes and then make
changes on an as-needed basis, primarily relying on the knowledge
of transportation department employees to develop bus routes.
Implementation of an electronic routing system could help in the
development of more efficient bus routes and assist in the periodic
evaluation of routes. For example, our analysis of DCPS’ September
2008 and 2009 bus forms for 140 bus runs disclosed that 79 runs
were below 75 percent capacity.5 On 26 of the 79 routes, student
capacity was less than 50 percent.
Bus Contractor Rates Paid Were Not Based On
Documented Criteria and More Could Be Done to Help
Ensure Cost Effectiveness
DCPS did not have a written policy addressing the methodology to
be used for calculating payments to contractors, including the per
vehicle allotment (PVA), and fuel and maintenance costs. For at
least the past 10 years, DCPS calculated the annual PVA based on
amounts paid by other school systems (predominantly those located
on the Eastern Shore). Specifically, DCPS negotiates the PVA
amount with contractors based on contractor requests and
averages paid by the other school systems. However, DCPS had no
assurance that this process provides the best value for its
transportation needs.
Moreover, certain payments to bus contractors should be
reevaluated. DCPS pays contractors an annual PVA for each bus.
For the majority of school systems that use bus contractors, the PVA
formula includes reimbursement for the cost of the bus as
depreciation and a specified or imputed rate of return for investing
in the bus. DCPS contractors receive the annual PVA payment for
the life of the bus or 13 years. However, as previously mentioned,
DCPS does not use a formula to calculate the PVA to be paid for
new buses acquired each year. Thus, DCPS does not consider the
actual cost of a new bus or market interest rates when setting its
PVA. Instead, the DCPS PVA payments are based merely on
5 DCPS does not have a formal bus capacity target. Its school bus capacities
would be lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ depending on
the type of school. We calculated target capacities based on the average target
capacities of similarly sized school systems and determined the capacity for
high, middle, and elementary schools routes at 51, 53, and 62, respectively,
based on 72 passenger buses (manufacturer-stated capacity).
36
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 47 ---
amounts paid by other school systems and subsequently negotiated
with DCPS bus contractors. Bus contracts run for one-year terms
and are renewable from term to term without either party being
required to give notice of renewal; DCPS generally renews contracts
for the approved useful life of the bus (13 years).6
To estimate the financial impact to DCPS of using this method, we
calculated the PVA for each of the 48 new buses placed into service
from fiscal years 1998 to 2010 using the prime interest rate7,
estimated bus acquisition costs,and DCPS’ 13-year estimated
useful life in the PVA formula; we compared our PVA results to the
PVA paid by DCPS. This comparison showed that the DCPS annual
PVA payments per bus were from $1,385 less to $5,221 more than
the payments would have been had the bus acquisition cost and the
prime rate that existed at the time of purchase been used in the
calculation. The effect is that, over the 13-year life of these 48 new
buses put into service by contractors since 1998, DCPS will pay out
approximately $1 million more than if the prime interest rate had
been used as the return on investment in the formula. Of the $1
million, $200,000 has already been paid out through fiscal year
2010 and, unless changes are implemented, the remaining
$800,000 will be paid out during fiscal years 2011 to 2022. This
analysis does not include the effects for any new bus purchases
that may be made after fiscal year 2010 and the lost interest
income that could have been earned by DCPS on the excess
amounts paid.
6 A May 2010 MSDE report from the PVA workgroup that included State and
local school system officials did not result in prescribing any particular
methodology or rates for paying for bus contractors. Instead, the report
concluded that, “How to fairly and equitably determine compensation to school
bus contractors – whether it be PVA, bid, or per mile rate – is the choice of the
local jurisdiction as each best knows its own unique transportation needs.
Clearly, it is essential that the basis of and process for such determination be
thoroughly documented and reviewed in an ongoing manner.”
7 We used the prime rate since this rate was recommended in a November 1999
study commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975, an
MSDE study recommended the prime rate as a reasonable bus investment
interest rate. The May 2010 MSDE study report indicated that using the prime
rate for the PVA return on investment may be deficient, but the study provided
no empirical data to support that position. The study also stated that the rate
used should reflect what a reasonable person would expect on a long-term
investment. If the long-term investment mentioned in the study refers to U.S.
Treasury investments, the use of the prime rate would provide a higher PVA
payment amount since the prime rate is higher than the U.S. Treasury
investment interest rates.
37
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 48 ---
In addition to the PVA amounts, DCPS payments to contractors also
include a per-mile fee for fuel and maintenance costs. However, our
review disclosed that DCPS reimbursements rates to school bus
contractors for such costs also appear to be excessive. For
example, maintenance costs paid to school bus contractors were
based on negotiated rates with those contractors, rather than
documented costs. In this regard, according to the DCPS table of
rates, bus contractors are currently paid $.71 per mile to reimburse
maintenance costs. However, DCPS expenditure records indicate
that the per-mile costs for maintenance on three DCPS-owned
buses (which are generally similar in age and size to the fleet of
contractor buses) were only $.25 per mile for fiscal year 2008 and
$.34 per mile for fiscal year 2009. Although there may be other
factors contributing to the variation, this difference suggests that
DCPS could be overpaying for contractor bus maintenance. The
cost differential for fiscal year 2009, based on actual bus mileage,
equates to approximately $300,000.
Performance Should Be Measured and Reported
Regularly to the Board
DCPS did not have a formal performance measurement system for
its transportation services. Performance measures that could be
developed and reported regularly to the Board include average bus
occupancy, annual operational cost per student, frequency of
vehicle breakdowns per 100,000 miles, and the percentage of
students delivered within established ride times. Performance
measures would serve as a tool that management and the Board
could use to monitor transportation operations and to help measure
efficiency and cost effectiveness.
Recommendations
10. DCPS should establish formal, comprehensive bus routing
procedures to address factors such as desired bus loads and
student ride times, and investigate the use of automated
routing software to help plan more efficient bus routes.
11. DCPS should establish written policies that justify and describe
how each component of the bus contractor’s table of rates are
to be determined, and retain documentation for each year to
show that the rates were determined in accordance with the
38
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 49 ---
policy. In developing the policies, DCPS should reevaluate the
appropriateness of the PVA, and the fuel and maintenance
amounts paid to bus contractors.
12. DCPS should establish a formal performance measurement
system for its transportation services, and periodically report
the results to the Board.
39
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 50 ---
40
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 51 ---
Chapter 9
Food Services Operations
DCPS has implemented a number of best practices, including
participation in the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
commodity program, and membership in various food-purchasing
cooperatives. DCPS also has adequate procedures in place to
identify students eligible for the National School Meals Program and
has one of the highest levels of program participation in the State.
However, DCPS should improve internal controls over the
procurement of food supplies.
Background
DCPS has a cooking cafeteria at 11 of its 12 schools. Food and
related supplies are received and stored in each school. In fiscal
year 2009, DCPS had 48 cafeteria employees (45 full and 3 part-
time positions) and food service revenues totaled $2.2 million.
According to the audited financial statements, food service
operations expenditures exceeded revenues by $90,006 for fiscal
year 2009. As noted in Table 4 on the next page, the fiscal year
2009 cost per meal for DCPS was similar to that of other similarly
sized school systems in Maryland. See Table 5 on page 44 for
information regarding fiscal year 2009 DCPS food services.
41
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 52 ---
Table 4
Comparison of Cost per Meal
Fiscal Year 2009 (unaudited)
Meals Served
Total Cost
School System Expenditures per
Breakfast Lunch A La Carte Total
Meal
Dorchester County $2,292,915 222,163 517,569 105,677 845,409 $2.71
Garrett County 2,692,443 153,502 454,213 223,008 830,723 3.24
Caroline County 2,251,576 124,251 576,824 83,477 784,552 2.87
Worcester County 2,533,519 196,088 552,513 174,828 923,429 2.74
Talbot County 1,691,629 133,378 400,127 141,899 675,404 2.50
Average of
Comparable $2,292,292 151,805 495,919 155,803 803,527 $2.84
Schools
Note: Breakfast sales represent meal equivalents based on actual meals and sales using
National Food Service Management Institute guidelines.
Sources: Local Education Agencies, MSDE Fact Book
Certain Best Practices Were in Place
DCPS implemented several practices to contain food
services costs – These measures helped to increase operational
efficiency and reduce food supply and material costs.
 DCPS maximized the use of convenience foods (heat and serve
items) to reduce the labor needed to prepare foods.
 DCPS participated in the USDA commodities free food program.
According to the audited financial statements, $94,000 in USDA
commodities was received in fiscal year 2009.
 DCPS participated in food purchasing cooperatives to maximize
its buying power and to reduce food costs. According to its
records, DCPS payments to the wholesale vendor selected by
one cooperative totaled $465,000 during fiscal year 2009.
42
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 53 ---
 DCPS used a number of methods to reduce waste including
monitoring menus, adjusting food production, standardizing
serving sizes and recipes, and reheating certain leftover items.
DCPS used several best practices to encourage
participation in the federal free and reduced-price meal
programs – These practices include the use of a family application
process—instead of individual student applications—to
simultaneously qualify more students for the programs, and the use
of a point-of-sale system accessed by a student ID number
(regardless of the method used to purchase a meal) to eliminate the
easy identification (and any perceived stigma) of students in the
free and reduced-price meal programs. For fiscal year 2009, 85
percent of DCPS students eligible to receive free lunches and 74
percent of the students eligible to receive reduced-price lunches
actually participated in the programs, which was consistent with the
average participation rates of similarly sized school systems (with
average participation rates of 80 percent and 72 percent for free
and reduced-price meals, respectively). MSDE recognized DCPS for
having the largest increase in free and reduced-price lunch
participation from fiscal year 2008 to 2009 in the State. In
addition, 69 percent of students who participated in the lunch
program also participated in the breakfast programs, well above the
national average of 46.7 percent. DCPS participation in the
breakfast programs was the second highest of any school system in
the State.
43
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 54 ---
Table 5
Food Service Activity for Fiscal Year 2009
Average Cost per Meal $ 2.71
Number of Meals Served:
Breakfast Paid 64,248
Free 141,057
Reduced Price 16,858
222,163
Lunch Paid 176,982
Free 296,996
Reduced Price 43,591
517,569
Meal Equivalents
Snacks and Summer Meals 1,994
A La Carte Sales 103,683
Total Meals Served 845,409
Schools 12
Kitchens 11
Full-time Employees 45
Part-time Employees 3
Revenues:
Federal Cash Payments $1,327,592
USDA Commodities 93,908
$1,421,500
Sales and other sources 682,583
State aid 98,826
Total Revenue (all sources) $2,202,909
Total Expenditures 2,292,915
Excess of Expenditures over Revenues $ (90,006)
Sources: MSDE Fact Book, DCPS Food Service Reports and Fiscal Year 2009
Audited Financial Statements
44
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 55 ---
DCPS Needs to Improve Internal Controls Over
Purchasing of Food-Related Items
We found that the same individuals (that is, the cafeteria managers)
at each school, who were responsible for ordering food items and
supplies, were also responsible for receiving the orders and
inventorying the supplies without any independent oversight or
approval of the orders. Consequently, there was a lack of
assurance that all items purchased were necessary, received, and
used at the schools. According to DCPS records, expenditures for
food and related supplies totaled $823,000 for fiscal year 2010.
Recommendation
13. DCPS should segregate the duties of ordering and receiving
food service items. DCPS should also ensure that purchases
receive prior approval of independent supervisory personnel.
45
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 56 ---
46
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 57 ---
C
hapter 10
School Board Operations and Oversight
Oversight of DCPS operations includes a comprehensive budget
process. The Board is actively involved in the development of DCPS’
budget. We also found that financial information is made available
to the proper parties (such as principals and administrative
supervisors) in a timely and consistent manner. Additionally, the
Board meets each year with DCPS’ certified public accounting firm
to review the results of the annual financial statement and federal
Single Audits. Furthermore, we also noted that the Board has a
comprehensive ethics policy that applies to all DCPS staff.
Several opportunities exist for the Board to improve operations and
oversight. Specifically, the Board should consider establishing an
internal audit function to act as an independent reviewer of DCPS
operations for the Board and a mechanism for the reporting and
investigation of suspected fraud (for example, a hotline).
Furthermore, the Board should formally adopt and receive
performance measurement data pertaining to critical operational
areas to help monitor DCPS implementation of the budget and
Master Plan. Finally, the Board should also ensure that the
provisions of its ethics policy are being carried out, and obtain
approval from the State Ethics Commission for changes to its ethics
policy to ensure that it conforms to requirements established in
State law.
47
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 58 ---
Background
DCPS is governed by a five-member board (not including two
student representatives) elected by the voters of Dorchester County.
The Board does not have an established committee structure, due
to its size, and generally acts in whole to carry out its oversight
duties. In its oversight responsibilities, the Board contracted with a
certified public accounting firm for independent audits of the DCPS
financial statements and federal grant programs.
The Board is ultimately accountable for the success of DCPS in
providing the children of Dorchester County with a quality education,
while wisely spending local, State, and federal funds. Following is
the DCPS stated mission vision and goals, according to its website:
Mission Statement
The mission of the Dorchester County Board of Education, in
partnership with the community, is to provide leadership for
excellence in teaching and learning for all students by:
-consistently advocating for resources,
-continuously developing sound policies, and
-carefully monitoring student progress.
Vision
The Dorchester County Public Schools will provide continually
improving educational programs in a safe and nurturing school
environment with exceptional faculty and staff. This will be
achieved through a cooperative and supportive partnership among
schools, home and community. All students will acquire the self-
discipline, knowledge, and skills necessary to become creative, self-
sufficient lifelong learners and productive citizens.
Board of Education Goals
1. To establish high academic expectations for all children
particularly in the areas of reading, writing, and mathematics.
2. To provide well-trained, caring staff with strong visionary
leadership.
3. To encourage parent/family involvement in the schools.
4. To make our schools safe, disciplined, and drug free.
48
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 59 ---
Certain Oversight Had Been Put in PlaceRegarding
DCPS Operations
The DCPS Board uses various methods to oversee the financial
operations of DCPS:
 The Board is actively involved in the development of the budget.
The Board receives monthly expenditure data including budget
variances.
 The Board hires an independent certified public accounting firm
to perform audits of its financial statements and federally
funded grant programs, and annually meets with that firm to
review the results.
The Board adopted a detailed conflict of interest and ethics policy to
cover Board members and all DCPS employees. DCPS policy
established an Ethics Panel (to be composed of five individuals
appointed by the Board) to interpret ethics policies and provide
advice on policy implementation as well as to review and rule on any
reported complaints of ethics violations. The policy identifies a
number of supervisory employees and Board members required to
file annual financial disclosure statements.
The Board Should Consider Additional Steps to Assist
It in Governing DCPS
DCPS should consider establishing an internal auditor
position – DCPS does not have an internal auditor. Although it has
an employee who performs certain internal audit-like functions
(specifically, reviews of certain student activity fund transactions) as
part of other job responsibilities, this employee does not
communicate the results of such work to the Board or senior DCPS
management. The use of an internal auditor, independent of school
system management, is a recommended best practice of the
Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA). The GFOA notes
that internal auditors commonly assist directors in monitoring the
design and proper functioning of internal controls and procedures,
and can play a valuable role in conducting performance audits,
special investigations, and studies. As cited in this report, our audit
identified certain deficiencies in the DCPS system of internal
control, such as unnecessary and unrestricted access to automated
49
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 60 ---
disbursement and payroll systems. While DCPS may determine it is
unable to afford the additional costs for a full-time internal audit
position based on its size (as the fifth smallest of all 24 public
school systems in Maryland), it should determine if such a position
could be shared with other local Boards. Alternatively, the Board
could consider expanding the scope of work performed by its
independent auditor (similar to the work done by the auditor for
student activity funds as commented upon in Chapter 1).
The DCPS Board should consider establishing a confidential
hotline – The Board had no process, such as a confidential hotline,
to enable employees and others to confidentially report operational
concerns and suspected fraud, waste, and mismanagement. In
addition, a whistleblower policy had not been established. Typically,
such confidential mechanisms bring to light matters and issues
previously unknown and unsuspected by organizational managers.
If such a process were established, in conjunction with the
establishment of an internal audit function, the internal auditor
could conduct the initial reviews of information received via the
hotline or direct the information to other appropriate officials, such
as law enforcement.
The Board should adopt and review key financial and
operational related performance measures – The Board had
not adopted any key performance indicators related to the financial
operations of DCPS, with the exception of actual expenditure data,
as previously noted. Without this information, it is difficult for the
Board to evaluate the progress of its budget and Master Plan.
Examples of useful performance measures include cost
comparisons, such as facility cost per student, cost per meal served
and transportation costs per bus rider. When implemented
correctly, performance measures can assist in decision-making
processes, such as allocating resources and budgeting, and
monitoring departmental effectiveness and efficiency.
50
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 61 ---
The Board Needs to Update and Enforce Its Ethics
Policy
Although the Board had adopted an ethics policy (that was approved
by the State Ethics Commission on May 8, 1984), we found:
 The Ethics Panel had not had any members since February
2008. The policy establishes a five-member Ethics Panel, whose
responsibilities include interpreting the ethics policy, reviewing
financial disclosure forms, and hearing and deciding complaints
regarding alleged violations of the policy.
 In absence of its own Ethics Panel, we were advised that the
employees and Board members were supposed to submit
financial disclosure forms to the Dorchester County Ethics Panel.
Based on the policy, DCPS identified 39 individuals required to
submit financial disclosure statements annually. Our review of
these forms for calendar year 2009 disclosed that the forms
were generally not filed timely. Specifically, although the policy
requires the forms be submitted by January 31, 2010, we noted
that 33 of the 39 forms were not submitted until after May 11,
2010, the date when we originally requested to review them.
 Revisions to the DCPS ethics policy since 1984 had not been
approved by the State Ethics Commission as required by law.
Additionally, effective October 1, 2010, State law requirements
were expanded to require that local school board regulations
regarding conflict of interest and financial disclosure provisions
for board members be equivalent to or exceed the State
requirements in Subtitles 5 and 6 of Title 15 of the State
Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.8 For
example, conflict of interest provisions of the current DCPS
ethics policy focuses on the member, their spouse, and
dependent children. Subtitle 5 includes additional relatives that
should be considered when considering potential conflicts of
interest, including non-dependent children, parents, brothers,
and sisters. Also, the disclosure of gifts received under the
current DCPS policy would only be required if a gift was actually
received. Under Subtitle 6, an annual disclosure statement
needs to be filed even when no gifts were received to report that
fact. Accordingly, DCPS will need to update its ethics policy and
8 Chapter 277, Laws of Maryland, 2010.
51
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 62 ---
submit the policy to the State Ethics Commission to ensure it
complies with State law requirements.
Recommendations
14. The Board should adopt policies to govern and monitor critical
financial and support services operations and ensure that
appropriate administrative procedures are developed to
support these policies.
15. The Board should enhance its oversight of DCPS operations.
For example, the Board should consider establishing an
internal audit function or expanding the scope of work
performed by its independent auditor. The Board should also
consider establishing a hotline for the confidential reporting of
operational issues and suspected fraud, waste, and
mismanagement. Furthermore, the Board should adopt
comprehensive performance measures in key operational
areas, such as transportation, food service, and facilities
management, to assist in its oversight duties; such data
should be periodically reviewed by the Board.
16. The Board needs to re-establish its ethics panel and monitor
the panel’s activities to ensure that the provisions of its ethics
policy, including the financial disclosure requirements, are
being complied with. The Board also needs to ensure that its
ethics policy includes all provisions required by State law and
obtain approval for all changes to the policy from the State
Ethics Commission.
52
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 63 ---
Chapter 11
Other Financial Controls
This chapter addresses the management of risk, cash, and debt (for
example, long-term lease agreements) within DCPS. Although
current practices minimized the risk to DCPS cash, DCPS had not
developed policies for cash or debt management. In addition, our
review disclosed that DCPS has taken steps to reduce its risks;
however, more can be done to enhance efforts to control health
care costs.
Risk Management Best Practices Were in
Place
DCPS used a combination of commercial insurance and self-
insurance to manage its risks. DCPS insured its liability, property,
and workers’ compensation coverage through participation in the
Maryland Association of Boards of Education (MABE) Group
Insurance Pool and the Workmen’s Compensation Self Insurance
Fund. The notes to the fiscal year 2009 audited financial
statements stated that settled claims had not exceeded coverage in
any of the past three fiscal years.
To control workers’ compensation costs, DCPS reviewed workers’
compensation reports provided by MABE to prevent similar
reoccurrences in the future, and established initiatives, such as a
return-to-work program, to help reduce workers’ compensation
costs.
53
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 64 ---
DCPS Should Develop Formal Cash and Debt
Management Policies
DCPS had not adopted policies governing cash or debt management
as recommended by the Government Finance Officers Association.
DCPS primarily invested its excess cash in the Maryland Local
Government Investment Pool (MLGIP) . According to DCPS’ audited
financial statements cash and investments totaled $5.2 million as
of June 30, 2009. The MLGIP is under the control of the State
Treasurer. The notes to the audited financial statements indicated
that deposits were fully insured or collateralized.
DCPS is not permitted to issue bonds or long-term debt to finance
capital or operational needs. DCPS currently uses operating leases
to lease computers and may use capital leases/purchase
agreements to purchase equipment. For example, according to its
records, during fiscal year 2009, DCPS lease payments totaled
approximately $500,000. However, DCPS has not adopted a policy
to govern its use of long-term lease obligations to finance
operations. Long-term liability levels, and the related annual costs,
are important long-term obligations that must be managed within
available resources.
DCPS Should Take Steps to Ensure the Propriety of
Health Care Costs
DCPS provides health care coverage to employees and eligible
dependents through the Eastern Shore of Maryland Educational
Consortium Health Alliance. The Alliance contracts with a health
care provider and each of the members pays premiums directly to
the provider. As DCPS is self-insured, to the extent that premiums
paid each year exceed actual and anticipated claims, DCPS is
eligible for a refund (DCPS would reimburse the provider if claims
exceeded premium payments for the year). According to its records,
for fiscal years 2008 and 2009, DCPS paid the health care provider
$5.4 million for each year and was owed refunds of $1.2 million and
$651,000 respectively. According to DCPS personnel, these
refunds were credited to DCPS’ account to offset costs for the
following year.
54
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 65 ---
The Alliance, on behalf of the members, contracted with a third
party to conduct a claims review to assess the insurer’s
administration of the Alliance’s self-funded health plans and
compliance with the administrative agreement governing the plans.
However, neither the Alliance, nor DCPS, verified the authenticity of
program participants and their listed dependents. As of August 4,
2010, DCPS provided health care coverage to 1,387 employees,
retirees and their dependents.
According to recommended practices published by the GFOA, health
care cost containment is a critical component of long-term financial
planning and budgeting. The GFOA recommends the establishment
of a cost containment program including specific steps such as:
evaluating plan design, management of vendors, management of
employee health, aggregation, and cost sharing. Although some of
these recommended steps (cost sharing by participating in ESMEC)
were implemented by DCPS, more can be done.
Recommendations
17. DCPS should develop and adopt formal policies governing
cash management and long-term obligations.
18. DCPS should institute processes to verify the authenticity of
health care program participants and their listed dependents.
55
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 66 ---
56
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 67 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives,
and Methodology
Scope
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the financial management practices of the
Dorchester County Public Schools (DCPS). We conducted this audit
under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-
1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and performed it in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our
audit objectives.
Objectives
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the DCPS procedures and controls were
effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the DCPS policies provided for the
efficient use of financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit, we focused on the major
financial-related areas of operations based on assessments of
materiality and risk. Our audit approach, including the specific
57
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 68 ---
objectives of our local school system audits, was approved on
September 14, 2004 by the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland
General Assembly in accordance with the enabling legislation. As
approved, the audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing
student achievement, curriculum, teacher performance, and other
academic-related areas and functions. We also did not review the
activities, financial or other, of any parent teacher association,
group, or funds not under the local board of education’s direct
control or management. Finally, we did not evaluate the DCPS
Comprehensive Education Master Plan or related updates.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws
and regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary
education, as well as policies and procedures issued and
established by DCPS. We also interviewed personnel at DCPS, the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and staff at other
local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).9 Our audit
procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of DCPS operations. We also tested transactions and
performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary
to achieve our objectives, generally for the period from January 1,
2009 through March 31, 2010. For our audit work on revenue and
federal grants, we primarily relied on the results of independent
audits of fiscal year 2009 activity.
In addition, we contacted a number of other state auditors’ offices
and legislative program evaluation agencies that had a history of
conducting audits or reviews of local school systems. We
interviewed those officials and inspected their work programs and
resultant reports to identify specific audit techniques and
operational practices at schools that could be adapted for our
school system audits. We also used certain statistical data—
including financial and operational—compiled by MSDE from various
informational reports submitted by the Maryland local school
systems. This information was used in this audit report for
background or informational purposes, and was deemed
reasonable. For comparison purposes, information provided in this
report was generally limited to those Maryland school systems of
similar sizes, based on student enrollment and/or system budget.
9 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to
identify policies or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
58
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 69 ---
In many cases, this information was self-reported by the school
systems. The data were neither audited nor independently verified
by us. Finally, information provided in this report was obtained from
various reports readily available during our fieldwork.
Other Independent Auditors
When developing the approach for the audits of school system
financial management practices, a consideration was the reliance
on the work of other independent auditors to the extent practicable
to avoid unnecessary duplication of audit effort. With respect to
DCPS, the results of other auditors that we considered were
reported in two distinct audit reports: one related to the
administration of its federal grants and the other, the management
letter from the audit of its Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.
During the course of this audit, we relied on these results. We
performed certain steps to satisfy ourselves as to the reliability of
the reported results of the independent federal grants audits of the
DCPS federal financial assistance programs for the evaluation of
internal controls and for compliance with federal laws and
regulations and of the DCPS financial statement audits.
Accordingly, we significantly reduced the scope of our work in
Chapter 1 “Revenue and Billing Cycle,” and in Chapter 2 “Federal
Funds.”
Limitations of Internal Control
DCPS management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
effective internal control. Internal control is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance that objectives pertaining to the
reliability of financial records, effectiveness and efficiency of
operations including safeguarding of assets, and compliance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud
may nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of
any evaluation of internal control to future periods are subject to the
risk that conditions may change or compliance with policies and
procedures may deteriorate. In addition to the conditions included
in this report, other less significant findings were communicated to
DCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this report.
59
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 70 ---
Fieldwork and DCPS Responses
We conducted our fieldwork from March 2010 to August 2010. The
DCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as
an appendix to this report.
60
Office of
Legislative
Audits

--- Page 72 ---
1
Dorchester County Public Schools
Agency Responses to Financial Management Practices Performance Audit Report
December, 2010
Recommendations and Responses
1. DCPS should develop comprehensive procurement policies that ensures acquisitions
are made at the best value and addresses all categories of goods and services purchases.
These policies should specify the procurement methods to be used (such as competitive
sealed bidding, sole source), when contracts should be in writing, and the mandatory
contract provisions. Additionally, DCPS should obtain goods and services through a
properly documented competitive procurement process. If a competitive procurement
process is not deemed appropriate (such as when only one vendor can provide the
required services), then documentation justifying the decision should be maintained.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees to review its existing internal procedures to ensure acquisitions continue to be
made at the best value and addresses all categories of goods and services. As a small school
system, written comprehensive procurement policies have not been previously identified as
an area in need of attention. Employees have been expected to use judgment and their
knowledge of available resources to fulfill procurement requirements in a cost effective
manner. DCPS agrees that we should better document sole source procurements when
they are the appropriate procurement method. DCPS does competitively bid (or quote)
whenever practical and enters into formal contracts for all goods and services when a
purchase order (and the associated bid documents, if any) are not adequate to serve as a
contract. In the coming year, DCPS will endeavor to better document procurement
decisions.
2. DCPS should improve its controls over purchasing and the invoice payment process
by separating incompatible functions and by assigning critical system functions to only
those who need those capabilities to perform their job duties. Furthermore, DCPS should
restrict access to blank check stock and the signature plate to employees who are
independent of the invoice processing functions. In addition, DCPS should establish a
process to ensure that a proper and independent review of all disbursement checks is
performed. Finally, DCPS should maintain contract pricing information on file,
including the applicable contracts, and verify the accuracy of prices on vendor billings.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees and during 2011, many of the recommended actions will occur. Due to the
small number of administrative staff, formal segregation of duties is not always possible.
However, there are mitigating procedures that are in place, or that could be strengthened,
to offset these weaknesses. The Finance Department has already modified the process for
the review of disbursements, and securing of the keys to the check supply storage cabinet.

--- Page 73 ---
2
Operating departments have increased their scrutiny of and retention of copies of piggy
back contracts that are utilized in lieu of bidding. Currently, better documentation of these
actions is being implemented. DCPS agrees that all invoices should be reviewed for
propriety prior to payment and by general practice makes effort to do so, including the
utilizing of vendor discounts required by contractual agreements.
3. DCPS should improve controls over the human resources and payroll system by
segregating incompatible functions and assigning critical system functions to only those
employees who need the capabilities to perform their job duties. In addition, DCPS
should ensure that critical transactions (such as adding an employee or changing salaries)
are reviewed by supervisory personnel independent of the payroll processing function
using supporting documentation.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees and has commenced a review of all those who have ‘critical’ system access.
Initially, we have decided to reassign duties within HR to assign data input to one
secretary, which allows a reduction of the number of staff members with that ability.
However, with only four (4) Human Resources staff members, it is important that all have
some level of access in the event a staff member is absent for any period of time. Also, the
DCPS Human Resources office will implement a procedure for reviewing HR transactions
(especially those that affect payroll). The person, who serves in the internal control
capacity, for these ‘transactions’ will have limited ‘critical’ system access.
4. DCPS should expand its workforce planning to include key non-instructional positions in
critical operational units.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees and has already begun to include in its workforce planning key non-
instructional positions in critical jobs.
5. DCPS should develop and implement comprehensive policies and procedures to govern
the accounting and safeguarding of equipment that addresses: maintaining detail
equipment records; tagging of equipment; conducting physical inventory counts; and
disposing of equipment. DCPS should ensure that only those employees who require the
capability to modify the equipment records as part of their job responsibilities to be
assigned this capability.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees and will begin the process in FY 2011 to adopt policies and procedures to
address this recommendation.
DCPS will consider how to limit update access to the inventory records to employees
requiring such access as part of their routine job duties without impairing network

--- Page 74 ---
3
operations. As a small system, segregation of duties can be difficult to achieve. A physical
inventory is being planned for the summer of 2011.
6. DCPS should implement appropriate security measures to safeguard its applications and
data systems by improving account and password protection, and logging all significant
security-related activity for review.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees and will take steps to implement these recommendations in the next 12
months.
7. DCPS should ensure that contracts for outsourced computer applications contain
provisions that provide sufficient legal protection to address security and performance
risks.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees with this recommendation and will contact the vendor to determine what can
be done to address the contract terms that should be strengthened to provide greater legal
protection.
8. DCPS should develop and implement a comprehensive disaster recovery plan.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees with this recommendation and will be working on plan preparation in the
coming year.
9. DCPS should develop a performance assessment system that establishes standards and
expectations for maintenance personnel. DCPS should formally identify the extent of its
deferred maintenance projects and develop solutions for addressing any backlog. Finally,
DCPS should consider implementing a formal customer feedback program to assist in
evaluating performance and improving maintenance and custodial operations.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees with the recommendation and feels that the current procedures, as explained
below, adequately address the concerns. DCPS will investigate a performance assessment
system for maintenance and custodial operations. Assessment of Maintenance staff size is
warranted. As we have reassigned some job tasks, due to staff turnover in the summer of
2010, we are hopeful that some of the backlog of maintenance tasks will be remedied. An
additional HVAC technician has been hired, utilizing existing budget funds from a
discontinued custodial manager’s position (attrition).

--- Page 75 ---
4
DCPS will investigate how it can implement a formal customer feedback program to assist
in evaluating performance and improving maintenance and custodial operations. We value
the benefit of feedback from our students, staff and community that we serve.
10. DCPS should establish formal, comprehensive bus routing procedures to address factors
such as desired bus loads and student ride times, and investigate the use of automated
routing software to help plan more efficient bus routes.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees with the recommendation and feels that the current procedures, as explained
below, adequately address the concerns. DCPS will review our current processes and
develop written bus routing procedures based upon the informal procedures already in
place, which have been utilized to maximize bus loads, while considering student ride times.
In December 2010, DCPS staff investigated automated routing software, which is in use in
neighboring school systems. Upon determining that it was cost-effective and would
integrate with our existing student data base, and was compatible with our county
government’s GIS system, we have issued a purchase order for the software. Previously,
these types of software have not been cost-effective for our school system, nor were GIS
and student data base interfaces readily available.
11. DCPS should establish written policies that justify and describe how each component of
the bus contractor’s table of rates are to be determined, and retain documentation for each
year to show that the rates were determined in accordance with the policy. In developing
the policies, DCPS should reevaluate the appropriateness of the PVA, and the fuel and
maintenance amounts paid to bus contractors.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees with the intent of this recommendation and will take steps to improve
documentation to support the Table of Rates funding. Prior to the legislative audit, in the
fall of 2009, our Board of Education held an extensive discussion of PVA and considered
the overall profitability of a bus contract considering work time, contractor investment,
liability, quality of service to our students, and the shrinking population of “qualified”
drivers. DCPS annually (during the budget process) considers the various factors in the
Table of Rates, which serve as the basis of the payments to all contractors. A meet and
confer process is used, with representatives of the bus contractors association, to
communicate challenges that contractors face and to “negotiate” payment rates for the
coming year. Cost is a primary factor in the determination of the rates paid to contractors,
but additionally total compensation to contractors must be sufficient to assure that an
adequate supply of buses will continue to operate in an extremely reliable and safe manner.
12. DCPS should establish a formal performance measurement system for its transportation
services, and periodically report the results to the Board.

--- Page 76 ---
5
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees with the recommendation and feels that the current procedures, as explained
below, adequately address the concerns. DCPS will develop performance goals for
transportation services in the coming year and report the results to the Board.
13. DCPS should segregate the duties of ordering and receiving food service items. DCPS
should also ensure that purchases receive prior approval of independent supervisory
personnel.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees to segregate the receiving function, where feasible. During the fall of 2010,
DCPS changed it operating procedures, wherever possible, such that a food service worker
checks and verifies the receipt of goods; not the manager who placed the order, as had been
our past practice. This strengthens our procurement verification process.
DCPS agrees with the recommendation and feels that the current procedures, as explained
below, adequately address the concerns. Given the amount of internal controls in the
procurement process, which include the ordering of items that must correlate to the
centrally planned menu, segregated receiving and invoice verification processes, reviews of
food production records, review of sales, and monthly inventories, DCPS believes that
reasonable controls are in place. Therefore adding prior approval of routine food supply
orders by independent supervisory personnel would only increase administrative
workload, delay the food delivery process and is not necessary. Independent supervisory
personnel will continue to review the necessity of products ordered and to take action as
necessary, if inappropriate items or quantities are ordered.
14. The Board should adopt policies to govern and monitor critical financial and support
services operations and ensure that appropriate administrative procedures are developed
to support these policies.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees that an accounting policies and procedures manual should be created.
Efforts to create a manual will begin in Fiscal Year 2011.
15. The Board should enhance its oversight of DCPS operations. For example, the Board
should consider establishing an internal audit function or expanding the scope of work
performed by its independent auditor. The Board should also consider establishing a
hotline for the confidential reporting of operational issues and suspected fraud, waste, and
mismanagement. Furthermore, the Board should adopt comprehensive performance
measures in key operational areas, such as transportation, food service, and facilities
management, to assist in its oversight duties; such data should be periodically reviewed
by the Board.

--- Page 77 ---
6
DCPS Response:
Given the present budget constraints, the Board will continue its current practices of
oversight of operations through the monthly Board of Education meeting finance reports,
budget monitoring, and work session updates on current matters such as construction
projects, minor capital projects and other operating matters. The Board will investigate
during FY 2011, the costs and opportunities to expand its oversight of DCPS operations by
establishing an internal audit function perhaps by expanding the scope of work performed
by its independent auditor. The Board will investigate establishing a hotline for the
confidential reporting of operational issues and suspected fraud, waste, and
mismanagement. The Board will consider adopting comprehensive performance measures
in key operational areas, such as transportation, food services, and facilities management,
to further expand its current oversight duties. The data, once obtained, would be
periodically reviewed by the Board.
16. The Board needs to re-establish its ethics panel and monitor the panel’s activities to
ensure that the provisions of its ethics policy, including the financial disclosure
requirements, are being complied with. The Board also needs to ensure that its ethics
policy includes all provisions required by State law and obtain approval for all changes to
the policy from the State Ethics Commission.
DCPS Response:
Subsequent to this audit (FY 2011), the Board of Education re-established its ethics panel.
Financial disclosure statements have been submitted. The Board will review its ethics
policy as compared to the provisions of the State policy and seek all required approvals.
17. DCPS should develop and adopt formal policies governing cash management and long-
term obligations.
DCPS Response:
DCPS will develop local policies for these recommended items. DCPS has always operated
within State law governing cash management, specifically investment practices. The State
law is very limiting as to the type of investments and is reviewed annually for compliance
by our independent auditors. Developing a local policy would be more a mirror image of
State law. The use of leases is very limited and is only with Board approval.
18. DCPS should institute processes to verify the authenticity of health care program
participants and their listed dependents.
DCPS Response:
DCPS agrees with this recommendation and in the fall of 2010 contracted with a consulting
firm to perform an eligibility audit during FY 2011.

--- Page 79 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Information Systems Audit Manager
Nichole M. Becker
Ken H. Johanning, CFE
Senior Auditors
R. Frank Abel, CPA, CFE
Joseph E. McWilliams
Staff Auditors
John C. Venturella
Information Systems Staff Auditor