Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2015
Date: 02/02/2016
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150ae7
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:07:43.233856
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2015
February 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 7
Findings 9
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1 – The Recovery of Recorded Federal Fund 10
Revenues Totaling Approximately $6.3 Million is Uncertain
Expenditure Transactions 11
Finding 2 – Unexpended General Fund Appropriations Totaling
Approximately $9.7 Million Were Not Cancelled at Fiscal Year-End
Special Funds 11
Finding 3 – One Agency Did Not Maintain Adequate Records to
Justify Retaining $5.4 Million in Special Funds
Other Liabilities
Finding 4 – Five Agencies Reported a Total of $60.4 Million In 12
Unprovided For General Fund Payables or Other Liabilities at Fiscal
Year-End
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2015 Closeout Review Findings by 14
State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of June 30, 2015 Unprovided for General Fund 15
Payables and Other Liabilities Reported to the General
Accounting Division
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closeout transactions that have not been previously recorded in the
State’s accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR).
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the CAFR. In its
audit report dated December 15, 2015, applicable to the fiscal year ended June 30,
2015, the firm stated that the State’s financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position of the State of Maryland as of
June 30, 2015, and the respective changes in the financial position and cash flows,
for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (referred to as GAAP).
The State’s CAFR states that, on a budgetary basis, the General Fund had an
unencumbered balance of approximately $321.3 million as of June 30, 2015. This
represents an increase of approximately $173.7 million from the balance reported
at the preceding fiscal year-end ($147.6 million). The CAFR also states that the
State Reserve (Revenue Stabilization Account) balance totaled $779.9 million as
of June 30, 2015.
The budgetary General Fund balance does not reflect the effect of year-end
GAAP adjustments made to the State’s financial statements that were prepared on
a modified accrual basis of accounting. Certain GAAP adjustments, if recognized
on the budgetary basis, would have reduced the unencumbered budgetary General
Fund balance of $321.3 million. For example, two GAAP adjustments reduced
the Fund balance by $1.0 billion for income tax collections that that are owed to
local jurisdictions as June 30, 2015. These adjustments were a total of $407.9
million smaller than a similar adjustment made for the fiscal year 2014 CAFR.
Other GAAP adjustments totaling $60.4 million were made for liabilities incurred
by State agencies during fiscal year 2015 for which general fund appropriations
were not available to finance the expenditures (see Exhibit 2).
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2015. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2015, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies and to determine if other significant liabilities existed at fiscal year-end.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 20
Departments and independent agencies to ascertain if the transactions were
properly supported and made in accordance with State budgetary laws,
regulations, and accounting policies and to determine if other significant liabilities
existed at fiscal year-end. We reviewed, on a limited basis, transactions
processed subsequent to June 30, 2015 to determine if the transactions were
properly recorded (such as charged or credited to the proper fiscal year).
As part of our current review, we contacted various officials of State agencies, as
well as the independent accounting firm under contract with the State to express
an opinion on its financial statements. Our review excluded public colleges and
universities and transactions processed through the Transportation Trust Fund
because the related financial activity does not involve the State’s General Fund
and/or because agencies have the authority to retain unspent funds at year-end.
Our conclusions for the aforementioned objective are contained on page 9 of this
report.
We also assessed the status of the five issues (appearing in three findings)
identified in our January 28, 2015 report entitled Statewide Review of Budget
Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2014. We determined that four of the five
issues had not been resolved and are repeated in this report (see Exhibit 1).
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. We advised the appropriate agencies of our findings. Formal responses
were not requested since this report contains no recommendations. Our fieldwork
was conducted during the period from August 2015 to January 2016.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that four departments or units thereof were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions were not properly recorded, could not be
substantiated, or did not comply with budget closeout requirements. Additionally,
we determined that two departments had other significant liabilities at June 30,
2015 which may require general funds.
Revenue Transactions
Two agencies recorded unsubstantiated revenues to offset federal fund deficits.
Specifically, the agencies recorded federal fund revenues totaling approximately
$6.3 million to cover expenditures even though the agencies could not document
that these funds would be received. To the extent these funds are not received,
general funds will likely be required to eliminate the deficits resulting from these
transactions. Similar issues were noted for these two agencies in our fiscal year
2014 closeout review.
Expenditure Transactions
One State agency inappropriately recorded encumbrances totaling $9.7 million at
fiscal year-end to avoid cancelling unspent general fund appropriations.
Special Funds
One State agency could not adequately demonstrate that it was entitled to retain
all special funds in one account which totaled $5.4 million at fiscal year-end
rather than reverting the funds to the General Fund.
Other Liabilities
Five state agencies reported a total of $60.4 million in unprovided for payables or
other liabilities as of June 30, 2015. For example, two agencies, which both had
similar issues in our fiscal year 2014 closeout report, may require general funds
totaling $42.6 million. One of these agencies has an unfunded federal liability of
approximately $30.7 million attributable to the disallowance of certain claims.
The other agency had unprovided for general fund payables of $11.9 million (that
is, accounts payable for which there was a lack of available appropriation).
According to an opinion of the Attorney General, unprovided for payables are not
a violation of State law if the General Assembly enacts a budget bill for the
subsequent year containing an appropriation that can be used to fund these
expenditures.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
The recovery of recorded federal fund revenues totaling approximately $6.3
million is uncertain.
Analysis
The Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) and the Department of Aging
(DOA) could not substantiate their ability to collect revenues of approximately
$3.4 million and $2.9 million, respectively, as of June 30, 2015. If these agencies
are unable to recover these funds, general funds may be needed to eliminate the
resulting deficits.
DVA
DVA could not provide any documentation supporting federal fund revenues
totaling approximately $1.0 million would be received. This federal fund revenue
was recorded at year end to eliminate deficit balances. According to the
Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD), these deficits
resulted from federal fund expenditures incurred during prior years. This issue
has been commented upon in our four preceding budgetary closeout reports.
Furthermore, DVA has recorded federal fund revenue to cover expenditures
related to the burial of veterans. However, DVA has experienced significant
delays in being reimbursed by the federal government for payments related to
these burials. Because of the length of the reimbursement delays, we question
whether all of the amounts outstanding will be received. As of January 11, 2016,
DVA had not been reimbursed approximately $830,000 for fiscal year 2014
burials and $1.57 million for fiscal year 2015. According to DVA management, it
is in the process of working with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs to
improve the reimbursement process.
DOA
DOA recorded federal fund revenue transactions of approximately $2.9 million at
June 30, 2015. These revenue transactions related to federal fund expenditures
for the Medicaid Waiver grant that were incurred during fiscal year 2015 and
prior years. However, as of January 12, 2016 requests for reimbursement of these
expenditures had not been prepared. This issue has been commented upon in our
three preceding budgetary closeout reports.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2
Unexpended general fund appropriations totaling approximately $9.7 million
were not cancelled at fiscal year-end.
Analysis
The Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) inappropriately recorded
encumbrances to avoid cancelling unspent general fund appropriations totaling
approximately $9.7 million. This practice violated the yearly closing instructions
of the Comptroller of Maryland - General Accounting Division (GAD) since the
encumbrances did not represent actual fiscal year-end commitments by the State
for goods and services and consequently would not qualify as valid
encumbrances. As of June 30, 2015, DJS did not have any obligations, such as
approved contracts, to support the encumbrance of these appropriations.
Consequently, the encumbrances should not have been recorded and the related
appropriations should have been cancelled so that the funds could revert to the
General Fund.
Special Funds
Finding 3
One agency did not maintain adequate records to justify retaining $5.4
million in special funds.
Analysis
The Maryland Department of State Police (DSP) retained special funds totaling
$5.4 million related to field operations without maintaining adequate records to
document the legal authority to retain the funds. Under this appropriation, DSP
accounted for billed external services provided under several of its programs
including Automotive Safety Enforcement Division, Commercial Vehicle
Enforcement Division, Reimbursable Overtime, John F. Kennedy Memorial
Highway, Resident Trooper, and Speed Camera Monitoring. Our fiscal
compliance audit report dated November 23, 2015, disclosed DSP did not account
for financial activity for each of these programs separately. As a result, the
specific fund balances for each of these programs were unavailable and, we were
unable to determine if specific legal justification existed for DSP to retain all of
the special funds remaining at fiscal year-end rather than reverting the funds to
the General Fund.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Other Liabilities
Finding 4
Five agencies reported a total of $60.4 million in unprovided for payables or
other liabilities as of June 30, 2015.
Analysis
Five agencies had a total of $60.4 million in unprovided for payables or other
liabilities as of June 30, 2015 (see Exhibit 2). The expenditures related to these
liabilities may have to be funded with subsequent year appropriations (or through
a deficiency appropriation). For example, one agency reported a federal liability
of approximately $30.7 million attributable to the disallowance of certain claims
while another agency reported unprovided for general fund payables of $11.9
million (that is, accounts payable for which there was a lack of available
appropriation). According to an opinion of the Attorney General, unprovided for
payables are not a violation of State law if the General Assembly enacts a budget
bill for the subsequent year containing an appropriation that can be used to fund
these expenditures.
DHMH
The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) has a liability to the
federal government of approximately $34.1 million for disallowed claims related
to Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) residential add-on
services. During the closeout process, DDA recorded expenditures of $3.4
million to repay a portion of the disallowed claims using general funds. Funding
sources for the remaining liability of $30.7 have not been identified. DHMH
reported the potential liability to GAD and, GAD recorded a decrease to the
General Fund in the State’s fiscal year 2015 Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report to recognize these disallowances. The claims were disallowed by the
federal Department of Health and Human Services – Office of the Inspector
General in its June 2015 audit report which recommended that DDA refund the
overbilled amount to the federal government. DDA is disputing the disallowed
claims. Disallowed federal fund claims were also commented upon in our
preceding budgetary closeout report.
MSDE
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) has a liability in fiscal
year 2015 to local education agencies of approximately $11.9 million for
nonpublic placements in its Students with Disabilities – Aid to Education
program. Specifically, MSDE fiscal year 2015 general fund expenditures for
nonpublic placements in its Students with Disabilities – Aid to Education program
totaled $123.2 million while the related appropriation was only $110.9 million,
12

--- Page 15 ---
resulting in a deficit of $12.3 million. MSDE was able to reduce this deficit to
$11.9 million using $400,000 in excess funds provided in a fiscal year 2015
deficiency appropriation totaling $10.8 million related to excess fiscal year 2014
expenditures. MSDE reported the liability to GAD and, GAD recorded a decrease
to the General Fund in the State’s fiscal year 2015 Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report to recognize this deficit. A similar situation regarding unfunded
liabilities in this program was commented on in our preceding budgetary closeout
report.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2015 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Finding
Agency Finding Description
Number
1* Recovery of $3.4 million in recorded federal
Department of Veterans
fund revenues is uncertain
Affairs
1* $2.9 million in federal fund revenues were
Department of Aging recorded even though related federal funds
may not be available
Department of Juvenile 2 Unexpended general fund appropriations
Services totaling $9.7 million were not cancelled at
fiscal year-end
3 Adequate special funds records were not
Maryland Department of
maintained to justify retention of funds
State Police
totaling $5.4 million at fiscal year-end
4* A federal liability of approximately $30.7
Department of Health and
million may have to be funded with State
Mental Hygiene
general funds
Maryland State 4* Unprovided for general fund payables of
Department of Education $11.9 million existed
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
14

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of June 30, 2015 Unprovided for General Fund Payables
and Other Liabilities Reported to the General Accounting
Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Unprovided for Payables /
Other Liabilities
As of June 30, 2015
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene $30,723,848
Maryland State Department of Education 12,410,913
Maryland Higher Education Commission 6,791,494
Department of State Police 5,574,944
Office of the Public Defender 4,894,813
Total $60,396,012
15

--- Page 18 ---
A UDIT T EAM
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Managers
James M. Fowler
Terry S. Gibson, CFE
John F. Nogel, CPA, CIA, CFE
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditors
Jaime A. DeWitt, CPA
Charles H. Hinds, IV
Joshua N. Naylor
James J. Podhorniak
Andrea G. Lynch Pyon, CFE
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors