Title: Baltimore County Public Schools
Date: 07/02/2015
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d34cc9d72404c1509f6
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:03:56.271698
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Baltimore County Public Schools
July 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud,
waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government resources.
Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously by
a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud Hotline, c/o Office
of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website:
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Federal Funds 9
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Finding 1 – BCPS Did Not Adequately Separate User Duties on Its 11
Automated School Procurement System
Finding 2 – BCPS Did Not Prepare Written Determinations That It 11
Was in BCPS’ Best Interest to Participate in Intergovernmental
Cooperative Purchasing Agreements
Finding 3 – BCPS’ Procurement Policies Did Not Require 13
Competitive Procurements for Service Contracts
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 4 – Independent Reviews of Certain Payroll and Personnel 14
Transactions Processed Were Lacking
Inventory Control and Accountability
* Finding 5 – Equipment Policies, Controls, and Record Keeping 15
Were Not Adequate
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
Finding 6 – BCPS’ Network Was Not Adequately Secured 17
Finding 7 – Workstations and Servers Were Not Sufficiently 19
Protected From Malware
* Finding 8 – Controls Over BCPS’ Network Domain Accounts, 20
Passwords, and Administrative Access Were Not Sufficient
Finding 9 – Controls Over the Student Information and 21
Financial Databases Were Inadequate
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 10 – BCPS is Paying a Higher Costs per Square Foot for 22
Roof Replacements Compared to Other Local School Systems,
and Could Not Adequately Justify the Rationale for Its Practice
of Using the Same Roofing Contractor for a Number of Years
Transportation Services
 Finding 11 – BCPS Was Not Using Its Automated Routing Software 26
to Develop More Efficient Routes
Food Services 27
School Board Oversight 28
Other Financial Controls
Finding 12 – BCPS Did Not Ensure the Reasonableness of Payments 29
for Employee and Retiree Health Care Costs
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 31
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Baltimore County Public Schools (BCPS)
July 2015
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
BCPS ranks 3rd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. In fiscal year 2014 BCPS had a total full-time regular and special
education pupil population of 108,191 at its 160 schools. BCPS’ operating
and capital expenditures totaled $1.55 billion during that year.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of BCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated October 15, 2008. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for BCPS to improve internal controls, to adopt more cost
effective processes, and to enhance its policies.
BCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability
BCPS needs to improve internal controls in several financial areas. For
example, we noted that BCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that
critical personnel and payroll transactions processed were proper. BCPS also
needs to restrict user capabilities to record critical transactions on its
automated procurement and accounts payable system. In addition, BCPS
needs to implement adequate security measures and monitoring procedures
to protect its network and related critical devices from security risks. For
example, account and password controls to protect critical systems were not
sufficient and firewall rules allowed numerous insecure and unnecessary
connections to critical devices.
BCPS needs to verify the propriety of payments to contractors for healthcare
services. The Baltimore County government administers self-insured
employee medical benefits for BCPS. However, BCPS does not verify the
reasonableness of the amounts paid for employee healthcare. BCPS
expenditures for employee healthcare totaled approximately $125 million
during fiscal year 2014.
BCPS Should Take Certain Steps to Assure Cost Effectiveness
BCPS did not comply with a State law that requires the preparation of written
determinations that it was in BCPS’ best interest to participate in an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA). Further, BCPS
routinely used a vendor from a purchasing consortium, under an ICPA, to
replace school roofs; however, BCPS did not periodically assess the cost
benefit of this practice. OLA’s analysis, including comparisons with other local
5

--- Page 8 ---
public school systems, indicates that BCPS could be paying significantly more
than necessary because of the exclusive use of this contractor for the
replacement of school roofs. Between July 1, 2010 and December 10, 2013,
BCPS paid approximately $31.4 million to the contractor obtained through the
purchasing cooperative for roofing services.
Also, BCPS was not using its automated bus routing software, purchased in
2004, to assist in planning efficient bus routes. We also found ridership on
certain elementary and middle school bus routes selected for review was
significantly lower than bus capacity.
BCPS Needs to Establish Certain Comprehensive Policies and Practices
BCPS needs to develop formal policies pertaining to the competitive
procurement of service contracts above a specified amount, and
recordkeeping and physical inventory requirements for certain equipment.
We also noted that BCPS awarded two service contracts totaling $1.25 million
without competitive procurements.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Baltimore County Public Schools (BCPS)
ranks 3rd in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2014 total full-time student population was 108,191
students. BCPS has 160 schools, consisting of 104 elementary schools, 27
middle schools, 24 high schools, 4 special education schools, 1 charter
school, and 11 centers where students are only enrolled on a short-term
basis.
According to BCPS’ audited financial statements, expenditures totaled $1.55
billion in fiscal year 2014. The largest expenditure category was salaries and
wages, including benefits, which accounted for 74 percent of total operating
expenditures during fiscal year 2014. According to MSDE records, as of
October 2013, BCPS had 14,281 full-time equivalent positions which
consisted of 9,195 instructional and 5,086 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
BCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of 11 voting members
appointed by the Governor and 1 non-voting student member. The State and
the Baltimore County government provide the majority of BCPS funding. In
addition, MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment
and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with BCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Baltimore County government exercises authority over BCPS,
primarily through review and approval of BCPS’ annual operating and capital
budgets.
External and Internal Audits
BCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what
is referred to as a Single Audit of BCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement and Single
Audit reports for fiscal years 2013 and 2014, and examined the related work
papers for the fiscal year 2013 audits, which were the latest work papers
available when we commenced our field work.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited BCPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit of federal grants, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain
areas, we relied on the results of the independent audits to reduce the scope
of our audit work related to certain revenues (amounts due from other
governments) and federal grant activity. In addition, we relied on the results
of the work performed by the BCPS internal auditors related to school activity
funds.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives, our
audit included a review to determine the status of 11 of the 18 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated October 15, 2008. We
determined that BCPS satisfactorily addressed 6 of these findings. The
remaining 5 findings are repeated in this report as 4 findings.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Baltimore County Public Schools (BCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Baltimore County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the BCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $1.55 billion during fiscal year 2014. In addition to these
revenue sources, schools also collect funds for various purposes, such as for
student activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not
considered school revenue, these student activity funds are accounted for
separately by each school and are reported in summary in the audited
financial statements. Although this revenue is raised through student-related
activities, BCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year
2014, school activity fund collections totaled $16.2 million and the June 30,
2014 balance was $7.3 million.
External Audits
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the BCPS financial statements and our objectives
for this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of the firm’s audit
for certain revenues, for which the auditor’s procedural reviews and testing
disclosed no material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
Internal Auditor Audits School Activity Funds
The BCPS internal auditor conducts audits of school activity funds. The
internal auditor’s review and testing of the school activity funds at BCPS
schools identified some control weaknesses at certain schools that were
addressed by school management. The internal auditor’s reports we reviewed
disclosed that internal control weaknesses identified were not prevalent. The
internal auditor audits all schools’ activity funds on a rotating basis and
reports its findings to the school principals and central administrative staff,
and are summarized and provided to the Board’s Audit Committee.
Federal Funds
Background
BCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
9

--- Page 12 ---
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2014 expenditures of federal
award funds totaled $88.7 million.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audits of BCPS federal grants for fiscal years 2013
and 2014 and the objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the
auditor's work and results. Besides expressing an opinion on BCPS
compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure's impact on compliance and
audited the fiscal year 2014 required Schedule of Expenditures of Federal
Awards. The related report stated that BCPS complied, in all material
respects, with the requirements applicable to its major federal programs.
With respect to internal controls over compliance with, and the operation of,
major federal programs, the auditor did not identify any deficiencies in
internal control that were considered to be material weaknesses.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to BCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled $226 million
during fiscal year 2014. Requisitions are computer generated by the
requesting department and must be approved by supervisory personnel (such
as a respective department head). Approved requisitions are then converted
to purchase orders and approved by the Chief Financial Officer. The BCPS
procurement policy requires that certain procurements over $25,000 be
competitively bid and approved by the Board. The policy also requires
solicitation of quotes for purchases of goods and services under $25,000.
Payments are processed by the finance department through an automated
system that prints vendor checks, for the majority of disbursement
transactions, and also posts the payment to the financial records. Finally,
system-wide contracts had been entered into for certain consumable items,
such as office supplies, which staff at individual schools are authorized to
purchase without finance department approval.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 1
BCPS did not adequately separate user duties on the procurement system
used by schools to order supplies.
Analysis
BCPS did not adequately separate user duties on the automated system used
by schools for order supplies. Certain employees were assigned capabilities
that allowed them to perform incompatible functions. Our review of user
capabilities disclosed that there were 168 employees that could initiate and
approve requisitions, which in turn caused a purchase order to be
automatically issued to the vendor without independent approvals. During
fiscal year 2013, 93 of the 168 employees initiated and approved requisitions
for 10,433 items that resulted in 3,084 purchase orders totaling $1,454,411.
In addition, there were 16 employees involved in the procurement process
that had administrator access to the system. The administrator access
provided them the ability to create or modify user accounts, without
subsequent independent review of the changes, in such a way as to permit
incompatible functions that could result in the processing of unapproved
transactions. Typically, such access is restricted to a limited number of
individuals and preferably those independent of the related operational area.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement system used to order supplies for schools. Specifically, we
recommend that BCPS restrict user access capabilities to eliminate the ability
of users to perform incompatible duties, such as initiating and approving the
same procurement transactions, and limit administrator access rights to
those employees requiring such access.
Finding 2
BCPS did not prepare written determinations that it was in BCPS’ best interest
to participate in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Analysis
BCPS did not prepare a written determination of the benefits of using an
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement (ICPA) as required by
State law. This law, which legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly
advised us is applicable to local education agencies, allows the use of
cooperative purchasing arrangements only after the using entity has
determined in writing that the use of such arrangements will provide cost
11

--- Page 14 ---
benefits, promote administrative efficiencies, or promote intergovernmental
cooperation.1
 Since 2006, BCPS has procured all roof replacements from the same
contractor obtained through an ICPA without preparing the required
written determination of the benefit of using the cooperative. Between
July 1, 2010 and December 10, 2013, BCPS paid approximately $31.4
million to one contractor procured through the cooperative. (See
additional comments regarding BCPS roofing procurements in finding 10.)
 During our test of 10 contract procurements, we also noted two service
contracts totaling $1.25 million (one for training prospective principals
and one to improve school schedules) in which the stated procurement
method was "piggybacking" on other governmental entities’ contracts,
which according to the aforementioned State law are also deemed to be
ICPAs. No written determination of the benefits of using this procurement
method was prepared for either contract.
These contracts were issued by other governmental entities that allowed
other jurisdictions to use the contract terms and prices. However, we
found that BCPS did not use the contract terms and prices established by
the other government entities, but negotiated their own unique contract
terms and prices. Without the aforementioned written determination of
the ICPA’s benefits, these two procurements have the appearance of sole-
source procurements that lacked any documented basis as to why
competitive procurement methods were not used.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCPS comply with State law and ensure that a written
determination substantiating its use of an ICPA is prepared.
1Section 13-110 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, in part, defines a
intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement as a contract that is entered into by at
least one governmental entity in a manner consistent with the purposes set forth in Section
11-201 of the Article, that is available for use by the governmental entity entering the
contract and at least one additional governmental entity, and that is intended to promote
efficiency and savings that can result from intergovernmental cooperative purchasing.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Finding 3
BCPS’ procurement policies did not require competitive procurements for
certain contractual services.
Analysis
BCPS had not established a comprehensive procurement policy that requires
competitive procurement of certain services or documentation of justifications
for not using competitive procurements. The Board adopted a procurement
policy that requires the purchase of goods to be conducted in compliance with
the Annotated Code of Maryland, which requires that procurements of school
buildings, improvements, supplies, and equipment exceeding $25,000 be
competitively bid and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. Although the
policy requires price quotes be obtained for purchases of services valued at
less than $25,000, the current policy does not address the selection of
contractors for services valued at $25,000 or more (for example, to be
selected by a competitive procurement process). During fiscal year 2013,
BCPS issued purchase orders for service contracts totaling approximately
$56.1 million with related expenditures totaling approximately $49.8 million
during that year.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCPS amend its existing policies to require competitive
procurement methods to be used for all contracts for services.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the BCPS
budget. According to BCPS records, fiscal year 2014 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $1.1 billion. According to Maryland State Department of
Education reports, during the 2013 - 2014 school year BCPS had 14,281 full-
time equivalent positions, which consisted of 9,195 instructional positions
and 5,086 non-instructional positions.
BCPS uses an automated integrated human resources and payroll system to
maintain human resources information, record employee time, track leave
usage, and to process and record payroll transactions. The system
automatically generates semi-monthly time records and any adjustments are
processed by central payroll personnel. The system generates payroll checks
and direct deposit advices. Payroll processing involves both automated
processes (such as compiling leave and running edit reports) and manual
processes (such as data entry of new employee information).
13

--- Page 16 ---
Finding 4
Independent reviews of certain payroll and personnel transactions were
lacking and access to the automated system was not properly restricted.
Analysis
Independent reviews of certain personnel and payroll changes processed
were not performed and certain system users were assigned incompatible
capabilities in the automated human resources and payroll system.
 BCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that certain processed
employee personnel and payroll transactions were correct and
appropriate. For example, new employees added to the system or
changes to employee data, including salary changes, were not subject to
online approvals nor were transaction reports generated for verification to
source documentation by an independent employee.
 BCPS did not adequately restrict employee capabilities to perform certain
critical functions, such as changing employee salary and direct deposit
information. Eleven employees within the Office of Payroll had been
assigned access to personnel and payroll menus in the automated system
that provided them with virtually complete control over the payroll process.
Although these employees needed access to certain components of the
menus to perform their jobs, BCPS had not developed a process to restrict
access to only those components necessary to perform specific job duties.
As a result of the current system’s inability to limit access to certain
functions within menus, these employees could perform potentially
incompatible functions such as adding a new employee and processing
the related payroll. Furthermore, these eleven employees had the ability
to change employee address and bank account information in the
automated system for direct deposit payees as well as the ability to
independently process payroll. Although our tests did not identify any
inappropriate transactions, unnecessary employee access to the system
could be used to process unauthorized payroll payments that would not be
readily detected. A similar condition was noted during our prior audit.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCPS
a. perform a documented independent review of personnel and payroll
transactions,
b. eliminate the capability of system users to perform incompatible
functions, and
c. limit assignments of critical system functions to those employees who
require such capabilities to perform their job duties (repeat).
14

--- Page 17 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to the BCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2014, the
undepreciated value of its equipment was $64.5 million. BCPS uses a
centralized fixed asset inventory system to track capital equipment (that is,
items with a cost of $5,000 and greater). Equipment at BCPS included
furniture and equipment items, such as desks, computers, audio and video
items, and various other items. Certain individuals were responsible for the
equipment at each location (that is, each school or administrative office). In
addition, the individual schools and offices maintain separate inventory
records for sensitive equipment (defined as non-capital equipment with a unit
cost between $500 and $5,000, with a useful life greater than one year,
which are transportable, easily concealable, or prone to theft). BCPS also
maintains a separate database of certain computer hardware assigned to
schools.
Finding 5
Policies, controls, and record keeping over equipment were not adequate.
Analysis
BCPS lacked sufficient policies and procedures to govern the accountability
and control of its equipment, including non-capitalized equipment items that
are prone to theft, such as digital cameras and other electronic equipment.
 BCPS’ equipment policy did not require that all computers (desktop and
laptop computers) and other sensitive items susceptible to theft (such as,
netbooks, tablets, cameras, audio visual equipment) be added to the
centralized equipment records and counted during periodic physical
inventories. A similar condition was noted during our prior audit. Although
BCPS required the schools or offices to establish proper accountability
over such items in their custody, BCPS did not ensure that those locations
were properly maintaining the related equipment records or conducting
physical inventories.
At three schools visited we were unable to locate 7 of 40 sensitive items
selected from the schools’ records (such as printers and cameras). In
addition, we noted that the inventory records did not include the minimum
information required by the BCPS’ Sensitive Equipment Tracking
Procedures. Those procedures require the school or office in custody of
sensitive equipment to maintain inventory records that, at a minimum,
15

--- Page 18 ---
include a description of the item, ID or serial number, date purchased,
cost, employee custodian, and date of last physical inventory.
Furthermore, we were advised by the three schools that physical
inventories were only taken for items purchased with federal grant monies
although the procedures also require an annual physical inventory of
sensitive items purchased with other funds.
 BCPS’ procedures were inadequate for its annual physical inventory of
capital equipment items with a value of $5,000 or greater. Specifically,
the employees designated as custodians responsible for maintaining the
inventory records of capital equipment items (usually school principals or
office managers) were also responsible for ensuring the completion of the
related annual physical inventories. BCPS also has an independent party
perform a physical inventory once every 5 or 10 years, depending on the
location to be inventoried. However, BCPS had not established a policy to
verify the accuracy of the inventory counts reported by either the
aforementioned employees or the independent party. A similar condition
was noted during our prior audit.
 Disposals were frequently not approved by supervisory personnel.
Specifically, our test of 12 disposals with a cost basis of $358,958
disclosed that none of the disposals were approved by supervisory
personnel. The only support was a physical inventory form that indicated
that the item was no longer on hand.
Inadequate accountability and controls over equipment could result in
unnecessary additional cost to replace missing property. In its response to
our prior audit, BCPS agreed with the need to implement a system to inventory
and track all computer equipment and sensitive items throughout the system
and that it would develop appropriate systems and procedures to accomplish
those objectives.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCPS
a. ensure that all locations with custody of sensitive equipment properly
maintain equipment records and perform annual physical inventories in
accordance with written procedures or require that such items be
recorded in the centralized equipment records and be counted during
physical inventories of capital equipment (repeat);
b. establish a policy to verify the accuracy of the completed capital
equipment inventory counts (repeat); and
c. ensure that equipment disposals are approved by supervisory personnel
prior to deleting items from the capital equipment inventory records.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Information Technology
Background:
The BCPS Department of Information Technology (DoIT) maintains and
administers the BCPS computer network, computer operations, and certain
information systems applications. BCPS operates a wide area network, with
Internet connectivity, which connects the individual schools’ local networks to
the computer resources located at the BCPS data center and the Baltimore
County Government network. DoIT supports instructional software/web-
services, the student information system, the financial management system,
e-mail, data backup, technology management tools, and application hosting.
Finding 6
The BCPS computer network was not adequately secured.
Analysis
The BCPS computer network was not adequately secured.
 Firewall rules allowed numerous insecure and unnecessary connections to
critical network devices. For example, firewall rules were not configured to
adequately secure connections into the BCPS network from the Internet.
In addition, the entire Baltimore County Government network had access,
at the network level, to all internal BCPS network resources via all ports.
Such access was excessive and should have been limited to specific
source and destination IP addresses over select ports. Best practices
prescribed by the State of Maryland Department of Information
Technology’s Information Security Policy requires that information systems
shall be configured to monitor and control communications at the external
boundaries of the information systems and at key internal boundaries
within the systems.
 Fourteen publicly accessible servers were located in the BCPS internal
network rather than isolating these servers in a separate protected
network zone. These 14 servers, if compromised, could expose the
internal network to attack from external sources. Recommended security
procedures from the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy, include placing publicly
accessible servers in an external protected zone to protect those servers,
as well as the entity’s internal network.
17

--- Page 20 ---
 BCPS did not use any form of intrusion detection prevention system (IDPS)
software to protect its network. Specifically, BCPS did not use a network
based IDPS to protect its entire network from external unencrypted traffic
and did not use a host-based intrusion prevention system (HIPS) on its
servers that processed encrypted traffic. A properly configured network-
based IDPS, supplemented by HIPS can aid significantly in the
detection/prevention of and response to potential network security
breaches and attacks. Also, best practices identified in the
aforementioned Information Security Policy require protection against
malicious code and attacks by using IDPS to monitor system events,
detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of information systems
and/or confidential information.
 BCPS was in the process of implementing a new wireless network
infrastructure that segmented guest users and required regular users to
authenticate before obtaining network access. However, our testing
disclosed that as of April 2014 wireless access in 106 schools and 6
administrative offices still allowed unfiltered, unauthenticated and
unencrypted access to the entire BCPS internal network by any wireless
user (including guests).
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCPS
a. configure its firewall rules to adequately secure connections from un-
trusted third parties (including the Internet and Baltimore County
Government);
b. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate neutral network zone
to limit security exposures to the internal network segment;
c. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS and HIPS coverage should be best applied to
its network and implement this coverage; and
d. complete the wireless network conversion project to properly segment all
guest wireless users and require authentication and encryption for all
wireless users accessing internal resources.
18

--- Page 21 ---
Finding 7
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
Analysis
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
 Eight of 10 workstations tested were improperly configured with users
having administrator rights. Administrator rights should be provided to
network administrators only, since these rights are the highest permission
level that can be granted to users and allow users to install software and
change configuration settings. As a result, if these workstations were
infected with malware, the malware would run with administrative rights
and expose these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights. In addition, as
a result of the administrator rights assigned, these 8 users had the ability
to disable the malware protection software on their workstations.
 Workstations tested had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security-related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products
frequently provide security-related software patches to address these
vulnerabilities, BCPS had not updated its workstations for these patches.
For example, of 10 workstations tested for 2 of these software products
we noted that all 10 workstations were running older software versions.
 The malware protection software used to protect BCPS workstations was
not properly configured to limit users’ capabilities. Specifically, users of all
10 workstations tested could disable malware protection software
features that would render the software unable to protect against malware
threats. In addition, 4 of 10 workstations and 2 of 3 servers tested had
not been updated with either the current malware protection software or
the related signatures.
The aforementioned Information Security Policy identifies best practices
which provide that security settings of information technology products should
be configured to the most restrictive mode consistent with operational
requirements and protect against malicious code by implementing protections
that, to the extent possible, include a capability for automatic updates.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCPS
a. ensure that administrative privileges on workstations are restricted to
network administrators,
19

--- Page 22 ---
b. keep its computers up-to-date for all critical security related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software,
c. configure its malware protection software so that users cannot disable the
settings which allow users to override and modify default security controls
established by management, and
d. ensure that the current versions of malware protection software and
related signatures are installed and running properly on all workstations
and servers.
Finding 8
Controls over BCPS’ network domain accounts, passwords, and administrative
access were not sufficient.
Analysis
Controls over BCPS’ network domain accounts, passwords, and administrative
access were not sufficient.
 Domain account and password controls were not in compliance with the
best practices identified in the aforementioned Information Security
Policy. Specifically, domain password length, age, complexity, history, and
account lockout were not enforced. These exception conditions weaken
the security over the entire BCPS network including all BCPS systems
(such as the financial management system) that use the domain’s active
directory system for authentication. Similar conditions were commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
 Administrative access to the BCPS network was excessive. Specifically, we
noted that 46 accounts, assigned to 44 unique users, were improperly
included in powerful domain groups. For example, 3 accounts were
classified as domain administrators even though the assigned users did
not need the related access. Accounts that are domain administrators are
the most powerful and privileged accounts in the system. As a result of
this condition, these accounts had administrative control over all BCPS
domain resources and could make unauthorized modifications to critical
data without detection.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCPS
a. implement strong controls over domain accounts and passwords in
accordance with best practices identified in the aforementioned
Information Security Policy (repeat), and
20

--- Page 23 ---
b. ensure that membership in powerful domain groups only be assigned to
users requiring such privileges.
Finding 9
Controls over the student information and financial management databases
were inadequate.
Analysis
Controls over the student information and financial management databases
were inadequate.
 A default administrative database account unnecessarily had full access
to the student information and financial management databases. Since
this account includes local server administrators by default, they, and
anyone able to achieve local administrator privileges, would automatically
have full administrative access to these databases and could perform
unauthorized modifications to critical data. For example, as a result of
these conditions, we noted that 36 accounts (assigned to 16 unique
individuals) had full administrative access to the student information
database even though those users did not need such access to perform
their duties.
 Fourteen accounts had been granted excessive access and privileges on
the student information database and/or server. For example, users of
five accounts had been improperly given the ability to perform all
configuration and maintenance activities (including deletion) on this
database even though these users did not need such access to perform
their duties.
 Security event monitoring over the student information and financial
management databases was not sufficient. For example, although a
number of security events were logged, BCPS was unable to provide
documentation that these logs were reviewed. In addition, audit events
and direct changes to several critical tables were not logged for
subsequent review.
Best practices identified in the aforementioned Information Security Policy,
recommend that access to information be strictly controlled, audited, and that
it supports the concepts of "least possible privileges" and "need-to-know." In
addition, this Policy states that procedures must be developed to routinely
review audit records for indications of unusual activity and report findings to
appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BCPS
a. limit access to critical databases to personnel whose job duties require
such access;
b. limit the assignment of access and privileges to the student information
database and server to only those accounts requiring such access and
privileges; and
c. log all critical audit events and direct changes to critical tables, review
these logs on a regular basis with appropriate investigation of unusual
activity, document these reviews, and retain the documentation for
subsequent verification.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
BCPS employs a staff of approximately 1,171 employees to maintain its 171
facilities (including schools and other administrative and support offices).
According to the fiscal year 2015 Capital Improvement Plan, necessary
construction, major renovations, and systemic improvements to BCPS
facilities over the next six years were estimated to cost $819 million.
Finding 10
BCPS is paying a significantly higher cost per square foot for roof
replacements compared to other local school systems, and could not
adequately justify the rationale for its practice of using the same roofing
contractor for a number of years.
Analysis
Our audit disclosed that BCPS is paying significantly more for roof
replacements, compared to other Maryland public school systems, through its
exclusive use of one contractor. Since 2006, BCPS has been using the same
contractor obtained through an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement for all of its roofing requirements. Specifically, BCPS has used a
Pennsylvania-based cooperative purchasing program (Program) that is open
to K-12 schools, higher education institutions, local government and other
non-profit organizations. According to the Program’s website, it competitively
procures contracts for commodities and services, with awards going to the
"lowest responsive responsible bidder," and the contracts are approved by the
board of directors of its parent agency (a collective of certain schools located
in central Pennsylvania). All cooperative members may purchase the
available goods and services at the prices provided for in the related
contracts. We were advised by a Program representative that there is no
22

--- Page 25 ---
direct membership fee to Program members, such as BCPS. Instead, the
Program’s vendors pay the administrative costs of the Program and our review
of vendor proposals found that they may pass these costs onto the members.
 BCPS did not evaluate the roofing contractors that were available through
the Program of which BCPS was a member to determine which contractor
provided the best value. In August 2012 the Program placed its roofing
contract out for bid and in December 2012 awarded contracts to two
contractors effective March 2013. One contractor was the incumbent,
and previously the Program’s sole roofing contractor and the other was a
new contractor. We selected roofing contracts for two schools that were
awarded by BCPS after the second contractor was added by the Program
for review. We found that in November 2013 BCPS awarded roofing
contracts for two schools to the contractor that had held the cooperative’s
contract for several years and who BCPS had exclusively used since 2006
and that BCPS was unaware that an additional vendor had been added by
the Program. We compared both contractors’ published rates and
because of differences between the contractors’ per unit cost rates for the
same roof design, we determined that the new contractor’s costs for each
project would have been lower. Specifically, one roof would have cost
$722,680 less ($1,818,999 vs. $1,096,319) and the other roof would
have cost $496,978 less ($1,299,470 vs. $802,492). The cost per
square foot was $28.92 and $25.68, respectively, for the higher priced
alternatives BCPS used compared to $17.43 and $15.86, respectively, for
the lower priced alternatives.
 Our analysis of nine BCPS roofing projects completed from August 2011
through December 2013 disclosed that the average cost of their projects
was $22.76 per square foot whereas the largest school system in the
state replaced two roofs during the summer of 2013 using competitive
procurements for an average cost of $13.70 per square foot (a difference
of $9.06 per square foot). Another school system received bids for a roof
replacement in April 2014 and the winning bidder’s price was $14.01 per
square foot. BCPS paid this same Program vendor approximately $31.4
million to replace 1.45 million square feet of roofing during the period
from July 2010 through November 2013. We estimate that the amount
paid was $11 million greater than the recent more expensive square foot
costs of approximately $14 per square foot paid by one of the two
aforementioned school systems.
We acknowledge that each roofing project is unique and structural
differences and quality specifications affect the ultimate costs incurred.
BCPS attributes part of the cost differential to the inclusion of annual
23

--- Page 26 ---
inspection services in BPCS contracts, which are not included in other
school system roofing contracts. We question whether the cost of annual
inspections would account for an appreciable increase in cost. Further,
BCPS cited the frequent use of a cold asphalt application, which is a more
expensive process that costs an additional $3.00 -$3.50 per square foot.
The cold asphalt application process is considered advantageous because
it results in fewer odors and does not disrupt operations when schools are
in session. However, we noted that two of the nine BCPS roof projects
reviewed did not use the cold asphalt application process, but still cost
$21.30 per square foot.
In December 2013, a report was issued by a consultant hired by BCPS to
perform a roofing study. The purpose of the study, as indicated in the report,
was to perform an investigation and comparison for BCPS between the
traditional "design, bid and award, construct" process utilized by BCPS prior to
2006 (and currently used by other Maryland public school systems) for roofing
replacement projects, to the current methodology of procurement of design
and construction through the purchasing cooperative Program that BCPS has
been using since 2006. The consultant concluded that use of the Program "to
purchase roofing replacements is a sound decision and provides BCPS with
the best long term solution and minimizes their involvement in management
and maintenance of the roofing well over a 20 year period." The consultant’s
report provided a comparison of roofing costs between the second through
ninth largest Maryland school systems and BCPS, which is the third largest
system. However, the comparison, without explanation, did not include data
for the largest Maryland school system. Furthermore, the cost per square foot
reported for the other Maryland school systems listed in the report for
comparative purposes did not appear to be obtained from those systems, as
we could not corroborate the costs for the three systems we contacted. For
these reasons, we question if the consultant’s report justifies the continued
use of the same vendor under the Program.
Subsequent to our audit field work, BCPS used the "design, bid and award,
construct" process to obtain a vendor for a school roof replacement project.
We were advised that BCPS bid this project out instead of using the
purchasing cooperative Program to assess which method was more cost
effective. BCPS believes the result of this bid process provides grounds to
conclude that its practice of using the Program vendor is appropriate and,
therefore, disagrees with our conclusion that its roofing replacement costs
may be excessive. However, we believe BCPS' conclusion cannot be reliably
supported.
24

--- Page 27 ---
BCPS received six bids for the project that were based on design
specifications developed by an architect hired by BCPS. The lowest bid of
$1,803,350 was received from the same purchasing cooperative Program
vendor that BCPS had used since 2006. During this process, BCPS also
obtained a proposal for the project from the same Program vendor based on
its own design specifications using the Program’s pricing method. That
proposal totaled $1,672,447, which was less than the same vendor’s
competitive procurement bid, thus ostensibly substantiating BCPS’
conclusion.
When questioned, however, BCPS acknowledged that different bid
specifications were used for the two proposals from the Program vendor.
Furthermore, we consulted a State agency with expertise in managing building
construction and they advised us that the specifications between the
competitively bid project and the project specified by the Program vendor did
not appear to be comparable. For example, the specifications developed by
the BPCS hired architect required five inches of insulation material whereas
the specifications developed by the Program vendor under its Program
proposal appear to require only three inches of insulation. We were advised
by staff at the aforementioned state agency that the additional layer of
insulation added increased costs to the competitively bid project not only for
the insulation material itself, but also resulted in significant cost increases for
the additional labor and materials to permanently raise various mechanical
components and duct work in order to accommodate the increased height of
the additional insulation.
Also, the architect hired by BCPS to develop the design for this roofing
project’s invitation for bids had used this same roofing vendor (from the
Program) to develop certain technical specifications for the project, perhaps
giving this roofing vendor an unfair advantage for the competitive bid process.
Although not applicable to BCPS and the other public school systems, State
law prohibits a person or firm who assisted in drafting specifications for a
proposed project for a State agency from bidding on or assisting others in
bidding on that project.2
According to the technical advice we received from the aforementioned state
agency, a thorough independent technical evaluation of multiple roofing
projects at BCPS needs to be performed to determine whether BCPS’ use of
the purchasing cooperative Program is cost efficient for the products and
services being delivered by the Program’s vendor.
2State Finance and Procurement Article, §5-508.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BCPS
a. obtain a thorough independent evaluation of the of the cost effectiveness
of using the purchasing cooperative program’s roofing vendors, and if
those vendors continue to be used, select the vendor whose proposal
provides the best value; and
b. adopt a policy similar to the cited State law prohibiting those involved with
developing project specifications from bidding on those projects.
Transportation Services
Background
BCPS had approximately 70,000 students eligible to receive student
transportation services during fiscal year 2014. These students were
transported 14.8 million route miles during the 2013-2014 school year using
781 system-owned buses and 84 contractor-owned buses. The Office of
Transportation (OT) is responsible for providing transportation service to
schools and school related activities, determining student transportation
eligibility, and establishing school bus stops for each school. The OT has
established five geographic service areas in the County. According to MSDE
records, fiscal year 2014 transportation costs totaled $60.3 million, with $10
million (17 percent) representing payments for contracted bus services.
Payments to bus contractors consist of a flat rate per mile for the route.
Finding 11
BCPS was not fully using its automated routing software to develop more
efficient routes.
Analysis
Routing software BCPS purchased during fiscal year 2004 has yet to be fully
implemented. Instead, the BCPS OT uses a manual routing process which
involves the flow of paper documents between schools, area bus depots, and
the BCPS business office. This process also involves either an assistant
principal at each school or a routing assistant in one of the five geographic
areas to manually determine the closest bus stop for each eligible rider.3
The lack of a system-wide route analysis could have a potentially negative
impact on route efficiency. For example, our review of fiscal year 2014 bus
manifests (documents that record student ridership) for 100 buses disclosed
3At the time of the audit, one of the five areas was in the process of implementing the
automated routing software.
26

--- Page 29 ---
that elementary school buses operated at an average of 63 percent of the
BCPS stated capacity and middle/high school buses operated at an average
of 68 percent of the BCPS stated capacity4.
The use of routing software is a recognized best practice that can reduce the
time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce student ride times, help ensure
that routes better utilize existing bus capacity, and minimize the number of
buses needed to transport students.
A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that BCPS use its automated routing software to develop
more efficient bus routes on a system-wide basis (repeat).
Food Services
Background
BCPS has a cooking cafeteria at 50 of its schools, where food is prepared for
distribution to other schools. Food and related supplies are received and
stored in each school. In fiscal year 2014, BCPS had 561 food service
employees (comprised of 491 cafeteria positions and 70 administrative
positions). According to the fiscal year 2014 audited financial statements,
food service operation revenues exceeded food service operation
expenditures by approximately $1.6 million. Additionally, BCPS’ fiscal year
2013 cost per meal was the second lowest among the five largest Maryland
public school systems.
Cash Handling Procedures for Cafeteria Sales Were Established
BCPS has implemented procedures and controls designed to ensure that
cafeteria receipts were properly accounted for, processed, and deposited.
BCPS has developed a Cash Handling Procedures manual to establish a
uniform policy for the handling of all cafeteria sales. The Procedures outline
responsibilities including, collection, reporting, and deposit practices.
Applicable food service employees must sign a signature page to
acknowledge reading the procedures, and periodically, staff from the Division
of Business Services conducts unannounced audits to test for compliance by
cafeteria staff with the procedures.
4BCPS’ school bus capacities are lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ
depending on the type of school. For example, the capacity for secondary (high school and
middle school) and elementary school routes are 45 and 55 students, respectively, based on
64-passenger buses (manufacturer stated capacity).
27

--- Page 30 ---
School Board Oversight
BCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Current Requirements of State
Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State Law
and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure and
was approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of this policy are
applicable to Board members as well as all BCPS employees. BCPS
established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members who are appointed by
the Board of Education. The Panel acts as an advisory body to the Board and
interprets the ethics code and provides advisory opinions. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendents, and
a number of other administrators (such as school principals and department
heads) by April 30th of each year. Our test of the records for employees
required to submit financial disclosure forms for calendar year 2013,
disclosed that forms were generally submitted as required.
BCPS Has an Operational Fraud Hotline
In 2012, BCPS implemented a confidential fraud hotline to enable employees
and others to confidentially report operational concerns and suspected fraud,
waste, and mismanagement. The hotline is maintained by an independent
third party that notifies the BCPS internal audit department of the allegations.
The BCPS Internal Auditor reviews the allegations and makes a determination
if the investigation should be performed by the internal audit department, the
department to which the allegation relates, or the BCPS legal department. On
a monthly basis, the Internal Auditor reports to the Superintendent and the
Board on the status of allegations.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
BCPS participates in the Baltimore County government self-insurance program
for employee and retiree health insurance. BCPS pays premiums to the
County for its share of current costs based on prior years’ claims and
anticipated enrollment. The County serves as administrator of the plan and
estimates outstanding claims and required reserves. BCPS healthcare
expenditures totaled approximately $125 million during fiscal year 2014.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 12
BCPS did not ensure the reasonableness of payments for certain employee
and retiree health care costs.
Analysis
BCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that the amounts paid to
Baltimore County were reasonable.
 The Baltimore County government informs BCPS each year of the amount
that it will have to pay for its share of health insurance costs. The amount
that BCPS is required to pay is included in the annual appropriation from
the County to BCPS; however, the County does not actually transfer the
funds related to health insurance. The County withholds the funds and
BCPS records a journal entry to record the funds as revenue and an
expense. BCPS does not receive any documentation to support the
calculation of the amount it is required to pay.
 BCPS does not receive any documentation regarding claims paid on behalf
of BCPS employees and retirees. Consequently, BCPS is unable to audit
the propriety of the claims paid on its behalf by the County to ensure that
the services were actually provided, were covered by the health plans, and
were appropriately priced. BCPS relies entirely on the County to
administer the plan.
Under the current arrangement, BCPS lacks assurance that the amounts that
it pays to the County for health insurance are reasonable. For example, BCPS
could possibly be overpaying for its share and be subsidizing the County’s
share. We met with a County representative and attempted to determine
what procedures and controls the County had in place to ensure the propriety
of the premium calculations and claims payments. However, we were unable
to readily obtain any information related to this issue from the County.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that BCPS establish procedures to determine the
reasonableness of the amounts paid for health insurance. Specifically, we
recommend that BCPS work with the County to
a. obtain the documentation to determine the reasonableness of the amount
allocated to health insurance costs; and
b. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and determine
the reasonableness of the claims paid by the County.
29

--- Page 32 ---
30

--- Page 33 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Baltimore County
Public Schools (BCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the BCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the BCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of BCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on BCPS dated October 15, 2008, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the BCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by BCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at BCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
31

--- Page 34 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).5
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of BCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2012 through December 31,
2013. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on the work
performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits BCPS’
financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data — including financial and operational —
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from BCPS’ automated finance management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure, inventory, and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
BCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to BCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from November 2013 to September 2014. The
BCPS response to our findings and recommendations is included as an
appendix to this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article,
Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise BCPS
regarding the results of our review of its response.
5During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
32

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 1
BCPS did not adequately separate user duties on the procurement system
used by schools to order supplies.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that BCPS strengthen its controls over the automated
procurement system used to order supplies for schools. Specifically, we
recommend that BCPS restrict user access capabilities to eliminate the ability
of users to perform incompatible duties, such as initiating and approving the
same procurement transactions, and limit administrator access rights to
those employees requiring such access.
Response 1
The 168 employees initiating and approving requisitions are primarily school
administrators. School administrators are the financial managers of their
budgets and are held to high standards of accountability. The automated
supply system is subject to random internal audits and regular review by the
Department of Fiscal Services. Additional controls will slow the distribution of
supplies to students and increase administrative costs, however, it will be
piloted for consideration. BCPS will reduce the number of purchasing
personnel with administrative rights.
Finding 2
BCPS did not prepare written determinations that it was in BCPS’ best interest
to participate in intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that BCPS comply with State law and ensure that a written
determination substantiating its use of an ICPA is prepared.
Response 2
BCPS has developed a purchasing procedure, checklist, and form for
preparing written justification when presenting intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing agreements from other government entities.
Finding 3
BCPS’ procurement policies did not require competitive procurements for
certain contractual services.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that BCPS amend its existing policies to require competitive
procurement methods to be used for all contracts for services.

--- Page 37 ---
Response 3
BCPS complies with all applicable state, federal, and local statutes. State law
is silent as to the purchase of services valued at $25,000 or more and BCPS’
Policy 3210,Purchasing Guidelines, Section VI., provides that BCPS shall have
the option to issue bids, requests for proposals, or solicit price quotations for
any requirements that do not require formal bids. BCPS’ Rule 3210,
Purchasing Guidelines, Section V., provides for the establishment of
procedures for informal bids, RFPs, and price quotations and these are
incorporated in Purchasing Procedure 3210.006.
Auditor's Comment:
Our report finding did not indicate non-compliance with State statutes by
BCPS, but questioned the lack of a policy requiring the use of a
competitive procurement process for all service contracts. A
comprehensive procurement policy requiring competitive procurements for
all types of purchases is a recognized best practice and it helps ensure
fairness and integrity in the expenditure of public funds. Other Maryland
school systems have established comprehensive policies, including
competitive procurement requirements for service contracts. BCPS’
apparent reluctance to establish a policy requiring competitive
procurement for all service contracts is perplexing given that its
procurement manual already requires it to obtain price quotes for lower
cost services (that is, services valued at less than $25,000).
Finding 4
Independent reviews of certain payroll and personnel transactions were
lacking and access to the automated system was not properly restricted.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that BCPS
a. perform a documented independent review of personnel and payroll
transactions,
Response 4a.
Internal controls are important and BCPS will continue to improve them
and reinforce the separation between personnel and payroll functions.
b. eliminate the capability of system users to perform incompatible
functions,
Response 4b.
BCPS has removed access for Payroll staff to enter grade and step salary
information for regular employees, although this has not resulted in any
known inappropriate transactions. A proposed upgrade of human
resources and payroll software will offer workflow enhancements that
should address concerns about employee’s address and direct deposit
information.

--- Page 38 ---
c. and limit assignments of critical system functions to those employees who
require such capabilities to perform their job duties (repeat).
Response 4c.
Internal controls are important and BCPS will continue to improve them
and reinforce the separation between personnel and payroll functions.
Finding 5
Policies, controls, and record keeping over equipment were not adequate.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that BCPS
a. ensure that all locations with custody of sensitive equipment properly
maintain equipment records and perform annual physical inventories in
accordance with written procedures or require that such items be
recorded in the centralized equipment records and be counted during
physical inventories of capital equipment (repeat);
Response 5a.
We agree. BCPS recently acquired the Destiny Asset Manager system and we
have developed a procedure referenced in Board Policy and Rule 3620,
Inventories, for recording sensitive equipment in this centralized inventory
system. Approximately 36,800 digital devices acquired in 2013-2015 are
being recorded in this system now and the entire inventory will be added over
the next one to two years.
b. establish a policy to verify the accuracy of the completed capital
equipment inventory counts (repeat);
Response 5b.
We agree. BCPS maintains a policy which requires periodic independent
physical inventories, and annual verifications of the fixed assets records by
the custodial school administrator or office manager. We will also work with
our Internal Audit staff to develop a process for them to test fixed assets and
sensitive equipment inventory records when they perform periodic school
audits.
and
c. ensure that equipment disposals are approved by supervisory personnel
prior to deleting items from the capital equipment inventory records.
Response 5c.
We agree. A standard form has been updated to ensure appropriate approvals
are obtained for all disposals before the item is removed from the inventory.

--- Page 39 ---
Finding 6
The BCPS computer network was not adequately secured.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that BCPS
a. configure its firewall rules to adequately secure connections from un-
trusted third parties (including the Internet and Baltimore County
Government);
Response 6a.
BCPS has removed rules from the firewall that were no longer needed. All
firewall changes now require a full review of the request, as well as the clear
definition of source/destination IP addresses and specific port numbers. This
has now become a standard practice. The BCPS firewall rules will be
reviewed on an annual basis, and documentation will be produced showing
the review and if any changes or issues were found.
b. relocate all publicly accessible servers to a separate neutral network zone
to limit security exposures to the internal network segment;
Response 6b.
BCPS has removed several servers that were accessible from the outside, and
either placed them into the demilitarized zone (DMZ), or have removed the
servers from production completely. The remaining publicly accessible
servers are being redesigned so that either they can be placed in the DMZ or
a proxy server front end will be placed into the DMZ. This work will continue
until the end of the 2016-2017 school year to ensure that all servers have
been properly moved, but the content is still accessible.
c. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how IDPS and HIPS coverage should be best applied to
its network and implement this coverage;
Response 6c.
A budget request was submitted for the FY2016 operating budget, but was
unfortunately not approved by the local funding authority. BCPS will continue
to research and focus on IDPS and HIPS implementation for critical systems,
and will implement based on budget availability.
and
d. complete the wireless network conversion project to properly segment all
guest wireless users and require authentication and encryption for all
wireless users accessing internal resources.
Response 6d.
As of June 12, 2015, 165 schools have had the new secure wireless installed,
along with multiple bus/grounds yards, and two major office complexes. The
secure wireless project will be completed by the end of December 2015, with

--- Page 40 ---
all schools, offices, and bus/grounds yards having the new secure wireless
installed.
Finding 7
Workstations and servers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that BCPS
a. ensure that administrative privileges on workstations are restricted to
network administrators,
Response 7a.
The granting of administrative privileges on workstations is currently being
reevaluated and only authorized IT support personnel are being granted local
administrative rights on workstations. This will ensure that any potential
spread of malware, etc. will be contained.
b. keep its computers up-to-date for all critical security related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software,
Response 7b.
Two key systems management software products are being fully deployed to
all BCPS schools and offices. These software products will allow for the poling
and inventory of critical/security patches, as well as antivirus/malware.
c. configure its malware protection software so that users cannot disable the
settings which allow users to override and modify default security controls
established by management,
Response 7c.
With the removal of the administrative privileges for end users, the ability to
configure and/or disable the malware protection software is being eliminated
starting with the 2015-2016 school year.
and
d. ensure that the current versions of malware protection software and
related signatures are installed and running properly on all workstations
and servers.
Response 7d.
With the full implementation of two system management software products,
malware protection software and signatures will remain up to date.

--- Page 41 ---
Finding 8
Controls over BCPS’ network domain accounts, passwords, and administrative
access were not sufficient.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that BCPS
a. implement strong controls over domain accounts and passwords in
accordance with best practices identified in the aforementioned
Information Security Policy (repeat),
Response 8a.
BCPS financial and HR users have been required to follow strong password
policies and routine changing of their passwords for the past several years.
BCPS is working on a procedures to have all users of other critical systems to
follow strong password policies and routine changing of passwords.
and
b. ensure that membership in powerful domain groups only be assigned to
users requiring such privileges.
Response 8b.
Only IT support personnel who require domain administrative rights now have
these rights. All others have been removed from the domain administrative
group, and the default administrator account in all critical systems has been
renamed and the password is changed on an annual basis. To ensure that
domain administrators’ regular user accounts are not compromised, BCPS is
creating a separate user account for each domain administrator.
Finding 9
Controls over the student information and financial management databases
were inadequate.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that BCPS
a. limit access to critical databases to personnel whose job duties require
such access;
Response 9a.
Access to critical databases has been restricted to BCPS IT personnel whose
job functions require them to have such access.
b. limit the assignment of access and privileges to the student information
database and server to only those accounts requiring such access and
privileges;
Response 9b.
BCPS concurs with this finding and has taken the necessary steps to limit the
access and privileges to the student information database and server.
and

--- Page 42 ---
c. log all critical audit events and direct changes to critical tables, review
these logs on a regular basis with appropriate investigation of unusual
activity, document these reviews, and retain the documentation for
subsequent verification.
Response 9c.
BCPS is in the process of hiring a full time IT Security Analyst who will be
working with the various critical system administrators on setting up the
necessary logging of events, and in the review and documentation of logged
events to determine appropriate response actions to be taken. Database
administrators of the critical systems are reviewing critical events in the log
monitoring of their appropriate systems.
Finding 10
BCPS is paying a significantly higher cost per square foot for roof
replacements compared to other local school systems, and could not
adequately justify the rationale for its practice of using the same roofing
contractor for a number of years.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that BCPS
a. obtain a thorough independent evaluation of the of the cost effectiveness
of using the purchasing cooperative program’s roofing vendors, and if
those vendors continue to be used, select the vendor whose proposal
provides the best value;
Response 10a.
BCPS is confident that it delivers cost efficient capital projects and will work to
further demonstrate this. BCPS did engage an independent consultant for
the previously mentioned 2013 study. BCPS is very interested in any
additional studies or reviews conducted by any state agency or independent
organization that may have considered this issue or that could provide further
guidance in this matter.
and
b. adopt a policy similar to the cited State law prohibiting those involved with
developing project specifications from bidding on those projects.
Response 10b.
BCPS currently complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
will continue to do so.

--- Page 43 ---
Finding 11
BCPS was not fully using its automated routing software to develop more
efficient routes.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that BCPS use its automated routing software to develop
more efficient bus routes on a system-wide basis (repeat).
Response 11
BCPS approved funding in 2013 for the implementation of automated routing
software. Implementation of the automated routing software started in the
Southeast and Southwest regions of the county during fall 2013 and spring
2014. BCPS routes were entered in the system as they existed on paper.
BCPS approved additional funding in March 2015, and regular education
routes for the Northeast, Northwest, and Central regions are now being
entered in the routing system.
BCPS is also implementing a new student information system and the full
implementation of the routing software will interface with this student
information system. Regular education routes for the 2015-16 school year
will be produced using the automated routing software. Special Education
routes are scheduled for implementation in October 2015.
Finding 12
BCPS did not ensure the reasonableness of payments for certain employee
and retiree health care costs.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that BCPS establish procedures to determine the
reasonableness of the amounts paid for health insurance. Specifically, we
recommend that BCPS work with the County to
a. obtain the documentation to determine the reasonableness of the amount
allocated to health insurance costs; and
b. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and determine
the reasonableness of the claims paid by the County.
Response 12
BCPS will continue to work with Baltimore County Government to obtain
requested information.

--- Page 44 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Robert W. Lembach, CPA
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Christopher D. Jackson, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Michael D. Cheese
David O. Mauriello
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Information Systems Staff Auditor