Title: Garrett County Public Schools

NOTE: In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, this system has obtained an exemption from one audit which extends the time until the next audit from 6 years to 12 years.
Date: 11/18/2016
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d36cc9d72404c150a16
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:01:06.055063
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Garrett County Public Schools
November 2016
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Wsrren G. Desehenaux ThomasJ. BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
November 18, 2016
Senator Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted an audit of the financial management practices of the Garrett
County Public Schools (GCPS) in accordance with the requirements of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) ofthe Annotated Code of
Maryland. The objectives ofthis audit were to evaluate whether GCPS
procedures and controls were effective in accounting for and safeguarding its
assets and whether its policies provided for the efficient use of financial
resources.
Our audit disclosed that GCPS needs to improve internal controls and
accountability for a number of its financial operations including cash receipts,
payroll processing, and information system security. For example,
incompatible functions were assigned to certain employees that increased the
risk of improper processing of personnel and payroll transactions. Also, GCPS
did not sufficiently protect its computer network by restricting user wireless
access and more effectively using its intrusion detection prevention system.
Numerous computers either did not have malware protection software
installed, or the installed software was not operational or out-of-date.
Although GCPS had taken some action to improve efficiency through the
closure of several underutilized schools, additional steps should be
implemented for student transportation and food services. For example,
GCPS did not ensure its methodology for determining payments to bus
contractors results in the best value. For certain payment components GCPS
could not substantiate their reasonableness. We estimated that for 35 new
buses placed into service since fiscal year 2010, GCPS would pay out
approximately $1.3 million more over the 12-year life of the buses because
the rate established for a particular component was not based on market
rates. GCPS also paid bus contractors for fuel, but did not exclude federal
301 West Preston Street Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il

--- Page 4 ---
excise taxes, which the contractors are exempt from paying and may claim as
a credit on their income tax returns. For fiscal year 2015, GCPS’ fuel
payments were $36,100 higher than necessary.
Finally, GCPS also needs to ensure the accuracy of payments for employee
healthcare. GCPS had not conducted reviews to verify the propriety of health
care claim payments, which totaled $10.4 million in fiscal year 2015. Such
reviews have been found to be cost-effective by the State resulting in
identification of improper claims consistently exceedingthe related cost of the
reviews.
The GCPS response to this audit is included as an appendix to this report. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during our audit by
GCPS.
Respectfully submitted,
72] &JL
ThomasJ. Barnickel Ill, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 6
External Audits 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Finding 1 – Checks received at GCPS headquarters were not 9
recorded or restrictively endorsed immediately upon receipt,
and independent verifications that recorded collections were
deposited were not performed.
Federal Funds 9
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 2 – GCPS did not adequately advertise certain contract 11
procurements, use a competitive procurement process when
appropriate, or present contracts to the Board for its
consideration.
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 3 – Access to critical functions in the automated human 12
resources and payroll system were not properly restricted and
certain duties were not properly segregated.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 4 – GCPS lacked a written policy to control equipment 13
items and did not periodically conduct equipment inventories.
Information Technology
Finding 5 – Numerous employees were improperly defined as local 14
administrators on many GCPS’ workstations.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Finding 6 – The GCPS’ network was not sufficiently secured to 15
assist in the detection/prevention of potential network security
breaches and attacks, and restrict access to critical servers.
Finding 7 – Certain computers were not sufficiently protected 16
against malware, as malware protection software was not
installed on numerous computers and computers were running
outdated or unsupported system software.
Finding 8 – GCPS’ Disaster Recovery Plan for recovering computer 17
operations from disaster scenarios was incomplete and had
not been tested.
* Finding 9 – Network, application, database, and server password 17
controls were not sufficient and security activity on a critical
database and server was not logged.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 10 – GCPS had not developed a process to independently 19
verify the reported savings from of its two energy performance
contracts.
Transportation Services
* Finding 11 – GCPS did not have formal targets and goals for 20
establishing and revising bus routes, use automated routing
software to improve route efficiency, or verify the propriety of
contractor payments to reimburse for time and mileage of bus
routes.
Finding 12 – GCPS could not substantiate the basis of certain 22
amounts paid to bus contractors and those payments were
higher than necessary.
Food Services
Finding 13 – GCPS has experienced persistent deficits in its food 24
service operations, but has not developed certain benchmarks
to gauge performance and identify areas for improvement.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
School Board Oversight
Finding 14 – GCPS financial disclosure statements were not 26
always filed as required.
Other Financial Controls
* Finding 15 – GCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain 27
payments for employee and retiree healthcare costs and did
not always verity the authenticity of employees’ listed
dependents.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 29
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Garrett County Public Schools (GCPS) is the
third smallest school system based on student enrollment among the 24
public school systems in Maryland. Fiscal year 2015 enrollment was 3,858
students. GCPS has 12 schools, consisting of 8 elementary, 2 middle, and 2
high schools.
According to GCPS’ audited financial statements, operating and capital
expenditures totaled $60.1 million in fiscal year 2015. The largest
expenditure category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which
accounted for 64 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2015.
According to MSDE records, during the 2014-2015 school year, GCPS had
556 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 371 instructional and
185 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
GCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected members
and one nonvoting student member. The vast majority of GCPS funding is
provided by the State and the Garrett County government. In addition, MSDE
exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and monitoring of
various financial and academic policies and regulations, in accordance with
certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE also works with
GCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of federal law. Garrett
County government exercises authority over GCPS, primarily through review
and approval of GCPS’ annual operating and capital budgets.
External Audits
GCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what
is referred to as a Single Audit of GCPS federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement and Single
Audit reports for fiscal years 2014 and 2015, and examined the related work
papers for the fiscal year 2014 audits, which were the latest work papers
available when we began our field work.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited GCPS’ financial statements and conducted the
Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we relied
on the results of the independent audits to reduce the scope of our audit work
for revenues, payroll, food service, and federal grant activity. In addition, we
relied on the results of the work performed by the firm related to school
activity funds.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our assessment of significance and risk to our audit objectives, our
audit included a review to determine the status of 18 of the 28 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated September 17, 2010. We
determined that GCPS satisfactorily addressed 11 of these findings. The
remaining 7 findings are repeated as 5 findings in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
GCPS revenues consist primarily of funds received from Garrett County, the
State, and the federal government. According to the GCPS audited financial
statements, revenues from all sources totaled $59.1 million during fiscal year
2015. In addition to these revenue sources, schools also collect funds for
various purposes, such as for student activities, clubs, and school
publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these student
activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and are reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. Although this revenue is raised
through student-related activities, GCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard
these funds. For fiscal year 2015, school activity fund collections totaled $1
million and the June 30, 2015 balance was $503,796.
External Audit Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Revenue
Activities
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the GCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we placed significant reliance on the
results of that audit for certain revenues and accounts receivable (for
example, amounts due from other governments). The auditor’s procedural
review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or deficiencies
regarding material revenue types or accounts receivable.
Student Activity Funds Were Subject to Auditor Review
GCPS' independent certified public accounting firm reviews the student
activity funds at select schools each year. This review consisted of evaluating
and testing end of the year reconciliations and verifying revenue collections
and ensuring that disbursements were supported by the documentation on
file. Our review of the firm’s work papers and procedures did not identify any
improprieties or prevalent control weaknesses.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Finding 1
Checks received at GCPS headquarters were not recorded or restrictively
endorsed immediately upon receipt, and independent verifications that
recorded collections were deposited were not performed.
Analysis
Proper controls over miscellaneous collections received at GCPS’ central
administrative office were not established. Collections were not recorded or
restrictively endorsed when they were initially received. Specifically, the
receipts were handled by at least one other employee before they were
recorded, and were not restrictively endorsed until the deposit was prepared.
Furthermore, the employee responsible for verifying that recorded collections
were deposited was not independent of the cash receipts process.
As a result of these conditions, collections could be misappropriated without
detection. According to GCPS records, cash receipts processed by the central
administrative office in fiscal year 2015, excluding electronic fund transfers,
totaled approximately $29.3 million, including $27.1 million in receipts from
the county.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that GCPS
a. ensure that all collections are immediately recorded and restrictively
endorsed upon receipt,
b. ensure that an independent employee performs a documented verification
that all recorded collections were deposited, and
c. investigate with the Garrett County government the possibility of receiving
funds by electronic transfer rather than by check.
We advised GCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Federal Funds
Background
GCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specified program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of Federal
Awards, fiscal year 2015 expenditures of federal award funds totaled $4.7
million.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to the work performed by the independent certified public accounting
firm that conducted the Single Audit of the GCPS federal grants and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor’s work and results
to reduce the scope of our audit for federal grants. Besides expressing an
opinion on GCPS compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the
auditor also considered the existing internal control structure's impact on
compliance and audited the Fiscal Year 2015 required Schedule of Federal
Awards (which includes claimed and reported grant-related expenditures).
The related report stated that GCPS complied, in all material respects, with
the requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to
internal controls over compliance with major federal programs, the auditor did
not identify any material weaknesses.
Medicaid Funds Were Requested for Eligible Services
GCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to GCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants. Our review
disclosed that for eligible services, reimbursements were requested and
verified against actual monies received. According to agency records, fiscal
year 2015 federal reimbursement for Medicaid-subsidized services totaled
approximately $350,000.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to GCPS records, non-payroll disbursements totaled $21.7 million
during fiscal year 2015. GCPS relies on a number of manual processes and
controls for purchasing and related disbursement transactions. Requisitions
created by departments are subject to departmental and purchasing office
approval. Purchase orders, solicitations, bids, and contracts are generally
handled by a central purchasing office. Approved requisitions are then
converted to purchase orders. GCPS procurement regulations require that
purchases over $25,000 be formally bid. The receipt of goods and services
are verified by the receiving school or department and payments are then
processed by the central administrative office.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Finding 2
GCPS did not adequately advertise certain contract procurements, use a
competitive procurement process when appropriate, or present contracts to
the Board for its consideration.
Analysis
GCPS did not adequately advertise certain procurements as required by State
law, did not solicit competitive bids for services that could have been provided
by multiple vendors, or present certain contract awards to the Board. Our
review of 10 procurements in which payments totaled approximately $1.2
million during fiscal year 2015, disclosed the following conditions:
• Three of these procurements, each exceeding $25,000 and collectively
totaling approximately $416,000, were not publicly advertised. The State
Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that procurements greater than $25,000 be advertised at least
two weeks before bids are due on eMaryland Marketplace.
• For two of the three aforementioned procurements, totaling approximately
$264,000, GCPS directly solicited only one bid; however, these services
(insurance, therapy) were available from multiple vendors and GCPS did
not prepare a written justification for the use of sole source procurements.
For the remaining procurement, GCPS received two bids as a result of
directly contacting potential vendors. A similar condition was commented
upon in our prior audit report.
• For 3 of the 10 procurements tested totaling approximately $341,000, we
were unable to locate any evidence that these procurements were
presented to the Board for its consideration. Although GCPS Board policy
does delegate final approval of all expenditures to the superintendent, the
Board reserved the right to approve, defer, or deny the award of a
contract; absent presenting all applicable procurements to the Board,
there is no way to ensure that the Board has exercised its right.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that for procurements exceeding $25,000 in value, GCPS
a. publicly advertise the procurements in compliance with State Law,
b. competitively bid the procurements unless sole source justification is
appropriately documented (repeat), and
c. present contract procurements to the Board for its consideration.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll costs represent the largest single cost component in the GCPS budget.
According to GCPS records for fiscal year 2015, salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $38.4 million. According to the Maryland State Department of
Education Fact Book, during the 2014 – 2015 school year (most current data
available), GCPS had 556 full time equivalent positions, which consisted of
371 instructional and 185 non-instructional positions.
GCPS uses an automated integrated human resources and payroll system to
maintain human resources information, record employee time and
attendance, and to track leave usage and earned balances. Manual time
records, including leave taken, are entered into the system every two weeks
by GCPS payroll clerks, and the system automatically calculates the
employee's available balance. The system is also used to process and record
all payroll transactions.
Finding 3
Access to critical functions in the automated human resources and payroll
system were not properly restricted and certain duties were not properly
segregated.
Analysis
Eight employees had been assigned certain incompatible human resources
and payroll system capabilities. Furthermore, three of these employees’ job
duties did not involve processing human resources or payroll transactions;
accordingly, their system access capabilities were unnecessary. All eight
employees had the capability to create and delete employees, change
employee salaries, enter time and attendance information, and prepare
checks and the electronic file that resulted in direct deposits. In addition,
although there was a review of payroll changes performed, it was conducted
by two of the eight aforementioned employees, and consequently was not
independent. As a result of the incompatible and unnecessary access
capabilities, these employees had virtually complete control over the system
and improper or erroneous transactions could be processed without
detection. A similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Recommendation 3
We recommend that GCPS
a. segregate incompatible functions and assign critical system functions to
only those employees who need the capabilities to perform their job duties
(repeat), and
b. ensure that human resources and payroll transaction processing and
review responsibilities are properly segregated.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to the GCPS audited financial statements, as of June 30, 2015, the
undepreciated value of its capital equipment totaled approximately $3.3
million. GCPS central staff uses a separate spreadsheet for each facility to
track equipment inventory with a cost of $500 or more (including items
capitalized for financial statement purposes).
Finding 4
GCPS lacked a written policy to control equipment items, and did not
periodically conduct equipment inventories.
Analysis
GCPS lacked sufficient procedures to control of its equipment, including non-
capitalized sensitive equipment items prone to theft. Specifically, GCPS
lacked a written policy with requirements for tagging equipment, reporting lost
or stolen items, approving disposals, and separating the duties of equipment
custody, performing physical inventories, and recordkeeping. Furthermore,
there was no evidence of periodic physical inventories having been taken for
at least the last three years, and accordingly, no reconciliation of equipment
on hand to the GCPS inventory records.
Consequently, GCPS lacked assurance that acquired equipment was recorded
and accounted for, any disposals were properly handled, and missing or
stolen items were thoroughly investigated.
Recommendation 4
We recommend that GCPS establish formal comprehensive policies and
procedures to ensure that accountability and control is maintained over its
equipment, including a requirement for periodic physical inventories.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Information Technology
Background
The GCPS Department of Information Technology maintains and administers
the GCPS’ computer network, computer operations, and instructional
information systems. GCPS uses the Garrett County Government’s backbone
network for Internet connectivity and to connect the individual schools’ local
networks to the GCPS’ centralized computer resources at its headquarter
location. A total of 14 GCPS locations (including schools and other facilities)
are supported by the Department.
Several significant administrative and academic related information system
applications exist. GCPS operates a financial application and a student
information application. For example, the student information application
includes functions for enrollment, scheduling, and grades.
Finding 5
Numerous employees were improperly defined as local administrators on
many GCPS workstations.
Analysis
Numerous employees were improperly defined as local administrators on
many GCPS workstations. We noted that 33 of 35 active workstations tested
were configured with numerous GCPS employees improperly defined as local
administrators on these workstations. For example, at one location all 9
workstations tested had over 90 individuals improperly defined as local
administrators on these workstations. Similar situations existed for 18
workstations tested at 5 other locations. We determined that GCPS had over
1,900 workstations in use for faculty, staff, and students.
Administrative rights are the highest permission level that can be granted and
should be restricted to network administrators and select others because
these rights allow users to install software and change configuration settings.
As a result, if these workstations were infected with malware, the malware
would run with administrative rights and expose these workstations to a
greater risk of compromise than if the workstations’ user accounts operated
with only user rights. In this regard, as a best practice the State of Maryland
Information Security Policy states that agencies must enforce the most
restrictive access capabilities required for specific tasks.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Recommendation 5
We recommend that GCPS limit administrative privileges on its workstations
only to those individuals required to have such capabilities.
Finding 6
The GCPS network was not sufficiently secured to assist in the
detection/prevention of potential network security breaches and attacks, and
restrict access to critical servers.
Analysis
The GCPS network was not properly secured.
• The GCPS network was not secured against improper access from un-
trusted parties using its wireless connections. All students and approved
guests could establish wireless connections and gain unnecessary
network level access to numerous critical administrative servers and
workstations.
• All high school computer lab and media center computers had
unnecessary network level access to faculty and staff workstations and to
critical administrative servers.
• GCPS’ Intrusion Detection Prevention System (IDPS) device provided very
limited protection to the GCPS’ network. It was not configured to scan and
block suspicious network traffic from untrusted sources or to decrypt
encrypted traffic and then scan the decrypted traffic.
Best practices prescribed by the University System of Maryland’s IT Security
Standards state that wireless networks should authenticate the identity of all
users, where necessary, and maintain restricted access to critical resources.
In addition, best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland Information
Security Policy state that only authorized individuals should have access to
confidential information and that such access be strictly controlled, audited,
and that it supports the concepts of “least possible privilege” and “need to
know.” Finally, this Policy states that IDPS should be used to monitor system
events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of information systems
and/or confidential information.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that GCPS properly secure its network. Specifically, we
recommend that GCPS
15

--- Page 18 ---
a. limit wireless user and high school computer lab and media center
workstation access to only those GCPS network devices that these users
and workstations require access to; and
b. use the IDPS to decrypt encrypted traffic, scan all traffic from untrusted
sources, and configure the IDPS device to block all identified suspicious
traffic.
Finding 7
Certain computers were not sufficiently protected against malware, as
malware protection software was not installed on numerous computers and
computers were running outdated or unsupported system software.
Analysis
Computers were not sufficiently protected against malware.
• GCPS lacked assurance that malware protection software was installed
and operational on all of its active computers. Our review identified 663
out of 1,956 active GCPS computers that either did not have malware
protection software installed or the installed software was not operational.
This included all 465 active computers, as of January 2016, running a
specific operating system that did not have any malware protection
software installed.
• Certain computers tested had not been updated with the latest releases
for software products that are known to have significant security related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products
frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, GCPS
had not updated its computers for these patches. For example, of the 12
computers tested for one of these software products, we noted that 9
computers were running older versions of this software.
• All 12 of the aforementioned computers tested were running an outdated
version of the malware protection software used by GCPS. These
computers were running the version released on October 2013 and at the
time or our audit testing the current version was released on April 30,
2015.
Best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Security Policy
state that agencies, at a minimum, must “protect against malicious code
(viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by implementing anti-malware solutions that,
to the extent possible, include a capability for automatic updates.”
16

--- Page 19 ---
Recommendation 7
We recommend that GCPS
a. ensure that all managed computers are running current versions of the
malware protection software used by GCPS, and
b. promptly install all critical security related software updates for commonly
vulnerable applications on all managed computers.
Finding 8
GCPS’ Disaster Recovery Plan for recovering computer operations from
disaster scenarios was incomplete and had not been tested.
Analysis
GCPS’ information technology Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) for recovering
computer operations from disaster scenarios (for example, a fire or flood) was
incomplete. GCPS’ DRP did not address several minimum requirements
needed for a DRP. For example, the DRP did not contain complete listings of
hardware and software or the restoration of network connectivity. In addition,
the DRP had not been tested. Without a complete and tested DRP, a disaster
could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of time) in
restoring information systems operations above and beyond the expected
delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario. The State of
Maryland’s Information Technology (IT) Disaster Recovery Guidelines provide
best practices on the minimum required elements needed for a DRP.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that GCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that is in accordance with
the aforementioned IT Disaster Recovery Guidelines; and
b. periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the
documentation for future reference.
Finding 9
Network, application, database, and server password controls were not
sufficient and security activity on a critical database and server was not
logged.
Analysis
Password controls were not sufficient to properly protect critical GCPS
resources and certain critical security activity was not logged.
17

--- Page 20 ---
• Passwords controls over the GCPS network, the student information
application and database, and the server hosting the financial application
did not meet the minimum recommended settings in the State of
Maryland Information Security Policy. For example, password aging and
complexity were not enforced for GCPS’ network level passwords.
• The student information database and the server that hosts the financial
application were not configured to log security activity including privileged
operations. Best practices identified in the aforementioned Information
Security Policy require that information systems must generate audit
records for all security-relevant events, including all security and system
administrator accesses and that procedures must be developed to
routinely (for example, daily or weekly) review audit records for indications
of unusual activities, suspicious activities or suspected violations, and
report findings to appropriate officials for prompt resolution.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that GCPS
a. establish passwords over the GCPS network, the student information
application and database, and the server hosting the financial application
that comply with the recommended password settings prescribed by the
State of Maryland State Information Security Policy (repeat); and
b. set the student information database and server that hosts the financial
application to log all critical security related events, regularly review these
logs, document these reviews and retain this documentation for future
reference (repeat).
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
GCPS maintains 12 schools and a number of other facilities with a staff of 48
custodial and maintenance personnel. According to the Capital Improvement
Plan (CIP) prepared in fiscal year 2015, planned construction, major
renovations, and systemic improvements to GCPS facilities over fiscal years
2015 through 2022 are estimated to cost $50 million.
GCPS Reorganized its Schools to Address Student Capacity and Improve
Efficiency
In our preceding audit report we commented that as of September 30, 2009,
GCPS had four schools that were being used at less than 70 percent of State-
18

--- Page 21 ---
rated capacity, including three elementary schools that were being operated
at 31 percent, 45 percent, and 56 percent of rated capacity. Subsequently,
GCPS completed an evaluation of facility usage and due to declining
enrollment, the Board of Education approved the closing of one elementary
school in fiscal year 2011 and two additional elementary schools in fiscal year
2012.
Finding 10
GCPS had not developed a process to independently verify the reported
savings from of its two energy performance contracts.
Analysis
GCPS had not implemented a process to independently verify that the cost
savings from its two energy performance contracts had been achieved and
met the guaranteed savings requirements under the contracts. Since the
accuracy and propriety of the calculations used by the energy contractor to
determine the reported dollar savings had not been independently verified,
GCPS lacked assurance that the related guaranteed cost savings were
actually realized.
GCPS entered into two contracts with an energy service company to provide a
number of services including installation of energy efficient devices (lighting
for example) and new heating and cooling equipment at certain schools as
well as a system to monitor, measure, and achieve project benefits as a result
of such improvements. The first contract, beginning in 2011, included GCPS
costs of $4.4 million for system improvements, monitoring, maintenance, and
reporting over the first three years of the contract. The second contract,
which began in 2014, included GCPS costs of $500,000 for installation of
energy efficient lighting.
The two contracts guaranteed annual costs savings to GCPS and total savings
of $6.7 million over 15 years, after taking into account the aforementioned
$4.9 million upfront costs paid by GCPS. If the guaranteed savings for any
given year is not met, the energy service company is required to pay the
difference to GCPS. Cost savings are reported annually to GCPS by the
contractor in a measurement and verification (M&V) report that details energy
usage and cost savings by school. The M&V report is to be prepared using the
methodology stated in the contract. However, GCPS performed no
verifications that the reported cost savings was accurate and determined in
accordance with the methodology specified in the contracts.
19

--- Page 22 ---
The M&V report for contract year 2014 (the first year of M&V reporting)
indicated that actual cost savings for the first year totaled $419,496, which
exceeded the guaranteed savings by $34,686.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that GCPS
a. independently verify the contractor reported data, at least on a test basis,
to ensure the propriety of critical calculations (such as guaranteed cost
savings) included in the related contract and subsequent M&V reports;
and
b. retain documentation of all such verifications performed.
Transportation Services
Background
GCPS has approximately 3,900 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported approximately
963,000 route miles during the 2014-2015 school year on one of the 61
contractor-owned buses. According to MSDE records, fiscal year 2015
transportation expenditures totaled $3.96 million, with $3.70 million (93
percent) representing payments for contracted services. Bus contractors are
paid a per vehicle allotment (PVA) that includes repayment to the contractors
the full acquisition cost of the bus over its life (12 years). The PVA also
provides an additional annual payment as a return on investment (ROI) to the
contractors, which is established when a bus is purchased and remains fixed
over the bus’ life. Finally, bus contractors are paid for other operating costs,
such as driver salaries, fuel use, maintenance costs, liability insurance, and
certain administrative costs.
Finding 11
GCPS did not have formal targets and goals for establishing and revising bus
routes, use automated routing software to improve route efficiency, or verify
the propriety of contractor payments to reimburse for time and mileage of bus
routes.
Analysis
GCPS did not have formal targets and goals to guide the decisions made
during the process of reviewing and revising bus routes nor did it use
automated bus routing software to promote efficiency. In addition, GCPS did
not verify the time and mileage of bus routes, which are the basis for a
significant portion of contractor payments.
20

--- Page 23 ---
• GCPS had not developed formalized and comprehensive policies that
defined the relevant factors for GCPS to consider when determining the
most appropriate bus routes, such as desired bus utilization (ridership)
guidelines and maximum student ride times. In addition, GCPS did not
use automated bus routing software or its student address system to
develop more efficient routes. Rather, GCPS used existing bus routes and
made manual modifications to accommodate students’ school assignment
without periodically reviewing all routes for efficiency on a system-wide
basis.
The lack of a system-wide route analysis could have a potentially negative
impact on route efficiency. As noted below, our review identified a
significant number of miles driven with no students on the buses
(deadhead miles for which the contractors were reimbursed). The use of
routing software is a recognized best practice that can reduce the time it
takes to design efficient routes, reduce student ride times, help ensure
that routes utilize existing bus capacity, and minimize the number of buses
needed to transport students.
• GCPS did not consider the contractors’ proximity to the route when
assigning bus routes in order to reduce the number of miles driven with no
students on the bus (deadhead miles). Our review of 63 GCPS contractor-
owned buses (using fiscal year 2016 bus manifests) disclosed that 40
buses (63 percent) traveled more than 30 deadhead miles per day,
including 7 buses that traveled 50 or more deadhead miles per day. For
example, 1 of these buses traveled 147.5 miles per day, of which 86 miles
(58 percent) were for deadhead miles.
Although we recognize that Garrett County includes large rural areas,
which can make it difficult to avoid high amounts of deadhead miles, a
GCPS policy to limit the number of deadhead miles could result in cost
savings. For example, based on our review of the five buses with the
highest number of deadhead miles during fiscal year 2016, we estimated
that GCPS could have saved $4,967 of the $29,696 paid for the 20,340
annual deadhead miles scheduled, by reassigning two contractors’ routes
that would eliminate 3,400 deadhead miles. We estimated that GCPS’
expenditures to reimburse bus contractors for deadhead miles traveled
during fiscal year 2016 will total approximately $570,000 and will account
for approximately 390,000 of the 1.04 million (37 percent) bus miles to be
traveled and paid for.
• GCPS did not ensure that the route times and mileages reported by bus
contractors were accurate. Bus contractors’ drivers complete a manifest,
21

--- Page 24 ---
which includes the total time and miles driven on each route. GCPS uses
the data recorded on these manifests to calculate the bus driver wages, in
addition to the maintenance and fuel cost components to determine the
monthly payments to the contractors. Our review disclosed that GCPS
lacked a process to ensure that the route times and mileages were
accurate. Ensuring this data is accurate is critical because a portion of the
payments GCPS makes to bus contractors is comprised of
reimbursements for bus driver wages and distance traveled. Although our
test of 10 bus routes did not disclose any significant discrepancies,
overpayments to bus contractors could occur and go undetected.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that GCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive policies and procedures for its bus routes
that include guidance regarding bus utilization, student ride times, and
any other factors (such as deadhead miles) in order to assist in developing
efficient bus routes (repeat);
b. use automated routing software to help ensure the efficient utilization of
buses (repeat); and
c. ensure the propriety of bus route time and mileage data used to calculate
payments to bus contractors (repeat).
Finding 12
GCPS could not substantiate the basis of certain amounts paid to bus
contractors and those payments were higher than necessary.
Analysis
Certain elements used to determine payment amounts to bus contractors did
not reflect market conditions or actual operating costs. Our review of the
contract terms disclosed the following conditions:
• GCPS lacked a documented policy for establishing the PVA amount. GCPS
management advised us that the bus PVA rates were generally increased
each year by a percentage over the prior year’s rates without any specific
analysis of the cost elements included in a traditional PVA calculation. The
PVA formula includes an annual ROI component (for the operator investing
money in the bus instead of another investment option), which varied
based on the year the bus was placed into service. As a result of GCPS’
method for raising the PVA rate each year, the ROI component of the PVA
22

--- Page 25 ---
was considerably higher than the prime interest rate,1 which is
recommended for use in the calculation of the PVA by other studies.
To estimate the financial impact of GCPS not considering the effect of its
method on the ROI rate, we calculated the PVA for each of the 35 new
buses placed into service from fiscal years 2010 to 2016 using the prime
interest rate. These calculations show that GCPS annual PVA payments
per bus were $2,822 to $3,294 higher than the payments would have
been had the prime rate that existed at the time of purchase had been
used in the calculation. Specifically, during fiscal years 2010 to 2016 the
prime rate was 3.25 percent each year, but the effective ROI rate used by
GCPS during this period ranged from 6.42 to 6.92 percent. As a result,
over the 12-year life of the 35 new buses put into service by contractors
since 2010, GCPS will pay out approximately $1.3 million more than if the
prime rate at the time of purchase was used for the ROI. This analysis
does not include the effects of the lost interest income that could have
been earned.
• GCPS payments to contractors for bus maintenance costs were negotiated
with the bus contractors and were not supported by documented
maintenance and other repair costs. Bus contractors were reimbursed for
maintenance at a rate of $1 per mile during fiscal year 2015, which
resulted in GCPS paying $962,559 for maintenance costs for the 61
contractor-owned buses, for an average of $15,780 per bus.
• GCPS did not exclude the federal fuel excise tax from payments to bus
contractors.2 In this regard, GCPS pays contractors for fuel usage using a
monthly average of diesel fuel prices and dividing by an established miles
1 The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study
commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a
lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment rate; therefore, it
is deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation. In addition, a May 2010 MSDE PVA
Workgroup commented that the profit (or ROI) to be included in the PVA should reflect what
a reasonable investor or business person would expect on a long-term investment. As of
October 2016, current 10 and 30 year US Treasury Note rates, which could be reflective of
a reasonable long-term investment option were 1.8 and 2.5 percent, respectively.
2 Subsequent to the completion of our audit fieldwork, Chapter 397, Laws of Maryland 2016,
effective July 1, 2016, exempted a county board of education or a school bus operator
under contract with a county board of education from State motor fuel taxes. In addition,
the law authorized county boards of education and a school bus operator to claim refund of
the State motor fuel taxes paid. Consequently, this exemption should be factored into
future payments.
23

--- Page 26 ---
per gallon (mpg) rate of 6.5 mpg.3 However, according to federal law,
GCPS contractors are exempt from the federal $0.244 per gallon excise
tax for diesel fuel and are able to receive a credit for federal fuel taxes
paid when they file their income tax returns. As a result, if GCPS had
considered the full $0.244 exemption amount in its calculation, payments
to the contractors would have been lower (for example, a total of $36,133
less during fiscal year 2015).
Recommendation 12
We recommend that GCPS ensure all contractor payments have a
documented and justified basis. Specifically, GCPS should
a. use market investment rates as the basis for establishing contractor rates
for the annual PVA,
b. use actual bus operating costs as a basis for establishing contractor rates
for per mile maintenance costs, and
c. exclude the federal fuel excise taxes from contractor payments.
Food Services
Background
GCPS has 5 food preparation kitchens that prepare all meals for its 12
schools. GCPS food service has a total of 21 full-time and 40 part-time
cafeteria workers, and 4 administrative employees. For fiscal year 2015,
GCPS' food service operations had revenues of $2,315,488 and expenditures
of $2,675,154, resulting in a deficit of $359,666.
Finding 13
GCPS has experienced persistent deficits in its food service operations, but
has not developed certain benchmarks to gauge performance and identify
areas for improvement.
Analysis
GCPS food service operation expenditures have consistently exceeded
revenues. From fiscal year 2011 through 2015, total expenditures have
exceeded related revenues by $1.5 million, see Table 1.
3 The American School Bus Council reported that the national average usage for a large
school bus with a diesel engine, such as those used by GCPS contractors, is 7 miles per
gallon.
24

--- Page 27 ---
Table 1
Food Service Annual Operating Revenue and Expenditures
Fiscal Years 2011 to 2015
Fiscal Year Revenue Expenditures Deficit
2011 $2,377,685 $2,612,057 ($234,372)
2012 2,427,669 2,684,537 ($256,868)
2013 2,420,368 2,716,834 ($296,466)
2014 2,369,294 2,757,790 ($388,496)
2015 2,315,488 2,675,154 ($359,666)
Total $11,910,504 $13,446,372 ($1,535,868)
Source: GCPS Audited Financial Statements
Although GCPS has developed a goal for meals per labor hour (MPLH), it has
not developed similar goals or benchmark for meal costs. Based on our
analysis of GCPS food service costs, it appears that contributing factors to
these deficits were personnel costs and productivity issues (MPLH).
Specifically, GCPS fiscal year 2013 overall cost per meal ($3.69) and cost per
meal related to salaries and wages ($1.52) significantly exceed the averages
of four comparable-sized Maryland school districts, which were $2.87 and
$0.91, respectively. Furthermore, our review found that for April 2015, 4 of
the 5 food preparation kitchens did not meet the 12 MPLH goal established
by GCPS.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that GCPS
a. develop performance measures for meal costs, using industry standards
or other accepted practices; and
b. monitor actual performance against these benchmarks and take
appropriate actions to improve operating results, as appropriate.
School Board Operations
Background
The Board of Education of Garrett County (the Board) is composed of five
elected members and one non-voting student representative. In its oversight
responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the GCPS financial statements and federal
programs. The Board has not established any special committees.
25

--- Page 28 ---
GCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In April 2015 the Board adopted a revised detailed ethics policy that conforms
to State Law and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial
disclosure and was approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of
this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all GCPS employees.
GCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members who are
nominated by the Superintendent and appointed by the Board to interpret
ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and a
number of other administrators (such as the Director of Finance and Human
Resources and school principals) by April 30th of each year.
Finding 14
GCPS annual financial disclosure statements were not always filed as
required.
Analysis
GCPS did not adequately ensure that an annual financial disclosure statement
was filed by all employees required to do so. Specifically, we were advised
that GCPS did not verify that employees required to file these statements
each year had done so. As a result, GCPS was unaware that certain
employees had not submitted a financial disclosure for the most recent
calendar year.
Our review of the records for the 36 GCPS employees required to submit
financial disclosure forms for calendar year 2014 by April 30, 2015, in
accordance with the aforementioned policy, disclosed that as of the date of
our test in November 2015, 8 employees did not file a disclosure statement
for calendar year 2014, and based on GCPS records, no disclosure
statements were on file for any previous years for 4 of these 8 employees.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that GCPS actively enforce its ethics policy and ensure that all
required disclosure statements are filed and reviewed by the ethics panel.
26

--- Page 29 ---
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
GCPS participates in a three-member coalition to provide healthcare coverage
to its employees. The three coalition members are self-insured for healthcare
costs up to a designated stop-loss limit and use a third-party administrator to
pay claims on behalf of plan participants and authorized dependents.
Providers submit claims to the administrator who pays them on behalf of
GCPS and then obtains reimbursement from GCPS for actual costs of claims
paid. GCPS pays an administrative fee for these services. According to GCPS
records, GCPS’ healthcare expenditures, including claims expense, stop-loss
insurance premiums, and plan administrative fees, totaled approximately
$11.4 million during fiscal year 2015.
Finding 15
GCPS did not ensure the propriety of certain payments for employee and
retiree healthcare costs and did not always verify the authenticity of
employees’ listed dependents.
Analysis
GCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that certain amounts paid to
the third-party administrator were proper. Specifically, GCPS did not audit the
propriety of claims paid on its behalf by the program administrator to ensure
that the services were actually provided, were covered by the health plans,
and were appropriately priced. Furthermore, GCPS was not provided with
detailed claims information with the monthly billing from the third-party
administrator. During fiscal year 2015, claims paid totaled $10.4 million.
The State Office of Personnel Services and Benefits administers self-insured
health plans for state employees, and contracts for comprehensive reviews of
claims paid by plan administrators. According to the Office, improper
payments identified from these reviews have consistently exceeded the cost
of the reviews. Furthermore, GCPS did not verify that all claims exceeding the
stop-loss limit were reimbursed by the administrator under the stop-loss
coverage. GCPS relies on the administrator to notify it of any payments above
the stop-loss limit. According to the administrator, GCPS paid approximately
$765,000 for stop-loss coverage and received $11,034 in plan year 2015
related to claims exceeding the stop-loss limit.
Finally, GCPS did not always verify new dependent eligibility prior to
enrollment in its healthcare plan. GCPS procedures require employees to
submit certain documentation when adding a dependent to their insurance
coverage (for example, a copy of a marriage certificate to enroll a spouse).
27

--- Page 30 ---
Our review of 10 employees who enrolled 16 new dependents during fiscal
year 2015 disclosed GCPS could not provide us with the required supporting
documentation for 6 of the employees tested who enrolled 11 dependents. A
similar condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that GCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and ensure
audits of the claims paid by the administrator are conducted,
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that all claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer, and
c. ensure all required documentation to establish dependent eligibility is
received prior to enrolling new dependents in its healthcare plan (repeat).
28

--- Page 31 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Garrett County Public
Schools (GCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the State
Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
and performed it in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. To evaluate whether the GCPS procedures and controls were effective
in accounting for and safeguarding its assets
2. To evaluate whether the GCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources
In planning and conducting our audit of GCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on GCPS dated September 17, 2010, was limited to those
findings that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11
areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the GCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by GCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at GCPS, the Maryland State Department of Education
29

--- Page 32 ---
(MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as appropriate).4
Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and records, and
observations of GCPS operations. We also tested transactions and performed
other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to achieve our
objectives, generally for the period from January 1, 2014 through June 30,
2015. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on auditor
judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits GCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data — including financial and operational —
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from GCPS’ automated finance management system
for the purpose of testing expenditure, inventory, and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
GCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to GCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
4During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
30

--- Page 33 ---
We conducted our fieldwork from August 2015 to January 2016. The GCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise GCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
31

--- Page 34 ---
APPENDIX
ii
a MembersoftheBoardofEducation
I I.1
Mrs.CharlotteA.Sebold, President
Mrs.Monica1.Rinker,Vice-President
Mr.ThomasA.Cart,AssociateMember
Mrs.CynthiaM.Downton,AssociateMember
r i Mr.MatthewA.Paugh,AssociateMember
t1YV1I SheyenneA.Tichnell,StudentBoard Member
PublicSchools
InterimSuperintendentofSchools
Ms.BarbaraL.Baker
4OSouthSecondStreet • Ookland, Maryland 21550
Telephone:301-334-8900 •
November 18, 2016
Mr. ThomasJ. Barnickel 111, CPA
LegislativeAuditor
OfficeofLegislativeAudits
301 WestPreston St.. Room 1202
Baltimore,MD21201
DearMr. Barnickel:
This letteris inresponse toyourdraftperformance auditreportofGarrettCounty Public Schools.
Revenue/BillingCycle
Recommendation 1: GCPS should(a) ensurethatall collectionsare immediately recordedandrestrictivelyendorsedupon receipt,
(b) ensurethatan independentemployee performsa documented verificationthatallrecordedcollectionswere deposited, and(c)
investigatewiththeGarrettCountygovernmentthepossibilityofreceivingfundsbyelectronic transferran thanbycheck.
Response: A written procedurewillbedeveloped. Appropriateseparation ofdutieswillbe included withintheprocedureas well
astimelinessofloggingandendorsement. Atpresent, the findingshave been correctedthrougha change in process andduty
assignments.
ProcurementandDisbursementCycle
Recommendation2: Forprocurementexceeding$25,000 in value,GCPS should (a)publiclyadvertisethe procurementsin
compliancewith State Law, (b) competitivelybid theprocurementsunless sole sourcejustification is appropriatelydocumented,
and (c)presentcontractprocurementsto theBoard forits consideration.
Response: GCPS will followthe State Finance&ProcurementArticleofthe AnnotatedCodeofMatyland 17-502. Currently, a
committee is intheprocessofrevisingthe ProcurementPolicy and Procedures. It is importantto note thateventhoughpurchases
maynotbetaken totheBoardon an individual basis, the purchaseamountis includedas part ofthe operatingbudget,which is
approvedbytheBoard. Furthermore,dueto its smallsize, GCPS doesnothave apurchasingdepartment;therefore, itis necessary
topiggybackonState andNationalbids, whichhave alreadybeen legally approvedand authorized.
HumanResources andPayroll
Recommendation3: GCPS shouldsegregate incompatible functionsand assigncriticalsystemfunctions to onlythoseemployees
whoneedthe capabilities toperformtheirjob dutiesand ensurethathumanresources andpayroll transactionprocessingand
reviewresponsibilitiesareproperlysegregated.
Response: Dueto GCPS’s smallstaffsize, it is necessary for users to have access thatmay appearto conflicttoensureproper
backup ofcritical functions. However, propermanual stepsare inplace to identif’errors ormanipulations outsideofthe
automatedsystem. While access maybeavailableto users, propersegregation ofdutiesis also in effect outsideoftheCEMS
system byrotatingjob duties andmanual approvals. Sincethe audit teamwas onsite, severalemployees are now inactiveanduser
accesshasbeenupdated. GCPS will furtherdevelopaproceduretoaccountforsituations inwhichemployees changeroleswithin
thesystem.
InventoryControlandAccountability
Recommendation4: GCPSshouldestablish formal comprehensive policiesandprocedures thataccountability and control is
maintainedoveritsequipment, includingarequirementforperiodic physical inventories.
Excellence • Effectiveness • Innovation • Community

--- Page 36 ---
shouldusemarketinvestmentrates asthebasis forestablishingcontractorrates fortheannual PVA, use actual bus operatingcosts
as abasis forestablishingcontractorrates forpermile maintenance costs, and exclude the federal fuelexcise taxes from contractor
payments.
Response: GCPS will developand implementafairandreasonablePVA formulatoreimburse bus contractors forthe purchase of
theirschool bus. Threequotes will beobtained from the Marylandbus vendorsandaformulaapplied to the averageprice. GCPS
will considerusingtheprimerateas the basis forROl. Management has adoptedanewtable ofrates forthe 2017 fiscalyear
identifyingtheitems inthe supplemental feepaidtothe contractors. Time and mileagedatadeterminedbythe newrouting
softwarealongwiththe dataprovided bythebus contractoris beingutilizedasthe basisforcalculatingthe bus driverwages,
maintenance, and fuelreimbursements. The federal excise fuel tax has beeneliminated, effectiveforfiscal year2017.
foodService
Recommendation 13: Itis recommendedthatGCPS develop performancemeasuresformeal costs, usingindustrystandardsor
otheracceptedpractices, andmonitoractualperformance againstthesebenchmarksandtake appropriate actionsto improve
operatingresults, asappropriate.
Response: Food andNutrition Serviceswill developaperformance measuredesigned forGCPS usingagreedupon standards and
to utilize whenstaffing. Schoolswithsmall enrollmentprohibitFNS from meetingstate averages forstaffinglevels. Additionally,
weather-causeddelaysand school closures directlyresult in loss ofsales forFNS. GCPS will continue to monitorthis enterprise
fund,
SchoolBoardOperations
Recommendation 14: It is recommendedthatGCPS activelyenforce its ethics policyandensure thatall requireddisclosure
statementsare filedand reviewed bythe ethics panel.
Response: Completed.GCPS willenforcethe ethicspolicy and validatethatthe requireddisclosure statementsarefiled.
OtherfinancialControls
Recommendation 15: GCPS shouldobtaindocumentationto supportactualclaimpayments and ensure auditsofthe claims paid
bythe administratorareconducted, use detailed claims paymentdatato ensurethatalt claims paidabovethe stop-loss limitare
reimbursed bythe insurer,andensureall requireddocumentation to establish dependenteligibility isreceivedpriorto enrolling
new dependents in itshealthcareplan.
Response: GCPS isone ofthree membersthatcollectivelypurchasehealth insurance through the GarrettCounty Health Care
Plan. Wewill presentthisrecommendationtothegroup. In addition, GCPS will annuallyverifythe administrative fee andstop
loss amounts beingchargedbythe insurance carrierbyindependently calculatingthe administrative fee and verifying with support
documentationandstop-loss limitdata. GCPS hasrevisedthe process ofon-boarding employeesto ensure all required
documentation is received.
Thankyouforthe opportunity to respondtoyourrecommendations. Shouldyou have any questions, please feel freeto contact
Mrs. Alison Sweitzerorme.
Sincerely,
Barbara Baker
.
Interim Superintendent
CC: Charlotte Sebold, Board President
AlisonR. Sweitzer, DirectorofFinance
3

--- Page 37 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
J. Alexander Twigg
Edward A. Rubenstein, CPA
Senior Auditors
Edward O. Kendall
Matthew D. Walbert
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Daniel P. Nuccio
Timothy S. Rice
Staff Auditors