Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2008
Date: 01/16/2009
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b78
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:05:37.256865
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2008
January 2009
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
January 16, 2009
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. Our review of closeout transactions disclosed
general compliance with the applicable laws, regulations, and policies. However,
we determined that certain transactions pertaining to the following agencies were
not in compliance:
Maryland State Department of Education
Department of Human Resources
Department of State Police
Generally, the non-compliant transactions we identified suggest that additional
State funds may be required to eliminate potential deficits. For example, accrued
revenues totaling $18.2 million could not be substantiated. If the revenues are not
available for these accruals, general fund appropriations (or deficiency
appropriations) may ultimately be needed to eliminate the resulting deficits. A
summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
Six State agencies reported a total of $15.2 million in unprovided for payables as
of June 30, 2008 (Exhibit 2). This situation means that the related expenditures
will have to be funded with subsequent year appropriations. According to an
opinion of the Attorney General, this is not a violation of State law if the General
Assembly enacts a budget bill for the subsequent year containing an appropriation
that can be used to fund these expenditures.

--- Page 4 ---
The agencies identified in this report generally agreed with our findings. The
primary purpose of this annual review is to alert the Maryland General Assembly
to significant financial and budgetary closeout practices that do not comply with
applicable laws, regulations, and policies. The issues identified during this
review, as well as relevant recommendations, will be fully addressed, as
appropriate, in our fiscal compliance audit reports on the applicable agencies. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of our
review by the Comptroller of the Treasury – General Accounting Division and by
the various State agencies.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 7
Findings 9
Closeout Transactions
Revenue Transactions
* Finding 1 – Accrued Federal, Special, and Reimbursable Fund Revenues 10
Totaling $18.2 Million Could Not Be Substantiated by Three Agencies
* Finding 2 – A $5.5 Million General Fund Deficiency Appropriation May 11
Be Needed to Eliminate a Special Fund Deficit Balance at the
Department of State Police
Other Issue
* Finding 3 – Federal Audit Disallowances Totaling $32.8 Million May 12
Have to Be Paid With General Funds, and the State Is Attempting to
Recover $13 Million in Other Federal Sanctions
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2008 Closeout Review Findings by 14
State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables According 15
to the General Accounting Division
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of the Treasury – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closing transactions that have not been previously recorded in the State’s
accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR).
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the CAFR. In its
audit report dated December 12, 2008, applicable to the fiscal year ended June 30,
2008, the firm stated that the State’s basic financial statements presented fairly, in
all material respects, the respective financial position of the State of Maryland as
of June 30, 2008, and the respective changes in the financial position and cash
flows, for the year then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (referred to as GAAP).
The State’s CAFR states that the General Fund, on a budgetary basis, had a
balance of approximately $1.4 billion as of June 30, 2008. This amount
represents a decrease of approximately $700 million from the balance reported at
the preceding fiscal year-end ($2.1 billion).
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2008. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 15
Departments and independent agencies to ascertain if they were properly
supported and made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and
accounting policies. We also reviewed, on a limited basis, transactions processed
subsequent to June 30, 2008 to determine if the transactions were properly
recorded (such as charged or credited to the proper fiscal year). Also, we assessed
the status of the findings identified during our review of the budget closeout
transactions for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, which were reported to the
Joint Audit Committee in a special report dated January 28, 2008. As part of our
current review, we contacted various officials of State agencies, as well as the
independent accounting firm under contract with the State to express an opinion
on its financial statements. Our review excluded public colleges and universities
and transactions processed through the Transportation Trust Fund because the
related financial activity does not involve the State’s General Fund and/or because
agencies have the authority to retain unspent funds at year-end.
Our conclusions for the aforementioned objective are contained on page 9 of this
report. Our follow-up review of the four closeout transactions from the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2007 disclosed that two
of the exceptions are repeated in this report, while two findings were satisfactorily
addressed by the applicable agencies. The status of Federal audit disallowances of
Medicaid expenditures incurred by local education agencies is also repeated and
updated.
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. Our fieldwork was conducted during the period from September 2008
to January 2009.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings
Closeout Transactions
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that three departments or units thereof were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions either were not properly recorded or could not be
substantiated.
Revenue Transactions
Three State agencies could not substantiate certain revenue transactions totaling
$18.2 million. That is, the agencies could not provide evidence that they were
entitled to receive federal, special, or reimbursable funding for the specific
expenditures incurred. To the extent that these funds are not received, the
resulting deficits would likely require the use of general funds. In addition, one
State agency maintained a deficit special fund balance of $5.5 million as a result
of an improper closing transaction recorded in a prior year. The use of general
funds will likely be required to eliminate the deficit.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1 on page 14 of this
report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
Accrued federal, special, and reimbursable fund revenues totaling
approximately $18.2 million could not be substantiated.
Analysis
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), the Department of
Human Resources (DHR), and the Department of State Police (DSP) recorded
unsubstantiated revenues of approximately $13.3 million, $2.9 million, and $2
million, respectively. If revenues are not available for these accruals, which were
recorded to cover expenditures that had been previously incurred, general fund
appropriations (or deficiency appropriations) may ultimately be needed to
eliminate the resulting deficit. These conditions had been commented upon in our
five preceding annual budget closeout reports for DHR and were commented
upon in our two preceding annual budget closeout reports for MSDE and DSP.
MSDE
MSDE recorded unsubstantiated federal fund revenues totaling $13.3 million at
June 30, 2008 related to the federal Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF) grant. This accrued revenue (that is, federal fund receivable) relates to
MSDE’s failure to recover TANF grant expenditures incurred during fiscal years
2002 and 2003. DHR, which processes the federal fund recoveries, advised that
the TANF federal fund grants for those years have already been fully used and are
no longer available to reimburse the MSDE expenditures. During our fiscal year
2007 closeout review, we reported that MSDE used $2.1 million in general fund
recoveries from MSDE’s State aid audit process to reduce the TANF deficit from
$15.4 million to $13.3 million. It was also noted that MSDE had accumulated
another $2.1 million in recoveries during the first half of fiscal year 2008 to apply
to the deficit. In our fiscal year 2007 closeout report, we stated that, because the
revenues represented the return of general fund monies, the revenues should have
been recorded as general fund revenues. During the current closeout review, we
noted that MSDE ceased applying general fund recoveries to the deficit and
reverted all recoveries accumulated during fiscal year 2008 to the State’s General
Fund. MSDE personnel informed us that a deficiency appropriation will be
requested to cover the outstanding $13.3 million deficit.
10

--- Page 13 ---
DHR
DHR recorded unsubstantiated federal fund revenues totaling approximately $2.9
million relating to the TANF grant. This condition has been reported upon in our
fiscal year closeout reviews since 2003. DHR’s records indicated that the TANF
unsubstantiated accrued revenues totaled approximately $2.9 million as of June
30, 2008, which is a decrease of $6.4 million from the $9.3 million reported in
fiscal year 2007. DHR used fiscal year 2008 general fund appropriations to
reduce $6.4 million of the prior years’ unfunded liability. DHR was able to use
these general fund appropriations to reduce the unfunded receivable by
identifying certain fiscal year 2008 expenditures that could be paid by the TANF
grant instead of general fund appropriations as originally budgeted.
DSP
DSP recorded unsubstantiated reimbursable and special fund revenues totaling
approximately $2 million relating to unattained revenue from the Maryland
Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) and from other entities. DSP did not
have adequate documentation to support a reimbursable fund accrual of $1.2
million that during our past closeout reviews DSP claimed was due from MEMA.
During our current review, DSP personnel acknowledged that MEMA does not
owe DSP the $1.2 million and that DSP will be requesting a deficiency
appropriation to resolve this issue. This unsubstantiated accrued revenue was
reported upon in our two previous closeout reviews. DSP also did not have
adequate documentation to support a special fund accrual of $798,000 related to
DSP providing services to other entities during fiscal year 2008. Accounting
detail records were not available to substantiate this assertion or identify the other
entities that owed this amount to DSP. A similar unsubstantiated special fund
revenue accrual was reported upon in our fiscal year 2007 closeout review,
although the amount of the unsubstantiated accrual increased during fiscal year
2008 (the fiscal year 2007 accrual was $560,000).
Finding 2
A general fund deficiency appropriation may be required to eliminate a
special fund deficit balance of $5.5 million.
Analysis
The Department of State Police (DSP) may require a general fund deficiency
appropriation to eliminate a special fund deficit balance of $5.5 million that
existed as of June 30, 2008. Specifically, DSP mistakenly recorded certain
transactions as both accrued revenue and actual revenue during fiscal year 2005.
This resulted in a special fund surplus of $5.6 million which DSP transferred to
the general fund during the fiscal year 2005 closeout because it did not have legal
authority to retain any balance in this special fund. When this mistake was
11

--- Page 14 ---
discovered during fiscal year 2006, DSP was left with a special fund deficit
balance of $5.6 million at the end of fiscal year 2006 due to the automatic reversal
of the previously recorded accrued revenue transaction at the beginning of fiscal
year 2006. During fiscal year 2007, excess revenues of $100,000 were retained in
the fund, which reduced the negative balance to $5.5 million. There was minimal
change to the deficit fund balance during fiscal year 2008. Consequently, a
general fund deficiency appropriation may be required to eliminate this deficit.
This condition was commented upon in our two preceding annual budget closeout
reports.
Other Issue
Conclusion
A liability of $32.8 million resulting from federal audit disallowances has been
recorded that may have to be paid with general funds.
Federal Disallowances
Finding 3
Federal audit disallowances totaling approximately $32.8 million may have to
be paid with general funds, and the State is attempting to recover $13 million
in other federal sanctions.
Analysis
Two federal audits of school-based Medicaid expenditures have resulted in
disallowed claims. In one case, potential federal sanctions totaling $32.8 million
are under consideration by the United States Department of Health and Human
Services and may have to be paid with general funds. In the other case, the
federal government has recovered the claimed disallowance from the State, and
the State has requested five local education agencies (LEAs) to repay $13 million
of the federal disallowance.
The $32.8 million of potential federal sanctions was the result of a federal audit
report dated May 2007, which focused on Medicaid expenditures for school-based
health services that were claimed in fiscal years 2002 through 2004 by LEAs.
The LEAs provide health-related services (such as speech therapy) to special
education students in the State as outlined in each child’s Individualized
Education Plan. The federal Medicaid program will pay for a percentage of
certain of these health-related services and for transportation costs incurred while
receiving the covered services.
12

--- Page 15 ---
The sanctions were principally based on the lack of adequate support for the rates
claimed for school-based health services. These rates had been established by the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) in conjunction with the
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and were uniformly charged by
all LEAs, as instructed by MSDE. DHMH and MSDE disagreed with the federal
audit report findings and appealed the potential sanctions in June 2007 to the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). In May 2008, CMS upheld
the audit report’s findings disallowing the $32.8 million. In June 2008, DHMH
appealed the CMS decision to the Department of Health and Human Services
Departmental Appeals Board (DAB). During the fiscal year 2008 closing,
DHMH reported the $32.8 million to the General Accounting Division (GAD) as
a liability with the appeal pending, and the full amount was recorded by GAD in
the State’s fiscal year 2008 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. If the
appeal is denied, the State may also incur considerable interest penalties until the
amount due is repaid to the federal government; however, the penalty amount
cannot be reasonably estimated until after the appeal process is concluded. As of
December 19, 2008, there had been no final determination by DAB on the appeal.
To the extent the sanctions are not reduced, the sanctions and any interest penalty
accrued during the appeal process may need to be paid with State general funds.
Other sanctions were imposed as a result of a March 2003 federal audit report,
which focused on the lack of documentation at certain LEAs to support specific
expenditures claimed in fiscal year 2000. DHMH and MSDE disagreed with the
federal audit findings and appealed these sanctions. Subsequently, the federal
government reduced its claim from $19.9 million to $16.4 million, which was
recovered by the federal government in July 2007 by reducing Medicaid
reimbursements to DHMH. Of the $16.4 million, DHMH determined that $13.9
million was applicable to five LEAs, and MSDE transferred $900,000 to DHMH
that had been withheld from these five LEAs during a previous fiscal year.
DHMH has requested the five LEAs to reimburse DHMH the remaining $13
million for their respective portions of the sanctions over the next three years.
However, four of the five LEAs have appealed DHMH’s request to the Office of
Administrative Hearings. DHMH management informed us that the appeal
hearing is scheduled in May 2009. Notwithstanding the appeal, in fiscal year
2009 DHMH began withholding a portion of the five LEAs’ medical assistance
reimbursement payments to fund the $13 million of sanctions.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2008 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Agency Finding Finding Description
Number
Maryland State Department of 1 $13.3 million in unsubstantiated federal fund accrued
Education revenues were recorded.
1 $2.9 million in unsubstantiated federal fund accrued
Department of Human Resources
revenues were recorded.
1 $2 million in unsubstantiated reimbursable and special
fund accrued revenues were recorded.
Department of State Police
2 $5.5 million special fund deficit balance exists, which
will require a general fund deficiency appropriation to
cover.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables
According to the General Accounting Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Unprovided for Payables
Maryland Higher Education Commission $8,953,512
Office of Public Defender 1,697,944
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 1,665,727
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 1,554,814
Department of General Services 709,181
Department of Human Resources 661,274
Total $15,242,452
15

--- Page 18 ---
Audit Team
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Laura J. Hilbert, CFE
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Adam J. Westover, CPA
Senior Auditors
Roger E. Jaynes, III
David O. Mauriello
David S. Propper
Ryan P. Stecher
Robert A. Wells
Edward J. Welsh
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
Terry S. Gibson
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Edwin L. Paul, CPA