Title: Frederick County Public Schools
Date: 04/07/2015
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d36cc9d72404c150a12
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:06:19.183206
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Frederick County Public Schools
April 2015
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud,
waste, or abuse involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports
of fraud, waste, or abuse may be communicated anonymously through the
Office’s website, by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, or by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 5
Background Information 7
Statistical Overview 7
Oversight 7
External Audits 7
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 8
Findings and Recommendations 9
Revenue and Billing Cycle 9
Finding 1 – FCPS Did Not Adequately Monitor the Work Performed to 10
Review Student Activity Funds
* Finding 2 – FCPS Had Not Established Proper Controls Over 11
Non-Cash Credits
Federal Funds 12
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
* Finding 3 – Proper Controls Had Not Been Established Over 14
Corporate Purchasing Cards
* Finding 4 – FCPS’ Procurement Policies Requiring Board Approval of 15
Purchases of Over $25,000 Omitted Certain Types of Purchases.
Human Resources and Payroll
* Finding 5 – User Capabilities For Processing Personnel and Payroll 17
Transaction Were Not Adequately Monitored and Restricted
Finding 6 – A High-Risk System Capability Allowing Changes to 18
Historical Records Was Not Adequately Controlled
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 7 – Physical Inventories Were Not Conducted as Required By 20
FCPS Policy
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Information Technology
* Finding 8 – Proper Access, Account, and Password Controls Were Not 21
Established Over Critical Applications, Servers, and a Database
Finding 9 – Frederick County Government had Unnecessary 22
Network Level Access to the Entire FCPS Network
Finding 10 – Malware Protection on FCPS Workstations Was Not 23
Comprehensive
Finding 11 – Monitoring Controls Over a Certain Database and 24
Application Were Not Sufficient to Protect Critical Data
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
* Finding 12 – Policies Were Not Consistently Adhered To and 26
Documentation Was Not Always Retained for Certain Professional
Services Procurements
* Finding 13 – FCPS Did Not Adequately Document Preventive 27
Maintenance Performed
Transportation Services
Finding 14 – Inventory Controls Over Transportation Department 29
Parts Were Inadequate
Food Services
Finding 15 – Independent Reviews of Cafeteria Cash Operations Were 31
Not Performed Timely
Finding 16 – Cash Receipts Transactions Could Be Voided by Cashiers 32
Without Independent Review or Approval
* Finding 17 – FCPS’ Controls Over Food Service Inventory Were Not 32
Adequate
School Board Oversight 33
Other Financial Controls
Finding 18 – FCPS Did Not Verify the Propriety of Health Claim 35
Reimbursements Paid to Third Party Administrator
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 37
Agency Response Appendix
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Executive Summary
Legislative Audit Report on the Frederick County Public Schools (FCPS)
April 2015
According to data compiled by the Maryland State Department of Education,
FCPS ranks 7th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. In fiscal year 2014, FCPS had a total full-time regular and special
education pupil population of 40,648 students at its 66 schools. FCPS’
operating and capital expenditures totaled $547 million in fiscal year 2013.
The Office of Legislative Audits has conducted its second audit of FCPS’
financial management practices. The results of the first audit were issued in
a report dated June 4, 2008. Our current audit identified a number of
opportunities for FCPS to improve internal controls and to enhance policy
direction.
FCPS Needs To Improve Internal Controls and Accountability
FCPS needs to improve internal controls in several financial areas. For
example, we noted that FCPS lacked an independent review to ensure that
critical personnel and payroll transactions processed were proper. FCPS also
needs to restrict user access capabilities to record critical transactions on its
automated human resources and payroll, and accounts receivable systems.
Additionally, FCPS needs to implement adequate security measures and
monitoring procedures to protect its network and related critical devices from
security risks. Account and password controls to protect critical systems were
not sufficient.
Existing procurement policies were not consistently followed and
documentation was not always retained for the procurement of professional
architectural and engineering and construction management services to
support contract award decisions. Our test of five procurements totaling $7.4
million disclosed various deficiencies in four of the procurements totaling
$6.3 million. For example, the technical evaluation of proposals submitted
was not always adequately documented, as sometimes individual technical
scoring sheets were missing and the identity of the related evaluators could
not be determined. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance that
appropriate personnel had performed the technical evaluations and that the
scores used for ranking the proposals were valid. Also, the selection of
finalists allowed to submit fee proposals was not always consistent with the
ranking of the contractor’s technical proposals.
5

--- Page 8 ---
FCPS needs to verify the propriety of payments to contractors for health care
services. FCPS is self-insured for employee medical benefits and uses a third-
party administrator to process related claims. FCPS reimbursed the
administrator for claims paid upon request without sighting support for the
amounts actually paid. Payments to the administrator during fiscal year 2013
totaled $49.6 million.
FCPS Needs To Modify Certain Policies and Practices
FCPS should consider broadening the scope of its policies so that they
address all applicable procurement situations. FCPS should revise its policies
regarding the Board’s involvement in decisions for certain procurements so
the Board can provide oversight regarding the appropriateness of such
procurements. Current policy generally requires Board approval of all
competitively procured contracts of over $25,000. The policies are silent on
the Board’s involvement with non-competitive contracts over that dollar
threshold, and school management personnel are allowed to approve sole
and single source procurements of over $25,000 without notifying the Board
of such procurements. Also, the Board has standard operating procedures for
the evaluation of procurements for architectural and engineering contracts
that requires retention of individual evaluator scoring sheets for all contractor
proposals, but they do not have such a requirement for construction
management contracts.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Frederick County Public Schools (FCPS)
ranks 7th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2014 full-time student enrollment was 40,648
students. FCPS has 66 schools, consisting of 36 elementary, 13 middle
schools, 10 high schools and 7 other types of schools (including vocational,
charter and alternative, but excluding special education).
According to FCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2013 revenues
were $550.4 million and expenditures were $547 million. The largest
expenditure category was salaries and wages which, including benefits,
accounted for approximately 82 percent of total expenditures. According to
MSDE records, for fiscal year 2014, FCPS had 5,617 full-time equivalent
positions, which consisted of 3,961 instructional positions and 1,656 non-
instructional positions.
Oversight
FCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of seven elected voting
members and one non-voting student member. The State and the Frederick
County government provide the vast majority of FCPS funding. In addition,
MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment and
monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with FCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Frederick County government exercises authority over FCPS
primarily through the review and approval of FCPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
External Audits
FCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual fiscal year-end financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts
what is referred to as a Single Audit of FCPS federal grant programs (as
required by federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial
statement audit and Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2011 through 2014,
and examined the related work papers for the fiscal year 2012 audits, which
were the latest work papers available when we commenced our field work.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Due to similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the FCPS’ financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas, we
relied on the results of the independent audits to reduce the scope of our
audit work related to revenues and federal grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Our audit included a review to determine the status of 19 of the 26 findings
contained in our preceding audit report dated June 4, 2008 (the 26 findings
resulted in 18 detailed recommendations in that report). We followed up on
these 19 findings based on our current assessment of significance and risk
relative to the audit objectives. We determined that FCPS satisfactorily
addressed 11 of these findings. The remaining 8 findings are repeated in this
report.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Frederick County Public Schools (FCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Frederick County, the State, and the federal government.
According to the FCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $550.4 million during fiscal year 2013. In addition to these
revenue sources, schools collect funds for various purposes, such as student
activities, clubs, and school publications. Because they are not considered
school revenue, these school activity funds are accounted for separately by
each school and reported in summary in the audited financial statements.
Although this revenue is raised through student-related activities, FCPS has a
fiduciary duty to safeguard these funds. For fiscal year 2013, school activity
fund collections totaled $6.5 million and the June 30, 2013 balance was $2.7
million.
External Audits
Due to the similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the FCPS financial statements and our objectives
for this area, we placed significant reliance on the results of the firm’s audit
for certain revenues and accounts receivable for which the auditor’s
procedural reviews and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or
significant deficiencies.
Reviews of School Activity Funds
FCPS contracts with an independent certified public accountant (CPA) to
conduct reviews of all school activity funds (SAF) annually. The CPA’s review
and testing of these funds during fiscal years 2012 and 2013 generally found
them to be adequate, with control weaknesses identified at certain schools;
however, these weaknesses were not prevalent among the schools. FCPS
provides the CPA with a standardized checklist that includes the general types
of procedures to be performed, which is then used to communicate the
results of the CPA’s reviews to the schools.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Finding 1
FCPS did not adequately monitor the work performed by the accountant
contracted to review SAF.
Analysis
FCPS did not adequately verify that the CPA had performed all work under its
contract for the annual review of SAF and had reported the results to the
management of the applicable schools, as required.
 FCPS did not require the CPA to prepare working papers to document that
all work required under the SAF review contract had been performed.
Specifically, FCPS had not established a provision in the related contract
to require that working papers be prepared documenting the review steps
performed and made available upon request for FCPS’ review.
Furthermore, our review of 30 CPA reviews of the SAF for 10 schools found
that the only documentation prepared was the standardized checklist
used to report the results to the schools. No additional working papers
had been prepared to support the work performed or the findings reported
on the checklist. Consequently, there was a lack of detail for FCPS to
examine to ensure that the review work had been properly performed and
that it fulfilled all requirements under the contract.
 Our review of the checklists prepared for the aforementioned 30 CPA
reviews disclosed that 12 checklists prepared for 9 of those schools were
missing the signatures of the Principal and Administrative Secretary for the
respective school. The checklists have signature blocks that are supposed
to be signed by the Principal and Administrative Secretary to document
that the results of the SAF review were discussed with them as required
under the contract. This document is then forwarded to the FCPS central
office. Consequently, there was lack of assurance that the results of the
CPA review were properly communicated and acknowledged by school
management so that proper corrective action could be taken.
Finally, our review of the findings for 10 schools, found that generally no
significant deficiencies were reported, although there were isolated control or
compliance issues, such as errors on bank reconciliations or untimely
deposits of collections.
Recommendation 1
We recommend FCPS ensure that
a. a contract provision is established requiring that working papers be
prepared to document the procedures performed, information obtained,
and conclusions reached for each SAF review;
10

--- Page 13 ---
b. the aforementioned working papers be periodically reviewed by FCPS
management to ensure compliance with contract terms and that adequate
support is maintained by the CPA; and
c. the results of each school activity fund review are formally communicated
to school officials, as required.
Finding 2
FCPS had not established proper controls over non-cash credits.
Analysis
Non-cash credit adjustments posted to accounts receivables by the central
accounting department were not properly controlled.
 Non-cash credits posted to the automated accounts receivable system
were not subject to independent supervisory review to verify propriety.
Output reports of non-cash credits processed were not generated from the
automated accounts receivable system and used to verify their propriety
by performing an independent comparison to the related supervisory
approved source documents.
 User access capabilities to perform non-cash credit functions in FCPS’
automated financial management system were not adequately restricted.
Specifically, our review of user access capabilities assigned to employees
as of September 2013 disclosed 13 employees with the ability to process
non-cash credits that did not need that capability to perform their job
duties. In addition, 2 of these 13 employees also had access to the safe
where cash receipts were to be kept overnight when the deposit cannot be
made the same day.
 Accounts receivable and cash receipts functions were not always properly
segregated. Our review disclosed two employees who were primarily
responsible for either processing non-cash credits in the accounts
receivable or performing cash receipts functions but would sometimes
perform the other function in a backup capacity when the primary
personnel were not available. For example, we noted where one of the
aforementioned employees, who was primarily responsible for processing
non-cash credits, had received and initially recorded cash receipts on at
least 15 days during fiscal year 2013. A similar condition regarding a lack
of separation of duties was commented upon in our preceding audit
report.
11

--- Page 14 ---
As a result, cash receipts could be misappropriated or unauthorized non-cash
credits could potentially be processed without detection. According to FCPS
records, accounts receivable processed by central accounting totaled
approximately $3.9 million and non-cash credits totaled approximately
$106,000 during fiscal year 2013 of which $80,000 were processed by one
of the aforementioned employees who also was involved in initially receiving
and recording cash receipts in a backup capacity. Our test of 15 non-cash
credit transactions totaling $16,000, which included 10 days where the
employee who processed the transaction had also recently handled cash
receipts, did not disclose any unauthorized transactions.
Recommendation 2
We recommend FCPS
a. establish procedures to ensure non-cash credit adjustments processed in
its automated financial management system are properly authorized and
supported. Specifically, FCPS should generate and review output reports
of non-cash credit adjustments from the system and have an independent
employee compare the adjustments to related approved authorizing
documents;
b. restrict access capabilities to perform non-cash credit adjustments
to accounts receivable records to only users who need that capability to
perform their job duties; and
c. properly segregate the duties of the accounts receivable and cash receipt
functions (repeat).
We advised FCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Federal Funds
Background
FCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2013 expenditures totaled $19.6
million, not including federally funded fee-for-service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audit of the FCPS federal grants and the objectives
12

--- Page 15 ---
of our audit in this area, we relied on the auditor's work and results. Besides
expressing an opinion on FCPS compliance with the terms of several grant
programs, the auditor also considered the existing internal control structure's
impact on compliance and audited the required Schedule of Federal Awards
(which includes claimed and reported grant expenditures) for fiscal year
2013. The related report stated that FCPS complied, in all material respects,
with the requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect
to internal controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal
programs, the auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and FCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $100.3 million during fiscal year 2013. FCPS has a
formal procurement policy and related procedures. The policy sets bidding
requirements and specifies when Board approval is required. FCPS uses an
automated system to process requisitions, purchase orders, invoices, and
payments to vendors. Purchase orders, contracts, solicitations, and bids are
processed by a centralized purchasing department. The centralized finance
office’s accounts payable unit processes payments after receipt of the goods
and services is confirmed by the division that received those goods or
services.
Internal Audit of Procurement Activity
FCPS, along with Frederick County government, and Frederick Community
College (FCC) receives internal audit services from the Interagency Internal
Audit Authority (IIAA). The IIAA is an independent agency of Frederick County
government governed by a seven member board comprised of one
representative each from the county government, FCPS, and the FCC Board of
Trustees and four members from the public with expertise in accounting,
auditing, and internal control. IIAA contracted with an independent certified
public accounting firm to conduct an audit of FCPS’ purchasing and
disbursement processes. The audit period was January 1, 2011 through
December 31, 2012 and the audit report was dated October 16, 2013.
Due to the similarities between the work performed by the IIAA and the
objectives of our audit in this area, we placed reliance on the work of the IIAA
audit to reduce the scope of our review in this area. For example, the audit
disclosed that generally FCPS procurements encouraged fair and open
competition, goods and services received were monitored for compliance with
13

--- Page 16 ---
contract terms and conditions, and that payments tested were appropriate
and in compliance with FCPS policies. The audit resulted in 17
recommendations. FCPS’ responses in large part agreed to implement these
recommendations. As of March 21, 2014, FCPS indicated that 9 of these
recommendations had been implemented and it was still in the
process of addressing 4 of the recommendations. For the remaining 4
recommendations, no further actions were planned by FCPS. Our review
disclosed that the majority of the findings did not relate to areas deemed
critical to our audit objectives. However, we did follow-up on one finding of
potential significance; that access controls over critical purchasing and
disbursement system functions were inadequate. At the time of our follow-up,
we deemed the existing controls adequate.
Finding 3
FCPS’ controls over obtaining and retaining corporate purchasing cards were
not adequate.
Analysis
FCPS lacked adequate controls over its corporate purchasing cards (CPC).
According to FCPS records, as of June 2013, 684 cards had been issued to
FCPS employees and related expenditures totaled approximately $6.8 million
during fiscal year 2013. For example:
 The functions of ordering and receiving new cards were not properly
segregated. Specifically, an employee responsible for receiving and
issuing new cards also had the capability to order new cards. In addition,
this same employee performed monthly audit reviews of card purchase
transactions for propriety. Also, documentation of the approval of the
issuance of new cards by the cardholder’s supervisor was not always
maintained. Specifically, our test of 10 cards issued disclosed 6 were
missing documentation to substantiate supervisory approval of the
issuance of the card. The supervisor’s approval provides assurance cards
were issued to appropriate employees who require cards for their job
responsibilities. As a result of the above issues, unauthorized cards could
be ordered and received by the aforementioned employee and improper
purchases could be made using an unauthorized card and remain
undetected. A similar condition regarding a lack of segregation of duties
over the ordering, receipt, and issuance of new cards by one employee
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 FCPS did not perform periodic evaluations of card usage to determine
whether the employees assigned the cards needed them. Records
provided by the card issuing bank disclosed that, as of June 2013, 78
cards had not been used for periods ranging from 12 to 25 months,
including 50 that had never been used. A similar condition regarding a
lack of periodic evaluations of card usage was commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FCPS
a. segregate CPC ordering, receiving, and audit functions (repeat);
b. maintain documentation to support supervisory approval of all cards
issued; and
c. conduct periodic evaluations of card usage and terminate cards that are
determined to be unnecessary (repeat).
We advised FCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using
existing personnel.
Finding 4
FCPS’ procurement policies requiring Board approval of purchases of over
$25,000 was delegated for certain types of purchases without a formal
corresponding Board reporting process.
Analysis
Board approved FCPS’ policies delegated the approval for sole and
single source procurements over $25,000 to certain administrative
individuals and did not require reporting to the Board so it could exercise
appropriate oversight.1 While FCPS had developed formal procurement
policies to address the acquisition and Board approval of competitive
procurements of over $25,000, it did not require Board approval for non-
competitive procurements over $25,000. Rather, only the purchasing
manager’s or Superintendent’s approval was specifically required for sole
and single source procurements over $25,000, respectively. Further, Board
policy provided that the Superintendent had the discretion to notify the
Board of single source procurements that he or she approves, and the
policies were silent regarding notifications for sole source procurements. A
1FCPS’ Policies define Single Source procurements as when staff actively seeks one supplier
even though multiple suppliers are available and define Sole Source procurements as when
only one supplier is available.
15

--- Page 18 ---
similar condition regarding the approval of sole source procurement
policies was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
According to FCPS records, sole and single source procurements over
$25,000 totaled approximately $11.1 million during fiscal year 2013, of
which $8.6 million were for placements of special education students in
private institutions. While we acknowledge that waiting for Board approval
could potentially delay these placements, we believe that the Board should at
least be notified of such contracts so that they would have an opportunity to
review the decision it had delegated to others.
Recommendation 4
We recommend FCPS modify its policies to require that, at a minimum, the
Board to be notified of delegated sole and single source procurements
exceeding $25,000 (repeat).
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the FCPS
budget. According to FCPS records, fiscal year 2013 salary, wage, and benefit
costs totaled $447 million, or 82 percent of the $547 million total operating
expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of Education reports,
during the 2013 – 2014 school year, FCPS had 5,617 full-time positions,
which consisted of 3,961 instructional and 1,656 non-instructional
employees.
FCPS uses an automated integrated human resources (HR) and payroll
system to maintain human resources information, record employee time,
track leave usage, and to process and record payroll transactions. The
system automatically generates semi-monthly time records and any
adjustments are processed by central payroll personnel. The system
generates payroll checks and direct deposit advices. Payroll processing
involves both automated processes (such as compiling leave and running edit
reports) and manual processes (such as data entry of new employee
information).
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 5
Capabilities assigned to users who would perform critical HR and payroll
system functions was not adequately monitored and restricted. In addition,
reviews of HR transactions were not always independently performed.
Analysis
Capabilities assigned to users who would perform critical HR and payroll
system functions were not adequately monitored and restricted to employees
who needed that access to perform their job duties. In addition, reviews of HR
transactions were not always independently performed.
 Although FCPS had established a procedure for the supervisory approval
of the access capabilities granted to new HR and payroll department
system users, FCPS had not established a procedure for the periodic
review of the propriety of existing users’ access capabilities. Specifically,
available reports of employee access capabilities were not periodically
generated (for example, annually) and distributed to applicable
supervisors for review and confirmation of the continued need for that
access. Instead, FCPS relied on individual supervisors to notify its
Technology Systems staff if access needed to be changed. Consequently,
FCPS personnel were unaware of the unnecessary and incompatible
access capabilities that existed for many users.
 Our review of the access capabilities of 176 users with critical HR and
payroll system functions, as of September 25, 2013, disclosed that 11
users had unnecessary access to one or more critical HR or payroll
functions (4 had access to as many as 8 different critical functions) that
were not required to perform their job duties. For example, these 11 users
had inappropriately been granted access to an HR function that allowed
them to change critical employee information, including compensation
rates, job positions, and benefits. Furthermore, 3 of the 11 users had
incompatible payroll system capabilities that enabled them to process
unauthorized payroll transactions. Additionally, we noted that there were
16 active test accounts with unnecessary production system access
capable of updating one or more critical HR and payroll related functions
(4 had access to as many as 10 different critical functions). After we
brought this to their attention, FCPS personnel agreed that the accounts
should not have had such production system access and they were
deactivated. Our test of HR and payroll update activity did not disclose
any inappropriate transactions.
 The reviews of the propriety of personnel changes processed that were
performed monthly on a test basis by HR employees were not always
17

--- Page 20 ---
independent, as one of the employees that performed the review also had
HR system update capabilities.
We commented on the failure to segregate incompatible job duties (and
related user access capabilities) and the lack of an independent review of
personnel changes in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that FCPS take appropriate actions to ensure the propriety of
assigned user access capabilities, and the propriety of HR and payroll
transactions. Specifically, FCPS should
a. perform a periodic documented review of user access capabilities for the
HR and payroll functions to identify any incompatible and unnecessary
capabilities and make appropriate changes (repeat);
b. for any users found to have inappropriate capabilities, conduct a review to
determine if the user performed any unauthorized transactions and take
any necessary corrective actions; and
c. perform a periodic documented independent review of personnel actions
processed (repeat).
Finding 6
Adequate controls had not been established over a certain high-risk access
capability that enabled users to change or delete historical personnel and
payroll records.
Analysis
Adequate controls had not been established over a certain high-risk access
capability that enabled users to change or delete personnel and payroll
records without leaving documentation that a change or deletion occurred.
Specifically, Correction Mode (CM) access to critical HR and payroll functions
was not adequately restricted nor was there a documented compensating
control. CM is an administrative level access that, when granted, enables
users to change or delete historical data. FCPS uses CM access to primarily
correct errors in an employee’s HR or payroll records. Normally the processing
of personnel changes results in the recording of effective dates and other
information that provides a permanent audit trail of the transaction. Under
CM, historical personnel actions (for example, changes to compensation
rates) can be overwritten or deleted without leaving a typical audit trail. CM
can also be used to change the historical effective dates of previous
personnel actions. Our review of CM access disclosed the following:
18

--- Page 21 ---
 As of May 16, 2013, there were 18 user accounts with CM access. In
response to our inquiries, FCPS personnel advised that 3 of these users
did not need this access to perform their job duties. Additionally, 3 users
were actually active test accounts created by and assigned to FCPS
Technology Services Department personnel, who did not need such
access. The remaining 12 users were HR personnel whose job functions
were consistent with processing personnel actions. However, FCPS agreed
that, given the high level of risk with CM access, such access should be
very limited and further controlled.
 CM actions were not independently reviewed and approved for propriety.
FCPS had created a custom report to track CM changes and deletions,
which was periodically generated and reviewed to verify the propriety of
the listed CM actions. However, these reviews were not documented and
the employee assigned the responsibility for performing the reviews was
not independent as this individual also had been assigned CM access
capabilities.
During fiscal year 2013, FCPS processed 1,118 CM changes and deletions.
Our test of 15 of these CM transactions did not disclose any improprieties.
ISACA2 stipulates that "...correction mode should be restricted to very few
users, if any, since its ability to change data in the past presents a high risk to
data accuracy."
Recommendation 6
We recommend that FCPS
a. evaluate whether the use of CM is necessary and, if so, restrict that level
of access to very few employees that require such access to perform their
job duties; and
b. implement a documented independent review process of all CM actions by
an individual who cannot perform CM functions.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to FCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $60 million as of June 30, 2013.
2ISACA (previously known as the ‘Information Systems Audit and Control Association’) is a
private association of information technology audit professionals that publishes Information
Systems (IS) audit standards and offers IS audit certification programs.
19

--- Page 22 ---
FCPS uses automated records to track its equipment inventory, including both
sensitive and capital items.
Finding 7
Physical inventories were not conducted as required by FCPS policy.
Analysis
Physical inventories were not conducted as required by FCPS policies.
Specifically, our test of five locations, with equipment costing $5.3 million,
disclosed that one of the five locations, with equipment totaling $4.1
million, did not conduct a physical inventory count during fiscal year 2013. In
addition, this same location’s fiscal year 2012 physical inventory
was incomplete. Specifically, 29 of the 95 total pages of the 2012
physical inventory listing of items to be inventoried were not verified. FCPS
inventory procedures require physical inventories of all capital assets and
sensitive items to be performed at least once per year.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that FCPS ensure all departments comply with applicable
FCPS inventory procedures.
Information Technology
Background
The FCPS’ Technical Services Department (TSD) maintains and administers
the FCPS telecommunications network, instructional applications, email
system, help desk, technology support, and computer operations. TSD also
operates a wide-area network for FCPS’ headquarters and schools and
maintains the critical core networking equipment and servers used to support
the FCPS operations. Additionally, FCPS Human Resources Division technical
staff manages the FCPS financial and human resources applications and
related databases while the TSD supports the servers and infrastructure that
support the applications and databases. Finally, per a cooperative
agreement, the separate networks for FCPS and Frederick County
Government (FCG) are inter-connected for purposes of allowing both agencies
to share certain computer resources.
20

--- Page 23 ---
Finding 8
Proper access, account, and password controls were not established over
critical applications, servers, and a database.
Analysis
Proper access, account, and password controls were not established over
critical applications, servers, and a database.
 FCPS provided over 11,000 active user accounts unnecessary, read and
modification access to clear text (that is, unencrypted) files maintained on
a web server that contained sensitive personal information (for example
names and social security numbers) of numerous individuals. This
sensitive personal information is commonly sought for use in identity theft
and therefore should be protected by appropriate information system
security controls. A similar condition was commented upon in our
preceding audit report regarding unnecessary or inappropriate access
privileges and capabilities. Best practices prescribed by the State of
Maryland’s Department of Information Technology’s (DoIT) Information
Security Policy state that “Agencies must ensure that only authorized
individuals (employees or agency contractors) have access to confidential
information and that such access is strictly controlled, audited, and that it
supports the concepts of ‘least possible privilege’ and ‘need to know’.”
 All of the FCPS’ and FCG’s network addresses had unnecessary network
level access to the management consoles of over 130 physical servers
that hosted over 350 guest virtual servers. As a result of this condition,
users with access to these network addresses could attempt to logon to
these consoles and compromise the respective host and virtual servers.
Best practices identified in the DoIT Information Security Policy, state that
organizations are responsible for “configuring the security settings of
information technology products to the most restrictive mode consistent
with operational requirements.”
 Account and password controls over several significant applications,
including the financial and HR systems, and a critical database were not in
compliance with the best practices identified in the DoIT Information
Security Policy. Specifically, we identified over 200 active critical
application accounts that had not been used for over 365 days. The DoIT
policy requires that user identifications associated with a password be
disabled or locked after 60 days of inactivity. Furthermore, password
length, complexity and history settings were not in accordance with the
21

--- Page 24 ---
aforementioned Policy. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that FCPS
a. limit read and modification access to the aforementioned files containing
sensitive personal information to only those users requiring such access
(repeat),
b. limit network level access to the management consoles of all host servers
to only those network administrators requiring such access, and
c. establish appropriate account and password controls (repeat).
Finding 9
FCG had unnecessary network level access to the entire FCPS network over
all ports.
Analysis
FCG connected directly to a FCPS network device behind the FCPS Internet
firewall and our review of this network device disclosed that no network level
traffic filters were defined to limit incoming FCG network traffic from this
connection. As a result of these conditions, the entire FCG network could
access, at the network level, all internal FCPS network resources via all ports.
Best practices identified in the DoIT Information Security Policy prescribe that
information systems shall prevent unauthorized and unintended information
transfer via shared system resources, and, that information systems shall be
configured to monitor and control communications at the external boundaries
of the information systems and at key internal boundaries within the systems.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that the connection from the FCG to the FCPS be made to the
FCPS Internet firewall and that the necessary network level traffic filters be
defined on this firewall to properly protect the FCPS network.
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 10
Malware protection on FCPS workstations was not comprehensive.
Analysis
Malware protection on FCPS workstations was not comprehensive.
 The anti-malware software used to protect FCPS workstations was not
properly configured to limit users’ capabilities. Specifically, the anti-
malware software was configured to allow users of 6 of 8 workstations
tested to disable anti-malware software features that would render the
software unable to protect against malware threats. Furthermore, 10 of
10 computers tested had not been updated with the most current anti-
malware software version available.
 Local administrator privileges were not properly restricted. All eight users
selected for testing were assigned local administrative rights to their
workstations. As a result, if these workstations were infected with
malware, the malware would run with administrative rights and expose
these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights. In addition, as
a result of this condition, these eight users could disable the anti-malware
software on their workstations.
 Workstations tested had not been updated with the latest releases for
software products that are known to have significant security related
vulnerabilities. Although the vendors for these software products
frequently provide software patches to address these vulnerabilities, FCPS
had not updated its workstations for these patches. For example, eight
workstations tested for one of these software products noted that all eight
workstations were running older versions of this software.
Best practice guidance from the DoIT Information Security Policy states that
agencies should configure security settings of information technology
products to the most restrictive mode consistent with operational
requirements.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that FCPS
a. disable the settings which allow users to override and modify default
security controls established by management,
b. configure all FCPS computers with the most current anti-malware software
version available,
23

--- Page 26 ---
c. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel who
require such rights for their job duties, and
d. ensure that all computers are kept up-to-date for all critical security
related updates to potentially vulnerable installed software.
Finding 11
Monitoring controls over a database and application were not sufficient to
protect critical data.
Analysis
Monitoring controls over a database and application were not sufficient to
protect critical data.
 Monitoring of the student information system database was inadequate.
Certain critical security and audit events (for example, grant privilege and
stop audit) were not monitored although the capability to perform such
monitoring exists within existing software. Furthermore, direct changes to
critical student database grade tables were not monitored. These
conditions could result in unauthorized or inappropriate activities
(affecting the integrity of the production database information) going
undetected by management.
 FCPS did not monitor additions, changes, and deletions to a critical
financial application’s permission lists and changes to the application’s
security parameters (for example password settings). Furthermore,
reports of security events that were reported for this application were not
generated and therefore the propriety of these security events was not
determined.
Best practices identified in the DoIT Information Security Policy require that
“Information systems must generate audit records for all security-relevant
events, including all security and system administrator accesses” and
“Procedures must be developed to routinely (for example daily or weekly)
review audit records for indications of unusual activities, suspicious activities
or suspected violations, and report findings to appropriate officials for prompt
resolution.”
Recommendation 11
We recommend that the FCPS
a. implement proper monitoring of critical database security and audit events
and direct changes to student database grade tables;
24

--- Page 27 ---
b. monitor additions, deletions, and changes to the aforementioned financial
application’s permission lists and security parameters; and
c. regularly generate reports of application security events, review these
reports, document these reviews, and retain the documentation for
subsequent verification.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
FCPS employs a staff of 493 employees to maintain its 59 primary and
secondary schools and its other education, administrative, and support
facilities. According to its fiscal year 2014 Capital Improvement Plan (CIP),
necessary construction, major renovations, repairs, and systemic
improvements to FCPS facilities over the next six years are estimated to cost
$302 million.
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
FCPS has processes in place to minimize energy costs. For example, FCPS
utilizes an energy management system that monitors and accounts for energy
usage and employs an energy management program manager trained in
conservation techniques and monitoring energy practices (such as usage
reports and year-to-year comparisons). According to reports prepared by FCPS
(which we did not audit), FCPS reduced energy usage by 11.6 percent from
fiscal years 2012 to 2013.
Professional Service Contracts
FCPS has established certain policies and procedures for the procurement of
architectural and engineering (A&E) and construction management services.
FCPS periodically conducts pre-qualification screenings of applicants to
identify eligible contractors to be placed on a list to receive requests for
proposals (RFPs). When services are needed, RFPs are sent to pre-qualified
contractors, who submit separate technical and cost proposals for the specific
project. All technical proposals are evaluated and for the contractors with the
highest technical scores (a minimum of two), the related financial (cost)
proposals are opened and the bidder with the lowest cost proposal is
recommended for award. The Board approves all A&E and construction
management contracts greater than $25,000. During fiscal years 2011 to
2013, there were 8 major facility construction projects (over $4 million each)
with budgets totaling $281.3 million that were either opened or closed with
related expenditures, as of October 4, 2013, totaling $172.6 million.
25

--- Page 28 ---
Finding 12
Policies were not always adhered to and documentation was not retained for
critical documents related to the procurement of A&E and construction
management services.
Analysis
FCPS did not always adhere to policies for the procurement of professional
A&E and construction management services and policies were not as
comprehensive as necessary for the retention of certain documents.
Furthermore, certain documentation pertaining to the procurements was not
retained. Our review of five contract procurements for such services totaling
$7.4 million, related to five major facility construction projects totaling $176
million, disclosed deficiencies with four of the procurements totaling $6.3
million.
 A certificate of insurance was not obtained for two procurements totaling
approximately $1.6 million, to document that insurance coverage was
purchased in the type (for example, general liability) and amount (for
example, $2 million in aggregate) required. The contracts specified that a
Certificate of Insurance confirming such coverage is to be submitted to
FCPS prior to commencing work under the contract.
 For two procurements, totaling approximately $2.7 million, related to
construction management services, adequate documentation was not
maintained of the technical evaluations performed for the proposals
submitted. Although a summary of the technical evaluation scores was
maintained for both projects, the individual technical scoring sheets were
missing for two of four evaluators for one project and three of four for the
other. We noted there was no existing Board policy requiring the retention
of the individual scoring sheets for construction management service
contracts. Furthermore, the technical evaluation summary for one of the
projects did not identify who the three evaluators were that had prepared
the missing scoring sheets. Consequently, there was a lack of assurance
that appropriate personnel had performed the technical evaluations and
that the scores used for ranking the proposals and making the award
decisions were valid.
 The selection of the four finalists to submit financial proposals for one
procurement was not consistent with the technical ranking of the
contractors’ proposals. Specifically, FCPS personnel could not explain,
why a financial proposal was requested from the contractor ranked 6th
technically, but not the 4th and 5th ranked bidders.
26

--- Page 29 ---
 For two procurements, the time periods allowed for the submission of the
technical and financial proposals (14 and 16 days) were less than
specified in the Board’s approved operating procedures (3 to 4 weeks).
We were advised by FCPS personnel that the employee responsible for
advertising for bids was complying with Maryland law, which required at
least a 2 week period, and was unfamiliar with the applicable Board policy.
We commented on the inconsistent application of procurement policies and
the inadequate documentation of procurement awards in our preceding audit
report.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that FCPS ensure that procurement policies are applied
consistently to all professional service contracts and the basis for
procurement award decisions are properly documented. Specifically, we
recommend that
a. contract terms requiring the purchase of insurance are complied with;
b. Board policies be amended to require the retention of all bid
documentation for construction management contracts;
c. technical evaluations of proposals, including individual scoring sheets and
the identities of the evaluators be properly documented and retained by
FCPS;
d. procurement selection and ranking procedures are consistently applied
and that justification for any deviations from standard procedures are
documented (repeat); and
e. the time period allowed for submission of proposals is consistent with
Board policy (repeat).
Finding 13
FCPS did not adequately document preventive maintenance work performed.
Analysis
Although FCPS has developed a comprehensive maintenance plan that
includes preventive maintenance and task schedules, and required that
inspections and preventive maintenance work be completed at certain
intervals, documentation was not maintained to substantiate that
maintenance was performed. FCPS has an automated work order system that
is used to generate monthly maintenance task lists and work order forms.
Work orders are signed by maintenance staff when completed and reviewed
by maintenance supervisory personnel to ensure assigned tasks were properly
performed. However, our test of one month’s schedule of preventive
maintenance at 10 schools during fiscal years 2012 and 2013 disclosed a
27

--- Page 30 ---
lack of documentation to support that preventive maintenance was performed
at 3 of these schools. Without appropriate documentation, there is a lack of
assurance that all preventive maintenance required by its plan had been
performed.
 For two schools, 30 percent or less of preventive maintenance work orders
were completed for the month selected for testing. At one school only 10
out of the 80 (12.5 percent) preventive maintenance work orders were
completed and at the other school only 24 out of the 80 (30 percent) were
completed.
 FCPS could not provide documentation to support completion of any
preventive maintenance for the month selected for testing for one school.
Our expanded review of this school disclosed that FCPS did not have
documentation to support that preventive maintenance was being
completed for the period from August 2010 to July 2013. According to
FCPS maintenance personnel, upon us bringing it to their attention, they
found that all preventive maintenance tasks were removed from the work
order system in 2008 when the preceding school of the same name was
demolished. However, when the new school opened in August 2010, a
new set of preventive maintenance tasks were never entered into the
system. A preventive maintenance schedule for this school was
established in July 2013 with 40 monthly work order tasks.
We commented on the inadequate documentation of the performance of
required scheduled preventative maintenance in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that FCPS
a. perform all required preventive maintenance in accordance with the
comprehensive maintenance plan and maintain appropriate
documentation of the work performed (repeat), and
b. ensure that appropriate preventive maintenance tasks are established
and kept current for each facility.
Transportation Services
Background
Based on land area, Frederick County is the largest county in the State. FCPS
is responsible for the safe transportation of approximately 29,700 eligible
students. These students were transported using 434 school system-owned
28

--- Page 31 ---
buses. According to FCPS audited financial statements, fiscal year 2013
transportation expenditures totaled approximately $20.1 million.
FCPS Utilized Many Practices to Minimize Transportation Costs
FCPS has established many practices to actively manage the cost of
transportation operations, some of which were unique. For example, FCPS
has established a program that under certain circumstances pays parents to
transport their special needs students to school in order to avoid using more
expensive bus services. Also, FCPS’ bus maintenance program includes
periodic inspections and preventive maintenance of its buses to keep its bus
fleet running efficiently and effectively. FCPS competitively procures fuel
under a variety of methods to ensure it receives the best prices for differing
circumstances. Based on MSDE and Local Education Agency data for fiscal
year 2012, FCPS had the lowest per rider and per mile costs as compared to
four similarly sized school systems (based on the number of students
transported).
Finding 14
Inventory controls over Transportation Department parts were inadequate.
Analysis
Procedures and internal controls over Transportation Department parts
inventories, which included parts and supplies used to service buses and
other system fleet vehicles, were inadequate as two employees had virtually
complete control over the inventory and related records. Specifically, our
review disclosed the two employees responsible for custody of the parts
inventory at the transportation warehouse were also responsible for taking the
annual physical inventory, ordering parts from vendors, maintaining the detail
inventory records, and making adjustments to the records. Furthermore our
testing of inventory records disclosed the following
 FCPS could not provide adequate justification or explanations to support
any of 20 negative inventory adjustments (adjustments reducing the
quantities reflected on the inventory records) totaling $30,834 tested. We
were generally advised that the adjustments were made to bring the
records in agreement with the last physical inventory counts. However,
the reasons for why the discrepancies existed could not be adequately
explained.
 Item quantities on hand were significantly lower than recorded on the
detail inventory records in several instances. Our test of 10 items with a
total cost of $29,315 on the inventory records, as of October, 2013,
29

--- Page 32 ---
disclosed 3 items with a total value of $8,271 where the quantities on
hand were significantly less than quantities per related inventory records.
In total, the value of these shortages for these 3 items totaled $1,927.
In discussing these issues, FCPS personnel acknowledged that inventory
controls over parts inventories were lacking, particularly over dispensing fluids
and safeguarding inventory assets (such as, ensuring all parts inventories
areas are locked). According to FCPS inventory records, parts on hand as of
August 2013 totaled $288,000 and the value of parts received during fiscal
year 2013 totaled $802,000. In addition, negative inventory adjustments
totaled $80,000 in fiscal year 2013.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that FCPS establish proper segregation of duties regarding
custody, record keeping, and physical inventory counts and that adequate
safeguards be implemented over transportation parts inventories.
Food Services
Background
FCPS organizes its schools into 11 complexes. Each complex includes
approximately 4 to 7 schools and has a designated base school and a
complex manager who is responsible for all schools within that complex. Food
and related supplies are received at FCPS' central warehouse or at each
complex base school and then transferred to each individual school as
needed. Food is then prepared at each school. In fiscal year 2013, FCPS
had approximately 120 cafeteria workers. According to FCPS’ audited
financial statements, food service operations expenditures
($11,256,820) exceeded revenues ($11,028,563) by $228,257 for fiscal
year 2013.
FCPS Took Measures to Address Operational Deficits in Food Service
Operations
In our prior audit report, we noted that FCPS’ food service was operating at
significant and persistent deficits for an eight-year period. Our current audit
disclosed that FCPS has taken measures to address food service
deficits. While for some recent years, FCPS operations resulted in deficits,
these deficits were not persistent and were offset by operational surpluses in
other years. Based on our review of food service operations from fiscal year
2009 through 2013, food service total revenues over this five-year period
exceeded total expenses by $702,000. Another result is that FCPS has
significantly reduced its cost per meal relative to similarly sized school
30

--- Page 33 ---
systems. Based on MSDE and Local Education Agency (LEA) data, from fiscal
year 2006 to 2013, FCPS’ per meal cost has gone from being the highest to
the second lowest as compared to four similarly sized LEAs. These
improvements in food service operations resulted from various measures
FCPS has taken.
 FCPS is more fully maximizing its utilization of the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) commodities resulting in cost savings to
food service operations. For fiscal years 2013 and 2014, FCPS fully
maximized its usage of USDA commodities.
 FCPS has been able to reduce food service payroll expenses over time by
further assessing resource needs. According to FCPS records, food service
payroll expenses have been reduced from $3.83 million in fiscal year
2010 to $3.65 million in fiscal year 2013. In addition, there has been an
approximate 10 percent reduction in the number of food service full-time
equivalent positions from fiscal year 2009 to 2013.
 Other actions that FCPS food service management personnel advised
were taken included developing more detailed recipe sheets for better
measurement of food products, continuous evaluation and removal of a-la-
carte menu items from the menu that were not selling, and additional
training provided to food service managers to ensure procedures and
processes were implemented efficiently.
Finding 15
Independent reviews of school cafeteria cash handling procedures were not
performed timely.
Analysis
FCPS did not ensure that reviews of cash handling operations at school
cafeterias were performed timely. FCPS contracted with an independent CPA
to conduct reviews at every school at least once per year to ensure that the
cash handling procedures at each school cafeteria were proper and that any
deficiencies identified were promptly corrected. However, our review in
December 2013 of 65 FCPS schools with cafeterias disclosed 35 schools had
not been subject to review for periods ranging from 642 to 797 days. FCPS
personnel advised that the issue was partly due to a change in contractors
during 2013; however, this does not fully explain delays approaching two
years.
31

--- Page 34 ---
Recommendation 15
We recommend that FCPS ensure that all school cafeteria cash handling
operations are reviewed timely (that is, annually).
Finding 16
Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated as transactions could be
voided by cashiers without independent review or approval at the schools we
reviewed.
Analysis
Cashiers in school cafeterias had the ability to void transactions on the
automated point-of-sale system with no independent review or approval. Also,
although the point-of-sale system is capable of generating output reports of
voided transactions for subsequent review, the schools did not generate these
reports. While FCPS advised that requiring independent management
approval of each void at the point of sale would not be feasible as it would
slow down the ability to get students through cafeteria lines, a documented
independent analysis of voided transaction activity per the output reports
could be performed after the fact to detect potential areas of concern, such
as cashiers with high volumes of voids that may warrant further investigation
or corrective actions.
According to FCPS records, 90,893 voids were processed by cashiers during
fiscal year 2013. According to FCPS audited financial statements, food
service revenue generated from charges for services totaled approximately
$5.3 million in fiscal year 2013.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that independent supervisory personnel, review and approve
voids, at least on a test basis, and that such reviews be documented. To
accomplish this, FCPS could generate periodic reports of all void transactions
and document the analysis of this information for unusual trends that should
be investigated, such as cashiers with abnormally high numbers of voids.
Finding 17
FCPS’ controls over food services inventory were not adequate.
Analysis
A proper segregation of duties did not exist over the food service inventories
at numerous locations. Specifically, detail inventory records are maintained
by the individual schools; however, FCPS management advised that due to
32

--- Page 35 ---
limited staffing at many schools (particularly elementary schools) the same
individual maintained the school’s inventory records, conducted the physical
inventory counts, and reported the inventory results to applicable FCPS
complex managers. FCPS written inventory procedures state that no one
individual should have responsibilities to purchase inventory, receive
inventory, maintain inventory records, and conduct physical inventories.
Furthermore, although FCPS had established certain audit processes whereby
periodic school visits by food services senior staff were to be made to
evaluate cafeteria operations, these reviews did not include individual
school’s food inventories and recordkeeping procedures. Finally, FCPS food
services management personnel advised us that additional reviews of schools
may be performed by complex managers at their discretion; however, there
was no requirement that the results of these reviews be reported to central
office personnel.
We commented on the lack of segregation of purchasing, records
maintenance, and physical inventory duties, and the lack of centralized
periodic monitoring of food and related supplies in our preceding audit report.
According to FCPS records, expenditures for food and supplies totaled
approximately $3.5 million during fiscal year 2013.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that FCPS implement additional controls over its food
inventory records (repeat). Specifically, FCPS should perform additional
centralized monitoring and oversight procedures to ensure school food
inventories are properly accounted for and controlled. For example, periodic
centralized reviews could include surprise independent sample counts of
inventories and documented analysis of school inventory data such as usage
and spoilage ratios, and the investigation of significant anomalies.
School Board Oversight
Background
FCPS’ Board of Education is composed of seven elected voting members and
one nonvoting student representative. In its oversight responsibilities, the
Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm for independent
audits of the FCPS financial statements and federal programs. The Board has
several established committees that discuss and provide advice on various
areas of FCPS operations and governance.
33

--- Page 36 ---
FCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
The Board has adopted a detailed ethics policy that conforms to State law and
includes provisions for conflicts of interest and financial disclosure and was
approved by the State Ethics Commission. Provisions of this policy are
applicable to Board members as well as all FCPS employees. FCPS
established an Ethics Panel currently consisting of five members (the policy
allows for up to seven members) who are appointed by the Board to interpret
ethics policies and provide advice on policy implementation. The Panel also
reviews and rules on any reported complaints of ethics violations. According
to the ethics policy, annual financial disclosure statements are required to be
filed by Board members, candidates for the Board, the Superintendent, and a
number of other administrators (such as school principals and agency
buyers) by April 30th each year. Our review of the records for employees
required to submit financial disclosure forms for the period May 1, 2012
through April 30, 2013, disclosed that forms were submitted as required.
FCPS Established a Confidential Hotline to Enable Employees to Report
Suspected Fraud, Waste, or Abuse
The Board has implemented a third-party hotline and confidential reporting
process for allegations of financial fraud, waste, abuse, or other illegal
activities that may impact the school system's operations. The Board also
approved a policy identifying the process for investigating these confidential
allegations and reporting the investigatory results.
FCPS Adopted Cash Investment and Debt Management Policies
The Board has adopted reasonable cash investment and debt management
policies to address prior audit recommendations.
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
FCPS self-insures its employee healthcare costs. FCPS contracts with three
third party administrator (TPA) firms for health care claims processing services
for employee medical (including vision), dental, and prescription costs. FCPS
also contracts with an insurance carrier for stop-loss coverage to protect
against the risk of large claims each year. FCPS verifies the eligibility of
employee dependents prior to enrollment in the health care plans. FCPS'
largest TPA is responsible for processing claims for medical and vision costs.
Medical providers submit claims to the TPA who pays them on behalf of
FCPS. FCPS subsequently reimburses the TPA for the paid claims and also
pays the TPA an administrative fee for these services.
34

--- Page 37 ---
FCPS Performed an Audit to Verify Propriety of Dependents
In 2010, FCPS performed an internal review to verify the propriety of
individuals that were covered as dependents under the systems’ health care
plans. FCPS required all 2,705 employees with dependents to submit
documentation to prove that each individual covered as a dependent was
eligible under the criteria defined in FCPS’ health care plan. As a result of this
review, FCPS identified 208 ineligible dependents and removed them from
employee health plans. FCPS has since implemented verification procedures
in its enrollment procedures whereby employees must submit adequate
documentation (such as, birth certificates) for any individuals the employee
wants added as a dependent to their health plan.
Finding 18
FCPS did not verify the propriety of health claim reimbursements amounts
paid to a TPA to the actual medical paid claims and service fees earned.
Analysis
FCPS paid its largest TPA for reimbursement of medical claims and certain
service fees without verification that the amounts reimbursed were proper.
Specifically, FCPS did not obtain a listing of the claims paid on its behalf by
the TPA to ensure that the payment amounts to the TPA were correct. FCPS
also did not verify that certain service fees paid to the TPA for negotiated
reductions and savings obtained from health care providers had actually been
earned. According to the FCPSs contract with the TPA, the TPA is entitled to a
specified percentage of such aforementioned reductions and savings. As a
result, there is a lack of assurance the amounts paid to the TPA for claims and
service fees were proper. In fiscal year 2013, FCPS’ health claims
expenditures processed by this TPA totaled approximately $49.6 million and
this TPA’s administrative fees totaled $2.6 million.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that FCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for
health insurance and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend that FCPS
obtain documentation to support actual claim payments and ensure that all of
the service fees earned by the TPA are calculated correctly.
35

--- Page 38 ---
36

--- Page 39 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Frederick County
Public Schools (FCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the FCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the FCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of FCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on FCPS dated December 8, 2008, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the FCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by FCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at FCPS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
37

--- Page 40 ---
appropriate).3 Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
records, and observations of FCPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from July 1, 2010 through
June 30, 2013. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied on
the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually audits
FCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the FCPS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure, inventory, and payroll
transactions. We performed various audit procedures on the relevant data
and determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data
were used during the audit.
FCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other less significant
findings were communicated to FCPS that did not warrant inclusion in this
report.
We conducted our fieldwork from April 2013 to April 2014. The FCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an Appendix to
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise FCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
3During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
38

--- Page 42 ---
FREDERICK COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOLS
RESPONSES TO LEGISLATIVE AUDIT
Finding 1
FCPS did not adequately monitor the work performed by the accountant contracted to
review SAF.
Recommendation 1
We recommend FCPS ensure that
a. a contract provision is established requiring that working papers be prepared to
document the procedures performed, information obtained, and conclusions reached for
each SAF review;
b. the aforementioned working papers be periodically reviewed by FCPS management to
ensure compliance with contract terms and that adequate support is maintained by the
CPA; and
c. the results of each school activity fund review are formally communicated to school
officials, as required.
FCPS Response 1: Agree
a. The CPA consultant contract was subsequently awarded to a new consultant. The new
CPA consultant has been made aware of the contractual requirement to maintain
adequate work papers to support work and document conclusions.
b. The new CPA consultant has been informed verbally, and in writing, to have working
papers available upon request for FCPS’s reviews.
c. FCPS will be more diligent in acquiring the signed checklists and confirming that the CPA
consultant has met with each school’s administrators to review the results of the audit
and discuss corrective action.
Finding 2
FCPS had not established proper controls over non-cash credits.
Recommendation 2
We recommend FCPS
a. establish procedures to ensure non-cash credit adjustments processed in its automated
financial management system are properly authorized and supported. Specifically, FCPS
should generate and review output reports of non-cash credit adjustments from the
system and have an independent employee compare the adjustments to related
approved authorizing documents;
b. restrict access capabilities to perform non-cash credit adjustments to accounts
receivable records to only users who need that capability to perform their job duties; and
1

--- Page 43 ---
c. properly segregate the duties of the accounts receivable and cash receipt functions
(repeat).
We advised FCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
FCPS Response 2: Agree
a. New procedures have been established to assure that non-cash credit adjustments are
properly authorized and then reviewed. The Accounting Manager reviews each
adjustment prior to entry and then also performs a month-end reconciliation by reviewing
a system-generated report with supporting documentation to make sure all adjustments
were done as pre-approved.
b. A review of access for performing non-cash credit adjustments to accounts receivable
records has been performed and is limited to required personnel.
c. Since the reorganization of the Accounting department on July 1, 2014, the duties
related to cash receipts have been further segregated for daily processing.
Finding 3
FCPS’ controls over obtaining and retaining corporate purchasing cards were not adequate.
Recommendation 3
We recommend that FCPS
a. segregate CPC ordering, receiving, and audit functions (repeat);
b. maintain documentation to support supervisory approval of all cards issued; and
c. conduct periodic evaluations of card usage and terminate cards that are determined to
be unnecessary (repeat).
We advised FCPS on accomplishing the necessary separation of duties using existing
personnel.
FCPS Response 3: Agree
a. Effective January 2015, the Assistant Procurement Card Administrator (APCA) no longer
has the ability to order cards, but is now the only one who can receive the cards from the
bank. Only the Procurement Card Administrator (PCA) has the ability to order
procurement cards.
b. Documentation is retained in PeopleSoft to support supervisory approval of all cards. In
June 2011 the request path for a procurement card was moved to this online
environment. At the completion of the cardholder test, an email is sent to the
cardholder’s Approving Official for approval to order the account. No account is created
without this email thread. All documentation relating to the cardholder, the test and all
emails are maintained in PeopleSoft.
2

--- Page 44 ---
c. In December 2014, the policy for evaluating inactive cards was updated to notify the
approving official if the procurement card holder had no activity in 12 months and to
terminate cards deemed unnecessary.
Finding 4
FCPS’ procurement policies requiring Board approval of purchases of over $25,000 was
delegated for certain types of purchases without a formal corresponding Board reporting
process.
Recommendation 4
We recommend FCPS modify its policies to require that, at a minimum, the Board to be
notified of delegated sole and single source procurements exceeding $25,000 (repeat).
FCPS Response 4: Agree
Beginning in January 2015, a quarterly report detailing all single/sole source procurements
is issued to the Superintendent. The Superintendent subsequently provides this information
to the Board of Education members, and the policy associated with the distribution of this
quarterly report will be amended to reflect this requirement.
Finding 5
Capabilities assigned to users who would perform critical HR and payroll system functions
was not adequately monitored and restricted. In addition, reviews of HR transactions were
not always independently performed.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that FCPS take appropriate actions to ensure the propriety of assigned user
access capabilities, and the propriety of HR and payroll transactions. Specifically, FCPS
should
a. perform a periodic documented review of user access capabilities for the HR and payroll
functions to identify any incompatible and unnecessary capabilities and make
appropriate changes (repeat);
b. for any users found to have inappropriate capabilities, conduct a review to determine if
the user performed any unauthorized transactions and take any necessary corrective
actions; and
c. perform a periodic documented independent review of personnel actions processed
(repeat).
3

--- Page 45 ---
FCPS Response 5: Agree
a. Human Resources staff members have worked with the IT staff to conduct an initial
assessment of user access. A complete review will be conducted by December 31,
2015, with annual reviews conducted thereafter. Human Resources managers, with final
review of the Executive Director, will ensure that user access directly correlates to the job
duties held by that employee.
b. During the assessment, if a user is found to have had access to data not applicable to
his/her position, corrective action will occur and access will be suspended. An audit of
the said user’s actions will take place to be certain that no harm has occurred. If
corrective action is prompted by harm, an appropriate staff member with due access will
correct needed data.
c. Human Resources managers have identified an independent department member to
conduct scheduled audits of actions performed by Human Resources staff that impact
employee compensation. This audit will occur prior to each pay, semi-monthly, and will
serve as a representation of said actions within the prescribed time.
Finding 6
Adequate controls had not been established over a certain high-risk access capability that
enabled users to change or delete historical personnel and payroll records.
Recommendation 6
We recommend that FCPS
a. evaluate whether the use of CM is necessary and, if so, restrict that level of access to
very few employees that require such access to perform their job duties; and
b. implement a documented independent review process of all CM actions by an individual
who cannot perform CM functions.
FCPS Response 6: Agree
a. The use of correction mode is deemed necessary by Human Resources management as
it relates to specified operations and business processes by designated staff within the
Human Resources Department. Recognizing the risk associated with corrective action,
an assessment has been initiated to ensure that this access is restricted to limited
individuals whose positions directly necessitate this access. Human Resources
managers, with final review by the Executive Director, will review the corrective action
access list annually to maintain control.
b. Staff recognizes the necessity of auditing such high risk actions (corrective) and will
audit these actions at a database level. An independent staff member will audit each
correction action prior to each pay, semi-monthly, with findings reviewed and logged
within the department.
4

--- Page 46 ---
Finding 7
Physical inventories were not conducted as required by FCPS policy.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that FCPS ensure all departments comply with applicable FCPS inventory
procedures.
FCPS Response 7: Agree
All departments are now in compliance with the annual inventory procedures. The
Accounting Department has established a policy to conduct site visits and audit inventory
samples at each individual site once every three years. Also noted in this finding, we began
capturing sensitive assets effective January 2013. This was a change in procedure and was
effective January 2013 going forward.
Finding 8
Proper access, account, and password controls were not established over critical
applications, servers, and a database.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that FCPS
a. limit read and modification access to the aforementioned files containing sensitive
personal information to only those users requiring such access (repeat),
b. limit network level access to the management consoles of all host servers to only those
network administrators requiring such access, and
c. establish appropriate account and password controls (repeat).
FCPS Response 8: Agree
a. FCPS has set up current environments as directed by our financial information
system software vendor at the time of implementation. During the audit period it was
found that the “Domain Users” group had access to the web server. At the time the
audit review team met with FCPS staff to verify results it was found that “the Domain
Users” group could not actually get to the location on the server by logging on to or
connecting to a share. However, during this meeting, it was determined that other
methods could have been used to gain access during the audit period. FCPS is
reviewing updated database software documentation that indicates it may be
possible to further restrict access to the web server. This option is being tested as
part of the financial information system software upgrade.
b. By use of ACLs and/or VLANs, FCPS will segregate and restrict the ESXi management
network on all physical hosts.
5

--- Page 47 ---
c. Based on this finding, FCPS has instituted additional password and account controls.
Per DOIT standards, the minimum domain password length has been adjusted to
eight characters. Further, if no problems are introduced, the administrator database
account username and password will also be changed and scheduled for renewal
every 90 days. The domain password minimum age has also been adjusted per DOIT
standards. In addition, FCPS will implement a process that will disable accounts that
have not been actively signed on to the system in 180 days. This process will be in
place by June 30, 2015.
Finding 9
FCG had unnecessary network level access to the entire FCPS network over all ports.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that the connection from the FCG to the FCPS be made to the FCPS Internet
firewall and that the necessary network level traffic filters be defined on this firewall to
properly protect the FCPS network.
FCPS Response 9: Agree
Based on this finding, FCPS has put in place an additional firewall for connections from FCG
to FCPS.
Finding 10
Malware protection on FCPS workstations was not comprehensive.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that FCPS
a. disable the settings which allow users to override and modify default security controls
established by management,
b. configure all FCPS computers with the most current anti-malware software version
available,
c. limit local administrative rights on user workstations to only personnel who require such
rights for their job duties, and
d. ensure that all computers are kept up-to-date for all critical security related updates to
potentially vulnerable installed software.
FCPS Response 10: Agree
a. FCPS has implemented this practice. FCPS will ensure the latest anti-malware software
definitions are on all workstations and servers. In addition, whenever possible, settings
will be invoked which would not allow users to disable implemented security controls.
b. FCPS has implemented this practice. FCPS will regularly update operating system
software updates.
6

--- Page 48 ---
c. FCPS already implements this practice. Administrative privileges are restricted from all
users, with the exception of those that require these rights in their job duties.
d. FCPS has implemented critical security application updates to the most recent version
which functions with all system-wide applications.
Finding 11
Monitoring controls over a database and application were not sufficient to protect critical
data.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that the FCPS
a. implement proper monitoring of critical database security and audit events and direct
changes to student database grade tables;
b. monitor additions, deletions, and changes to the aforementioned financial application’s
permission lists and security parameters; and
c. regularly generate reports of application security events, review these reports, document
these reviews, and retain the documentation for subsequent verification.
FCPS Response 11: Agree
a. FCPS will request vendor to define and implement database auditing best practices. In
addition, as budget permits, FCPS will evaluate and potentially procure a third party
database auditing solution.
b. FCPS has implemented database level triggers on security-related topics for all events
noted.
c. Reports will be developed by June 2015 that will be used to review changes on a weekly
basis.
Finding 12
Policies were not always adhered to and documentation was not retained for critical
documents related to the procurement of A&E and construction management services.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that FCPS ensure that procurement policies are applied consistently to all
professional service contracts and the basis for procurement award decisions are properly
documented. Specifically, we recommend that
a. contract terms requiring the purchase of insurance are complied with;
b. Board policies be amended to require the retention of all bid documentation for
construction management contracts;
c. technical evaluations of proposals, including individual scoring sheets and the identities
of the evaluators be properly documented and retained by FCPS;
7

--- Page 49 ---
d. procurement selection and ranking procedures are consistently applied and that
justification for any deviations from standard procedures are documented (repeat); and
e. the time period allowed for submission of proposals is consistent with Board policy
(repeat).
FCPS Response 12: Agree
a. The Purchasing Department now issues an award letter after Board of Education
approval and requests the Certificate of Insurance (COI). The COI is reviewed by the
Purchasing Department for compliance with amounts specified in the contract. The COI
is retained in the Purchasing Department.
b. Current operating procedures and regulations address retention requirements. The
Board policy that addresses purchasing will be modified to reflect these requirements as
well.
c-e. The Purchasing Department and Facilities Services Department reviewed, modified and
updated the policy regarding procurements of A&E and CM contracts that became
effective March 2015. This revised policy formalizes FCPS’s intent to comply with the
documentation, record retention and policy application recommendations that were
made during the legislative audit.
Finding 13
FCPS did not adequately document preventive maintenance work performed.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that FCPS
a. perform all required preventive maintenance in accordance with the comprehensive
maintenance plan and maintain appropriate documentation of the work performed
(repeat), and
b. ensure that appropriate preventive maintenance tasks are established and kept current
for each facility.
FCPS Response 13: Agree
We agree with the finding that past practices associated with documenting preventive
maintenance tasks have been weak. This was noted in the 2008 Legislative Audit. Since
that time, the Maintenance and Operations Department has completed a comprehensive
review of our computerized maintenance management system (CMMS) software and
procedures. The outcome of this audit has resulted in the abandonment of the old CMMS
software, and a new CMMS system has been implemented. Along with the selection of the
new software, the Maintenance and Operations Department has completed a
comprehensive update of all preventive maintenance procedures, including frequency of
8

--- Page 50 ---
inspections and time allocated to complete tasks. Finally, preventive maintenance tasks
associated with recently constructed buildings have been incorporated into the program,
and old records associated with buildings that have either been demolished or renovated
have been purged.
Finding 14
Inventory controls over Transportation Department parts were inadequate.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that FCPS establish proper segregation of duties regarding custody, record
keeping, and physical inventory counts and that adequate safeguards be implemented over
transportation parts inventories.
FCPS Response 14: Agree
FCPS agrees with the recommendation and has been working to improve the parts inventory
process. Transportation personnel and accounting personnel have been meeting bi-monthly
to develop standard operating procedures related to inventory handling. The adjustment
access in the system has been segregated from the Transportation Department to the
Accounting Department. Physical inventory processes have been adjusted to include teams
of people.
Finding 15
Independent reviews of school cafeteria cash handling procedures were not performed
timely.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that FCPS ensure that all school cafeteria cash handling operations are
reviewed timely (that is, annually).
FCPS Response 15: Agree
FCPS provides school cafeteria personnel with cash handling training, but also recognizes
that the nature of cash handling warrants additional controls. For over 15 years, FCPS has
hired an independent CPA consultant to perform annual audits. As mentioned in a previous
finding, 2013 was a period of transition for the CPA consultant. A review of the current
consultant’s progress confirms that there will not be a problem in meeting the annual
requirement to perform timely reviews.
9

--- Page 51 ---
Finding 16
Cash receipt duties were not properly segregated as transactions could be voided by
cashiers without independent review or approval at the schools we reviewed.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that independent supervisory personnel, review and approve voids, at least
on a test basis, and that such reviews be documented. To accomplish this, FCPS could
generate periodic reports of all void transactions and document the analysis of this
information for unusual trends that should be investigated, such as cashiers with
abnormally high numbers of voids.
FCPS Response 16: Agree
The FCPS Food & Nutrition Services (FNS) Department has access to the district void report,
and it can be accessed by the FNS Complex Manager for review for any school. Effective
February 2, 2015, all Complex Managers will be required to review the void transaction
report bi-monthly for each of the schools within their complex. Appropriate steps and further
follow-up will occur if excess voids are identified.
Finding 17
FCPS’ controls over food services inventory were not adequate.
Recommendation 17
We recommend that FCPS implement additional controls over its food inventory records
(repeat). Specifically, FCPS should perform additional centralized monitoring and oversight
procedures to ensure school food inventories are properly accounted for and controlled. For
example, periodic centralized reviews could include surprise independent sample counts of
inventories and documented analysis of school inventory data such as usage and spoilage
ratios, and the investigation of significant anomalies.
FCPS Response 17: Agree
Beginning March 15, 2015, the Food and Nutrition Services’ Complex Managers will conduct
periodic unannounced inventory audit visits. During these visits, the Complex Manager will
complete a periodic sampling of the inventory. Any discrepancies on the inventory counts
and recorded amounts will be recorded on a periodic sampling inventory report and
discussed by the Complex Manager and the Site Assistant or Assistant Manager. The
periodic sampling inventory report will be submitted to the appropriate central office FNS
Specialist for review.
The FCPS Food and Nutrition Services Department is also investigating purchasing an
electonic inventory software program to automate and gain efficiencies in its inventory
management.
10

--- Page 52 ---
Finding 18
FCPS did not verify the propriety of health claim reimbursements amounts paid to a TPA to
the actual medical paid claims and service fees earned.
Recommendation 18
We recommend that FCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for health
insurance and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend that FCPS obtain
documentation to support actual claim payments and ensure that all of the service fees
earned by the TPA are calculated correctly.
FCPS Response 18: Agree
Reports are now available and are being reviewed to confirm the amounts calculated for
health insurance and TPA service fees prior to payment. Procedures are in place regarding
methods and document retention.
11

--- Page 53 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton, CPA, CFE
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Managers
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
David R. Fahnestock
Senior Auditor
Eric Alexander, CPA, CISA
Christopher D. Jackson, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Andrew S. Bien
Donald J. Rodis, III, CPA
Staff Auditors