Title: Managing for Results - Performance Measures - Commerce - Department of Agriculture - Department of Budget and Management - Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation - Department of Planning - Department of Transportation
Date: 04/18/2011
Type: Performance
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3acc9d72404c150a8c
Extracted: 2025-06-18T10:58:02.286806
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Performance Audit Report
Managing for Results
Performance Measures
Commerce
Department of Agriculture
Department of Budget and Management
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
Department of Planning
Department of Transportation
April 2011
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the Office of
Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland 21201. The Office
may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle, Annapolis,
Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related correspondence. The
Department may be contacted by telephone at 410- 946-5400 or 301- 970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
April 18, 2011
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
Delegate Guy J. Guzzone, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator James C. Rosapepe, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We conducted a performance audit to determine the accuracy of selected
Managing for Results (MFR) performance measure data reported in the Maryland
fiscal year 2011 operating budget request, and/or the Managing for Results
Annual Performance Report issued in March 2010. We also determined whether
adequate control systems were in place for collecting, summarizing, and reporting
the performance measure data.
As requested by the chairmen of the legislative budget committees, we are
systematically auditing the results of the 62 MFR measures contained in the 2005
Managing for Results - State Comprehensive Plan, which was produced by the
Department of Budget and Management. This audit is the fifth to be conducted
on the 62 measures and focuses on the data reported for the 11 measures
contained within the Commerce portion of the State Comprehensive Plan. The
agencies responsible for reporting these results are the Maryland Department of
Labor, Licensing, and Regulation (DLLR), the Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT), the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), the
Department of Agriculture (DOA), and the Department of Planning (DOP). A list
of the 62 MFR measures is contained in Exhibit 3 of this report.
As a result of our audit, we have classified each of the 11 measures as either
Certified, Certified with Qualification, Inaccurate, or Factors Prevented
Certification as noted in the chart on the next page. These designations are
further described in Exhibit 2. One of the 11 measures included multiple sub-
measure results that were separately evaluated before a conclusion was drawn
regarding the certification level for the measure as a whole. If sub-measures
within a given measure had differing certification results, we

--- Page 4 ---
concluded on the overall certification level for the measure by considering the
various sub-measure certification levels and the significance of any variances.
The audit results for the 11 measures are as follows:
Level of Certification
Factors Performance
Certified with
Certified Inaccurate Prevented Measures Audited
Qualification
Certification (See Exhibit 1)
8 - - 3 11
The primary factor contributing to our inability to certify three measures was that
MDOT did not adequately ensure that reported data were accurate. In addition,
DOA did not maintain an audit trail that could be used to verify the accuracy of
their reported results.
An executive summary of our findings can be found on page 4, and our audit
scope, objectives, and methodology are explained on page 14. The responses
from the related agencies are included as appendices to this report. We wish to
acknowledge the cooperation extended to us by DLLR, MDOT, DBM, DOA, and
DOP during the audit.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 4
Background Information 4
Conclusions 5
Recommendations 5
Findings 6
Certification Results 6
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 14
Exhibit 1 – Definitions of the Commerce Measures Audited 16
Exhibit 2 – Categories of Performance Certification 19
Exhibit 3 – Managing For Results – State Comprehensive Plan – List 20
of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Exhibit 4 – Managing For Results Audit Reports Previously Issued by 24
the Office of Legislative Audits Pertaining to the 62 Measures
Auditees’ Responses Appendix
3

--- Page 6 ---
Executive Summary
Background Information
In July 1997, the Governor implemented the Managing for Results (MFR)
initiative, which is a strategic planning process used by department leaders and
others to establish direction and priorities for State programs to achieve
meaningful results. MFR requires State agencies to submit missions, goals,
objectives, and performance measures for each program as part of the annual
budget request. This information may then be considered in determining
Statewide spending priorities and the allocation of resources in agency budgets.
Effective July 1, 2004, the MFR process was established in State law, with the
Department of Budget and Management as the lead agency for developing a State
comprehensive plan for MFR. The resultant 2005 Managing for Results - State
Comprehensive Plan categorized MFR goals into five functional areas, referred to
as pillars, which contained a total of 62 measures. Also, State law requires
agencies to maintain documentation of the internal controls established to
evaluate their performance measures.
As requested by the chairmen of the legislative budget committees, we are
systematically auditing these 62 measures. This audit is the fifth to be conducted
pursuant to this request and focuses on certain data reported by the Department of
Labor, Licensing, and Regulation, Maryland Department of Transportation
(MDOT), Department of Budget and Management (DBM), Department of
Agriculture (DOA), and the Department of Planning in the Maryland fiscal year
2011 operating budget request or the Managing for Results Annual Performance
Report for eleven of the thirteen1 measures contained within the Commerce
portion of the State Comprehensive Plan (See Exhibit 1). The categories of
performance certification are explained in Exhibit 2 of this report, and a list of the
62 MFR measures is contained in Exhibit 3. Exhibit 4 references the first four
MFR audit reports issued by our Office, which collectively covered 34 measures
in the Public Safety and Safer Neighborhoods, Education, Fiscal Responsibility,
and Health portions of the State Comprehensive Plan.
1 Two of the Commerce measures included in the 2005 Managing for Results – State
Comprehensive Plan were not included in the Plan when it was reissued by DBM in November
2009. Furthermore, DBM had not reported on these two measures since March 2008 (reported
fiscal year 2007 actual results). Consequently, these two measures were not included in this
audit.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Conclusions
We concluded that, for the 11 measures tested, 8 were Certified, and 3 were
designated as Factors Prevented Certification. These results are further described
in the Findings section of this report.
Recommendations
The following detailed recommendations are among those we made to MDOT
and DOA to help strengthen the quality control processes and improve reporting
for the measures we audited.
 Establish procedures to ensure that reported data are accurate. For
example, MDOT should consider auditing airline passenger count data, at
least on a test basis, to verify that the data reported by the airlines was
correct.
 Implement procedures to ensure a comprehensive listing of all applicable
records is maintained and utilized for reporting.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Findings
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 for Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference1 Definitions)
Department of Percent change in November Certified
Labor, Maryland 2008
Licensing and employment from through
Regulation the 2001 baseline. October
Managing for (12 month 2009
Results Annual average)
Performance 1.57%
Report
Page 22
Rate that adult Program Certified
employment Year 2009
trainees enter
Budget Book 2,
employment 77.8%
Page 508
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
6

--- Page 9 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments/Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference1 for Definitions)
Department of General cargo Fiscal Certified
Transportation tonnage (millions) Year
– Maryland Port 2009
Administration
Budget 7.8
Book 1,
Page 630
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference1 for Definitions)
Department of Annual Calendar Factors The Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) had not implemented a
Transportation Baltimore- Year Prevented comprehensive process to independently verify airline reported data. MAA
– Maryland Washington 2008 Certification relied on passenger count documentation provided by the airlines to
Aviation International calculate the measure and had only limited assurance as to the accuracy of
Administration Thurgood -2.64% the reported data. Analytical procedures performed by MAA on passenger
Budget
Marshall Airport
counts would only detect very significant differences from expected
Book 1,
passenger growth
passenger data and did not include data for all passenger types included in
Page 653
rate
the measure (that is, charter passengers). Furthermore, while MAA received
summarized reports which included passenger count information on a
monthly basis, detailed passenger information supporting these reports was
not routinely received from the airlines. MAA internal auditors conducted
periodic audits of certain airlines to review compliance with provisions of
each airline’s contract with MAA. In performing these internal audits, the
internal auditors did obtain additional documentation from the airlines to
support the reported passenger counts. However, MAA had not conducted
any audits related to calendar year 2008 passenger data. Although MAA
conducted two airline audits which included 2007 passenger data, one of the
audits questioned the adequacy of one airline’s internal controls over
reporting. For example, the audit noted instances where the airline did not
correctly compile its passenger data for reporting to MAA.
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 for Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference1 Definitions)
Department of Percentage of State Calendar Certified
Transportation system roadway Year
– State Highway mileage with 2008
Administration acceptable ride
Budget quality 86%
Book 1,
Page 617
Percent of bridges
on the State Calendar Certified
portion of the Year
Budget
National Highway 2009
Book 1,
System that will
page 618
allow all legally- 99%
loaded vehicles to
safely traverse
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference1 for Definitions)
Department of Total ridership Fiscal Year Factors Prevented Overall, the measure was deemed as Factors Prevented Certification. Our
Transportation (thousands). 2009 Certification review of four of the reported sub-measures (Core Bus, Metro, Light Rail,
– Maryland and MARC) disclosed that only one (Light Rail) was accurately calculated
Transit Core Bus 69,846 and reported. For the remaining three sub-measures, we found certain
Administration weaknesses related to the process of accumulating and/or reporting the
Metro 13,567
Budget data.
Book 1,
Light Rail 8,712
Page 642 The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) reports Core Bus ridership
Mobility based on fare box data collected by drivers and subsequently downloaded
Paratransit 1,094 into an automated fare system. However, we found that drivers did not
always account for each passenger as required. According to MTA records
Taxi Access 356 for fiscal year 2009, unclassified revenue (revenue recorded as received in
the fare box for which the driver did not record a corresponding passenger)
MARC 8,081
totaled $2.6 million, indicating that ridership may be understated. In
Contracted addition to ridership reported in its MFR submission, MTA also reports
Commuter Bus 3,974 ridership to the Federal Department of Transportation. However, in order
to determine this data, MTA uses a federally-approved statistical sampling
Total 105,630 model that uses independent counts of a specified number of routes
throughout the year. The data are then extrapolated to determine total
ridership. Based on this method, MTA reported fiscal year 2009 ridership
of 87.8 million riders to the Federal Department of Transportation, or 18
million more riders than included in its State MFR submission (a difference
of 26 percent). MTA officials could not readily provide an explanation for
this difference.
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
10

--- Page 13 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference1 for Definitions)
Department of Total ridership Metro ridership is based on reports of persons exiting each station as
Transportation (thousands) - recorded by the automated gates. Although our review disclosed that the
– Maryland continued reported amount substantially agreed to supporting reports, these reports
Transit also disclosed that 184,000 more passengers entered stations than exited.
Administration In addition, once MTA places gates in service, it does not conduct any
Budget testing or perform other procedures to ensure that the automated system
Book 1, accurately records riders entering or exiting each station.
Page 642
MTA reported MARC train ridership based on reports received from the
two vendors who operate the system. The vendors based the reported
amounts on physical counts performed by conductors on each train. The
conductors prepare count sheets which the vendors tabulate for monthly
reporting to MTA. However, our limited testing disclosed that these
monthly reports often did not agree to the related daily count sheets. Our
test of 40 daily count sheets disclosed that the daily count sheets did not
agree to the summaries for 24 of the 40 days tested (for certain days, there
were no passengers recorded in the monthly reports). In this regard, while
the vendors periodically provided the daily count sheets to MTA, MTA did
not reconcile the monthly summary to the corresponding daily count sheets.
Our review also found that the daily counts as reported on the monthly
summaries often remained unchanged for a number of consecutive days.
Our review of the June 2009 summary from one vendor disclosed
numerous instances where the ridership remained unchanged for four or
more consecutive days. While we cannot categorically state that such
information is erroneous, the number of occurrences with identical
ridership counts appears highly unlikely.
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference1 for Definitions)
Department of Home Ownership Calendar Certified
Budget and Year
Management 2009
Managing for
Results Annual 69.7%
Performance
Report
Page 22
Managing for Annual percent Calendar Certified
Results Annual change in Year
Maryland per 2008
Performance
capita personal
Report
income 2.82%
Page 22
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
12

--- Page 15 ---
Certification Results
Agency, Performance
Level of
Program Name Measure Results
Certification Comments / Causes
and Budget (See Exhibit 1 for Reported
(See Exhibit 2)
Reference1 Definitions)
Department of Total acres Fiscal Factors Prevented The Department of Agriculture (DOA) did not maintain a comprehensive
Agriculture – enrolled in Year Certification listing of all property enrolled in agricultural preservation districts to
Maryland agriculture 2009 substantiate the reported measure result. To recreate the measure results
Agricultural preservation would involve reviewing approximately 5,000 land owner files for initial
Land districts 443,811 district agreements, amendments to agreements (addition or deletion of
Preservation acres acres from district), and agreement terminations. Furthermore, DOA
Foundation management advised us that the fiscal year 2009 acres it reported was
Budget incorrect noting that it should have reported 435,315 acres.
Book 2,
Page 25
Department of Value of Fiscal Certified
Planning – rehabilitation Year
Maryland expenditures 2009
Historical Trust approved for the
Budget State $13
Book 1, Rehabilitation million
Page 295
Tax Credit for
restoration and
preservation of
historic properties
1 Reference cited is the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request or March 2010 Managing for Results Annual Performance Report, as indicated.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Scope
Under the authority of the State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, we conducted an audit of selected performance
measure results reported in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget
request, or measure results that were reported in the Managing for Results Annual
Performance Report dated March 2010. The audit was performed in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require
that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
As requested by the chairmen of the legislative budget committees, we are
systematically auditing the performance measures from the 2005 Managing for
Results - State Comprehensive Plan produced by the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM). This Plan included 62 performance measures categorized
into five functional areas referred to as pillars.2 This audit is the fifth to be
conducted pursuant to this request and focuses on the 11 performance measures
from the Commerce functional area as reported by DBM in its Managing for
Results Annual Performance Report.
Objectives
The objectives of our audit were (1) to determine whether the most recent actual
measurement results for the selected performance measures were accurately
reported in the Maryland fiscal year 2011 operating budget request (or the
Managing for Results Annual Performance Report dated March 2010) and (2) to
determine whether adequate control systems existed over the collection and
reporting of the data related to the measurement results. Our performance audit
did not include an assessment of whether the performance measures reviewed
were consistent with the goals and objectives of the related programs, or were
meaningful indicators of program performance.
Methodology
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed Maryland Department of
Transportation (MDOT), Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation
(DLLR), DBM, Department of Agriculture (DOA) and the Department of
2 DBM reissued the State Comprehensive Plan in November 2009 with 98 performance measures
categorized into six functional areas. The measures under this new Plan will generally be
reported on by State agencies beginning with the fiscal year 2012 budget cycle.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Planning (DOP) personnel responsible for collecting and reporting the measure
data, reviewed performance measure calculations for accuracy, reviewed the data
collected and reported for the performance measures, and determined whether the
calculations and data were consistent with the definitions of the performance
measures as noted in Exhibit 1. We also analyzed these agencies’ performance
measurement data collection and reporting activities to evaluate whether proper
controls existed to ensure data integrity. Where the State agency used data
received from a federal government agency to calculate the measure, our audit scope
did not include procedures to test the reliability of the federal agency reported data.
However, we did review the responsible federal agency’s reported methodology
for collection and publication of the data and deemed the methodology to be
reasonable.
We developed a system to categorize the results of our audit of performance
measures. The four categories represent varying levels of certification of the
accuracy of the performance reported. The categories of performance
certification are defined in Exhibit 2. If, during the course of our audit of a
measure, we found circumstances that would require us to conclude that factors
prevented certification of the measure, we did not perform additional audit work
that may have disclosed other factors that might have adversely impacted the
reported results.
Our fieldwork was conducted on site at MDOT, DLLR, DBM, DOA, and DOP
during the period from June 2010 to December 2010. The responses from these
agencies to our findings and recommendations appear as appendices in this report.
As prescribed in State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, we will advise these agencies regarding the results of our review of
their responses.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the Commerce Performance Measures Audited
Page 1 of 3
Performance
Definition3
Measure
Percent change in This measure is calculated from data obtained from the Federal
Maryland Bureau of Labor Statistics, and placed on the Department of Labor,
employment from Licensing and Regulation’s (DLLR) website. The calculation is
the 2001 baseline made based on a 12-month average. The current 12-month data
(12-month (November 2008 through October 2009) is then compared to the
average) 2001 baseline to obtain the percent change.
Rate that adult DLLR provides funding for employment and training services (such
employment as resume writing, interviewing skills, and computer workshops) to
trainees enter job seekers in an effort to increase the employment, retention, and
employment earnings of participants. This measure was designed to report the
percentage of program participants that entered employment after
completion of the program services.
This measure is calculated by the number of adults who have entered
employment by the end of the first quarter after exiting the program
divided by the number of adults who exit during the quarter.
Total general The Maryland Port Administration (MPA) total general cargo is the
cargo (tonnage) foreign and domestic waterborne cargo that crosses MPA terminals,
and not classified as bulk cargo. Also, it includes the weight of the
goods and not the weight of the containers or empty containers.
3 The definitions are substantially derived from those provided to the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM) in annual State agencies’ Managing for Results budget submissions and DBM’s Managing for Results
Annual Performance Report. Additional information, such as data sources, was included in certain definitions in
this exhibit for informational purposes. Also, certain definitions were shortened to enhance readability.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the Commerce Performance Measures Audited
Page 2 of 3
Performance
Definition
Measure
Annual Baltimore- This measure includes all persons who board or disembark from a
Washington commercial aircraft for the most recent calendar year as compared to
International the preceding calendar year. General aviation passengers (that is,
Thurgood Marshall flights other than military and scheduled airline and regular cargo
Airport passenger flights) and transit passengers are not included in the passenger
growth rate counts. Passenger figures are supplied to the Maryland Aviation
Administration on a monthly basis by air carriers.
Percent of State Acceptable ride quality is defined as the percent of State Highway
system roadway Administration (SHA) roadway network in very good, good, and fair
mileage with condition based on Federal Highway Administration ride quality
acceptable ride conditions. Ride quality is represented by the International
quality Roughness Index (IRI) which is measured by SHA through an
Automated Road Analyzer, which drives over the surface and records
the IRI. Surfaces below a predetermined IRI values are considered
acceptable (that is, very good, good or fair). Certain portions of the
state roadway system (for example, roadways less than one mile
long, ramps) are excluded from this measure.
Percent of bridges SHA calculates this measure by subtracting the number of SHA
on the State portion bridges carrying vehicle traffic that are weight posted (that is, weight
of the National limited or restricted) from the total number of SHA bridges according
Highway System to a database maintained by SHA. This number becomes the
that will allow all numerator and is then divided by the number of SHA bridges (the
legally loaded denominator). Weight posted bridges are those that are deemed not
vehicles to safely able to safely carry the maximum weight of a legally loaded vehicle
traverse (80,000 lbs.), and therefore a weight limit is posted on the bridge.
Weight restrictions are based on periodic inspections of bridges by
SHA and/or contractor personnel.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Exhibit 1
Definitions of the Health Performance Measures Audited
Page 3 of 3
Performance
Definition
Measure
Total Ridership Total unlinked passenger trips for each of the Maryland Transit
(thousands) Administration modes of transportation (such as Core bus, Metro,
Light Rail, Contract Commuter Bus, and MARC trains).
Unlinked passenger trips refer to counting a passenger each time they
board a vehicle, even if the boarding may be the result of a transfer
from another route. This methodology represents a nationally
recognized method for calculating transit ridership.
Home Ownership Home Ownership as reported by the United States Census Bureau.
According to the U.S. Census, the measure is defined as the number
of owner-occupied housing units as a percentage of all occupied
housing units.
Annual percent The measure is calculated based on calendar year income data
change in developed and published by the U.S. Department of Commerce,
Maryland per Bureau of Economic Analysis.
capita personal
income
Total acres Agricultural land preservation district agreements represent voluntary
enrolled in 5-year restrictions on landowner's right to develop a farming property
agricultural eligible for the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund
preservation (MALPF) program in return for the ability to offer to sell an
districts easement to MALPF. The total acreage represents the previous
year’s total adjusted for additions and deletions (based on removal
from the program or modifications to existing agreements).
Value of This measure is reported by the Department of Planning (DOP) -
rehabilitation Maryland Historical Trust, and represents the total value of
expenditures residential rehabilitation expenditures approved in the reported fiscal
approved for the year. Amounts approved are documented on submitted applications
State as recorded by DOP in its Tax Credit database.
Rehabilitation Tax
Credit for
restoration and
preservation of
historic properties
18

--- Page 21 ---
Exhibit 2
Categories of Performance Certification
Category Definition
Certified Reported performance was reasonably accurate.
Certified with Reported performance was reasonably accurate even though
Qualification minor deficiencies were noted with the supporting
documentation, controls were not sufficient, or the methodology
used to calculate reported performance was not consistent with
the measure definition.
Inaccurate Reported performance differed significantly from actual
performance; the calculation process was wrong, such as
excluding data relevant to the calculation; or, as reported, the
measure was misleading, such as failing to disclose the measure
as a rate when applicable.
Factors Prevented Reported performance could not be verified, as documentation
Certification was unavailable, controls were not adequate to ensure the
accuracy of the results, or results were not presented in a manner
consistent with the performance measure description.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 1 of 4
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Public Safety and Safer Neighborhoods
Keeping Maryland communities safe – measured by
1 Firearm homicide rate per 100,000 (calendar year)
Recidivism: Percent of offenders returned to Department of Public Safety and Correctional
2 Services supervision for a new offense within one year of their release from the Division of
Correction - all releases
3 Traffic fatality rate per 100 million miles traveled (calendar year)
Maintaining necessary security standards in correctional institutions – measured by
Number of inmates who escape from all Division of Correction Facilities, Patuxent
4
Institution, and Division of Pretrial Detention and Services facilities (in aggregate)
Total number of inmates who walk off from Division of Correction minimum security
5
settings, prerelease or alternative confinement settings (in aggregate)
Providing effective rehabilitation and treatment services to offenders or substance abusers –
measured by
Percent of Proactive Community Supervision cases closed where the offender had
6
satisfactorily completed substance abuse treatment programs
Preventing youth violence, alcohol and substance abuse – measured by
Violent offense arrest rate for youths between 15 and 17 years of age (per 100,000 children
7
per calendar year)
8 Recidivism: Percent of youth re-adjudicated or reconvicted within 1 year after release
Percent of 12th grade public school children who report using alcohol within the last 30
9
days
10 Percent of 10th grade public school children who report using heroin within the last 30 days
Protecting the well being of children – measured by
Rate of injury-related deaths due to accidents to children and youth between 0 and 19 years
11
of age (per 100,000 children per calendar year)
12 Percent of children with recurrence of maltreatment within six months of first occurrence
Statewide percent of current child support paid (Includes cases for persons who receive
13 public assistance, and for other persons who apply for child support services from the
Department of Human Resources)
20

--- Page 23 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 2 of 4
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Education
Children will enter school ready to learn – measured by
Percent of students entering Kindergarten demonstrating Full Readiness on the Work
1
Sampling System Kindergarten Assessment
Children will be successful in school – measured by
Percent of students scoring proficient or better by grade and content area
 Reading – Grade 3 – Total all groups
 Reading – Grade 8 – Total all groups
2  Reading – Grade 10 – Total all groups
 Mathematics – Grade 3 – Total all groups
 Mathematics – Grade 8 – Total all groups
 Algebra – Total all groups
Children will complete school – measured by
3 High School Graduation Rate
4 Percent of children in grades 9 through 12 who drop out of school in an academic year
Schools will promote high levels of learning – measured by
5 Percent of schools demonstrating Adequate Yearly Progress in reading – State totals
6 Percent of schools demonstrating Adequate Yearly Progress in mathematics – State totals
Higher Education
Promoting access and academic success in postsecondary education – measured by
Six year graduation rate of first-time, full-time students at Maryland public four-year colleges
1
and universities (all groups)
Percent of bachelor’s degrees awarded to racial/ethnic minorities at public and private
2
Maryland colleges and universities
3 Number of community college students who transfer to a Maryland public four-year campus
Producing an educated and skilled workforce including addressing the State’s critical workforce and
healthcare needs – measured by
Number of graduates in teaching from Maryland’s public and private higher educational
4
institutions
Percent of teacher candidates from Maryland public and private higher educational
5
institutions who pass Praxis II
Number of graduates in nursing from Maryland public and private higher educational
6
institutions
21

--- Page 24 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 3 of 4
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Health
Promoting health and well being: Babies Born healthy – measured by
1 Infant mortality rate for all races (per 1,000 live births)
2 Rate of live births to adolescents between 15 and 19 years of age (per 1,000 women)
Promoting health and well being: Healthy children, adolescents, and adults – measured by
3 Percent of Maryland children fully immunized (by 24 months)
4 Number of children under 6 years of age with elevated blood lead levels (>10ug/dl)
Cumulative percent change from the calendar year 2000 baseline for underage high school
5
students smoking cigarettes
Overall cancer mortality rate per 100,000 persons (age adjusted to 2000 U.S. Standard
6
Population)
7 Percent change in number of new HIV cases from calendar year 2007 baseline
8 Rate of primary/secondary syphilis incidence (cases per 100,000 population)
Number of reported cases of vaccine preventable communicable diseases including hepatitis
9
A, measles, mumps, pertussis
Promoting health and well being: Services to the disability community – measured by
Number of people with disabilities who achieved successful employment through assistance
10
by the Department of Education’s Disability Rehabilitation Services rehabilitation programs
Percent of Developmental Disabilities Administration Community Service respondents of
11 the “Ask ME!” survey who expressed satisfaction with physical well-being, personal
development, and self-determination (reported separately)
Promoting health and well being: Substance abuse treatment – measured by
12 Percent of substance use decrease during substance abuse treatment
Promoting health and well being: Mental health services – measured by
Percent of adults who report mental health services have allowed them to deal more
13
effectively with daily problems
Environment
Restoring the health of the Chesapeake Bay and its living resources – measured by
1 Acres of submerged aquatic vegetation
2 Blue crab landings (3 year average)
3 Oyster landings (3 year average)
4 Estimated nitrogen load to the Chesapeake Bay from Maryland (in million pounds)
Improving and protecting water quality and ensuring safe drinking water – measured by
5 Watersheds impaired by nutrients
Percent of Marylanders served by public water systems in significant compliance with all
6
rules adopted as of 2002
22

--- Page 25 ---
Exhibit 3
Managing for Results – State Comprehensive Plan
List of 62 Performance Measures in Plan
Page 4 of 4
Performance Area
Goal
MFR Measure
Ensuring clean air – measured by
7 Three-year average of days the one-hour ozone standard was exceeded
Restoring contaminated industrial sites to productive use – measured by
Number of acres of property in the Voluntary Clean-up Program completed and a No
8
Further Requirements Determination or a Certificate of Completion issued
Reducing hazardous waste and hazardous materials in the environment – measured by
9 Number of remedial actions at all State Superfund sites that are completed
Commerce
Helping businesses to grow and create jobs – measured by
1 Percent change in Maryland employment from the 2001 baseline (12 month average)
2 Rate that adult employment trainees enter employment
3 Maryland Port Administration total general cargo tonnage (thousands)
Estimated direct expenditures from film, television, and other production activities in
4
Maryland (Measure not audited - not included in the Comprehensive Plan reissued in November 2009)
5 Annual Baltimore Washington International Airport passenger growth rate
Improving the State’s transportation infrastructure – measured by
6 Percent of State system roadway mileage with acceptable ride quality
Percent of bridges on the State portion of the National Highway System that will allow all
7
legally loaded vehicles to safely traverse
8 Total ridership for bus and rail transit (in thousands)
System Preservation Funding Levels in the Consolidated Transportation Program (in
9
millions) (Measure not audited - not included in the Comprehensive Plan reissued in November 2009)
Invigorating communities – measured by
10 Home ownership
11 Annual percent change in Maryland per capita personal income
12 Total acres enrolled in agricultural preservation districts
Making the most of Maryland’s history and culture – measured by
Value of rehabilitation expenditures approved for the State Rehabilitation Tax Credit for
13
restoration and preservation of historic properties
Fiscal Responsibility
Effective resource management – measured by
1 Number of fiscal years closed with a positive General Fund balance
Maintaining a triple A bond rating from all three nationally recognized bond rating agencies
2
for each issuance of State General Obligation Bonds
23

--- Page 26 ---
Exhibit 4
Managing for Results Audit Reports
Previously Issued by the Office of Legislative Audits
Pertaining to the 62 Measures
Number of
Report Report Date Measures
Audited
Public Safety and Safer Neighborhoods March 19, 2009 13
Education October 2, 2009 6
Fiscal Responsibility March 31, 2010 2
Health February 4, 2011 13
24

--- Page 28 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Managing for Results Performance Measures
Audit Report Responses
Report Issued March 2011
Recommendation 1-Maryland Aviation Administration:
The following detailed recommendations are among those we made to MDOT to help strengthen the
quality control processes and improve reporting for the measures we audited.
 Establish procedures to ensure that reporting data are accurate. For example, MDOT should
consider auditing airline passenger count data, at least on a test basis, to verify that the data
reported by the airlines was correct.
 Implement procedures to ensure a comprehensive listing of all applicable records is
maintained and utilized for reporting.
MAA Response:1
MAA agrees with the intent of the auditor’s recommendation and believes that its current
practices provide assurance as to the accuracy of the reported passenger data.
 MAA internal auditors conduct periodic audits of airlines to review compliance with
provisions of each airline’s contract with the MAA. In FY 2011, MAA audited two
major domestic airline carriers and plan to audit a major international carrier as well.
The three airlines represent about 70 percent of annual total passengers handled at
Baltimore/Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport (BWI Marshall). Audits
conducted by MAA personnel previously, as well as including the two recent domestic
airlines audits mentioned, found no material discrepancies in airline reported passenger
counts. One audit report in 2007 had minor discrepancies.
 MAA has a reasonable level of analytical procedures in place to determine whether the
airlines are reporting the passenger counts accurately. Each month, the MAA compares
the load factor at BWI Marshall with the load factor of the North American system for
each carrier operating at BWI Marshall. In addition, the MAA compares the reported
landings with the scheduled landings for each month to determine the reasonableness of
the reporting. As of the fall of 2010, the MAA also compares the landings reported by
the carrier to information from a passive radar system at BWI Marshall to ensure that the
landing information is accurate. Lastly, the FAA releases enplaned passenger data on an
annual basis and the MAA compares enplaned passenger data reported to the MAA
versus the information reported to the FAA. If any of the above shows any potential
1 Auditor’s Comment: We evaluated all of these procedures during the course of the audit and neither we nor
MDOT/MAA could identify a competent independent source that verified the data used for the reported
performance measure, as explained in our Comments/Causes on page 8. Specifically, MDOT/MAA relied solely on
data received directly from the airlines without validating the data. Furthermore, there was no evidence to support
that TSA security information was used by any agency to substantiate passenger count data. In this regard, we also
note that the enplanement security information would not substantiate the arrival destinations where passengers
actually deplaned for flights with more than one-stop itineraries.

--- Page 29 ---
inaccuracies, the carrier is contacted by MAA for an explanation and/or a revised landing
report.
 The FAA operates in a similar manner. According to FAA, passenger data provided by
airlines is merged in to the Air Carrier Activity Information System, which is reviewed
by the FAA personnel. If there are erroneous or inconsistent data found, FAA contacts
the air carrier for resolution of the matter before finalizing the data. In addition, FAA
conducts an annual survey for the operations of non-scheduled (charter) activity.
 In addition, TSA’s Secure Flight Program requires airlines to collect a passenger’s full
name, date of birth, gender and Redress Number (if applicable) for all passengers so that
TSA can perform “No-Fly” watch list verification. Boarding pass will not be issued until
the airline submits complete passenger data to Secure Flight. Further, boarding passes
are verified by the TSA security personnel with proper identification prior to boarding the
aircraft. It would be almost impossible for airlines to manipulate any passenger
information, given the passenger reporting requirements not only to MAA, but also to
FAA and TSA.
 In summary, passenger information is concurrently reviewed by TSA and is subsequently
verified by MAA and FAA. These practices should provide sufficient controls to ensure
the reported passenger data is accurate.

--- Page 30 ---
Maryland Department of Transportation
Managing for Results Performance Measures
Audit Report Responses
Report Issued March 2011
Recommendation 2-Maryland Transit Administration:
The following detailed recommendations are among those we made to MDOT to help strengthen the
quality control processes and improve reporting for the measures we audited.
 Establish procedures to ensure that reporting data are accurate. For example, MDOT should
consider auditing airline passenger count data, at least on a test basis, to verify that the data
reported by the airlines was correct.
 Implement procedures to ensure a comprehensive listing of all applicable records is
maintained and utilized for reporting.
MTA Response:
The MTA agrees with the auditor’s finding and recommendations. The auditors raised three
specific concerns with respect to MTA’s ridership counts for Core Bus, Metro Subway, and
MARC Train service.
 Core Bus: The MTA recognizes that there is a variance between the federally approved
method of counting ridership and the method used to report ridership under the Managing
for Results program. This variance has existed since the inception of MFR. The MTA is
working to use an industry-standard technology, Automated Passenger Counts, that will
provide a more accurate count. APCs count riders as they board and alight a vehicle.
This data is downloaded and becomes available for use as ridership statistics. APCs must
be maintained and a portion of MTA’s fleet are not equipped with this technology at this
time; however, the MTA believes that this technology will improve bus ridership data
reporting in the future.
 Metro Subway: From time to time, the MTA is not able to fully staff a Metro station.
Without a station attendant on site, there is not a mechanism to allow egress for disabled
patrons. As a result, station attendants have typically opened all fare gates, allowing all
passengers to exit the system without using their pass in the fare gate. The uncounted
trips, as noted by the auditor, are less than 1% of the Metro trip total for the year. The
CharmCard, an electronic pass product, requires all riders to tap their card on exit. If
riders skip this step, their card will not work properly when they next enter a station or a
bus to ride. The MTA has been educating customers about this feature and as more riders
obtain CharmCards, the MTA hopes that the incidence of riders failing to properly use an
exit fare gate will decrease.
 MARC Train: The MTA contracts with two operators, Amtrak and CSX, for passenger
rail service. These vendors are required to submit counts of passengers onboard each train
to the MTA. During peak hours it can be difficult for conductors to pass through trains

--- Page 31 ---
and get an accurate count of all seated and standing passengers. Nonetheless the MTA
agrees that this data is an important element of our contracts with Amtrak and CSX. The
MTA will continue to stress the importance of this data at quarterly meetings and in other
communications to ensure accurate ridership reporting.
The MTA appreciates the advice and guidance of the auditors with regard to ridership data and
will continue to improve its ridership data collection systems to minimize the potential for
misreporting.

--- Page 33 ---
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE April 6, 2011
AGENCY RESPONSE TO MANAGING FOR RESULTS AUDIT REPORT DRAFT
Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation Certification Results Budget Book 2, Page 25
Total Acres Enrolled
The Department concurs. However, due to the termination of agricultural districts as of June 30, 2008,
this measure has been rendered meaningless to program staff. The criticism is valid also for other
program performance measures. The program has started building a database with easement
information and is not in the process of data verification. This should be completed by June 30, 2011.

--- Page 34 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Edward L. Shulder, CPA
Audit Manager
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Senior Auditor
Sandra C. Medeiros
Ryan P. Stecher
Matthew D. Straw
Staff Auditors