Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2012
Date: 10/11/2013
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b2b
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:01:44.483835
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2012
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
 This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
 Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
 Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
 The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Purpose of Review and Background Information
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012. We
reviewed these audit reports to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit balances in unrestricted
net assets, or uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the
results of that review.
According to the State's records, State aid totaling approximately $264 million
was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16 community colleges for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2012. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and student
enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and various
other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College) is a
budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation. Baltimore
City Community College is not subject to the Education Article, Section 16-
315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual financial
statement audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits for which separate audit reports are issued.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to adopt
guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on the colleges. The
guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors to express
opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial statements as
well as of the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating the State aid to
the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue management letters
containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of internal controls.
While not required, many of the auditors issue management letters that contain
additional recommendations that were not considered material weaknesses.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
All 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2012 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions and were presented in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2012 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors and
were presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Financial Statements
Three community colleges’ financial statements disclosed deficit balances in
the unrestricted portion of their net assets at June 30, 2012.
Our review disclosed three colleges with deficit balances in the unrestricted
component of their net assets as of June 30, 2012. Specifically, Anne Arundel
and Carroll Community Colleges and the Community College of Baltimore
County had unrestricted net assets deficits of $12,390,918, $6,218,363, and
$1,836,601, respectively. Furthermore, this situation was also noted in the 2011
financial statements for Anne Arundel Community College and in the financial
statements for Carroll Community College for each fiscal year since 2009. For
these two colleges, the unrestricted net assets deficits increased during fiscal year
4

--- Page 7 ---
2012. An unrestricted net assets deficit balance represents the costs of current or
past services that will need to be financed in future periods and could indicate a
potential financial problem.
We did not perform a detailed analysis to determine the cause of these deficits;
nevertheless, the Colleges’ financial statements and accompanying notes
contained certain pertinent information relative to the deficits. Specifically, these
Colleges’ financial statements disclosed that the decreases in net assets
experienced during fiscal year 2012 that contributed to these deficits were due, in
part, to increases in the other post employment benefit liabilities. During fiscal
year 2012, these post employment benefit liabilities increased by $4.3 million for
Anne Arundel Community College, $6.9 million for the Community College of
Baltimore County, and $1.9 million for Carroll Community College.
Additionally, according to Anne Arundel Community College’s financial
statements, the decrease in unrestricted net assets in fiscal year 2012 primarily
related to funding reductions by Anne Arundel County and the planned utilization
of net assets to fund operating costs.
Generally accepted accounting principles specify that liabilities for post
employment benefits (such as healthcare benefits), which are deferred until
retirement or another future event, be recognized in the years in which the
employee provides services rather than during the postemployment period when
payments are made.
The financial statements of one community college disclosed bank deposits
that were not fully collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by State
law.
The financial statements of Wor-Wic Community College disclosed that bank
deposits were not fully collateralized, or otherwise insured, as required by State
law. Specifically, these financial statements disclosed that cash deposits totaling
$295,262 exceeded collateralization and insurance at June 30, 2012 and,
therefore, subjected these deposits to custodial credit risk.
Article 95, Section 22 of the Annotated Code of Maryland requires that deposits
with financial institutions by local government units (including community
colleges) be fully collateralized. Full collateralization is necessary to minimize
the risk of loss of a deposit in the event of the default of a financial institution.
5

--- Page 8 ---
Management Letters
Management letters for fiscal year 2012 included a total of 19
recommendations for improvement, including 1 recommendation considered
to be a material weakness in a college’s system of internal controls.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012. Our
review disclosed that 8 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations; the remaining 7 community colleges received a total of 19
recommendations, 1 of which was considered a material weakness in the college’s
system of internal controls. The material weakness, which has been reported
since 2008, was found at Garrett College and was related to the college’s financial
reporting.
As required by the Education Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the college’s response to the
material weakness and determined that no further action was required.
MHEC did not formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
18 other recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s guidelines,
comments and suggestions related to these deficiencies are not required. When
auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up actions are
subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2012
recommendations by fiscal area. Six of the 19 recommendations (including the
aforementioned material weakness) were repeated from the preceding year.
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Financial aid 16
Accounting and financial reporting 3
Total 19
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Garman, CPA
Assistant Director
Catherine M. Easter
Senior Auditor