Title: Review of Community College Audit Reports - Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2006
Date: 10/16/2007
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ecc9d72404c150b86
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:06:27.680194
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Review of Community College Audit Reports
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 2006
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
October 16, 2007
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Senator Nathaniel J. McFadden, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Mr. Kevin M. O’Keefe, Chairman
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Mr. Karl S. Aro, Executive Director
Department of Legislative Services
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In accordance with the provisions of the Education Article, Section 16-315(h) of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we have reviewed the audit reports that must be
filed by 15 of the State’s community colleges with the Maryland Higher
Education Commission (MHEC) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006. We are
herein summarizing the results of such audits.
Our review disclosed that all opinions expressed by the colleges’ independent
auditors stated that the applicable financial statements were fairly presented in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. Additionally, none of the College’s had a deficit net assets balance as
of June 30, 2006. However, there was one college for which the applicable
auditor reported one material weakness in internal control for fiscal year 2006. In
this instance, MHEC evaluated the adequacy of the college’s response to the
material weakness noted, and concluded that appropriate follow-up action had
been taken.
A draft copy of this report was provided to the MHEC for review and comment.
Since there are no recommendations in this report, a written response was not
necessary.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor

--- Page 4 ---
2

--- Page 5 ---
Background Information and Purpose of Review
According to the State’s records, State aid totaling approximately $192 million for
the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006 was granted to 15 of Maryland’s 16
community colleges. This aid primarily consisted of funding based on cost and
student enrollment data. In addition, it included certain retirement benefits and
various other grants. The remaining college (Baltimore City Community College)
is a budgetary unit of the State and receives an annual State appropriation.
Baltimore City Community College is not subject to the Education Article,
Section 16-315(h) of the Annotated Code of Maryland; however, it obtains annual
financial audits that are conducted by a certified public accounting firm. The
College is also subject to fiscal compliance audits by the Office of Legislative
Audits. We issue separate reports on the College, which contain information
regarding the results of these audits.
The Education Article, Section 16-315(a) of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to adopt
guidelines for the preparation of annual audit reports on the colleges. The
guidelines promulgated by MHEC require independent auditors to express
opinions as to the fairness of presentation of the colleges’ financial statements as
well as to the cost and student enrollment data used for calculating the State aid to
the colleges. The guidelines also require the auditors to issue management letters
containing all material weaknesses in the colleges’ systems of internal controls.
While not required, many of the auditors issue management letters that contain
non-material weaknesses.
We reviewed the audit reports of the State’s community colleges for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2006 to determine compliance with the applicable statutes
and the guidelines promulgated by MHEC. We also reviewed the reports to
determine if any of the community colleges had deficit net asset balances, or
uninsured/uncollateralized bank deposits. This report contains the results of that
review.
3

--- Page 6 ---
Results of Review
Audit Reports
Thirteen of the 15 audit reports for fiscal year 2006 were filed timely.
Our review disclosed that 13 of the 15 community college audit reports were filed
timely with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006. The two community
college reports submitted after the required filing date were those of Chesapeake
College and the College of Southern Maryland. These two reports were
submitted 17 days and 49 days, respectively, after the required filing date, and no
extensions were granted.
The State’s community colleges are required by law to file annual audit reports
within 90 days of the fiscal year end (June 30) unless an extension is granted.
All audit reports expressed unqualified opinions; however, six reports were
not presented in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Our review disclosed that all 15 community college audit reports for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2006 contained unqualified opinions from their auditors.
However, 6 of the 15 community college audit reports reviewed for fiscal year
2006 did not express opinions on all opinion units included in the colleges’ basic
financial statements as required by generally accepted auditing standards.
Specifically, the independent auditor’s reports for Allegany College, Chesapeake
College, College of Southern Maryland, Montgomery College, Prince George’s
Community College, and Wor-Wic Community College did not express separate
opinions on the colleges’ business-type activities and discretely presented
component units (for example, college foundations). MHEC advised us that it
would notify the community colleges of the deficiency and ensure that the
deficiency is corrected in future audits.
MHEC’s audit guidelines require the auditors to express opinions as to the
fairness of the presentation of the colleges’ financial statements and that the audits
be performed in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. An
unqualified opinion is issued when the auditor states that the applicable financial
statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Financial Statements
None of the community colleges had a deficit net assets balance as of June 30,
2006, and college bank deposits were adequately insured or collateralized at
June 30, 2006.
There were no deficit net assets balances reported for any of the 15 colleges as of
June 30, 2006. A deficit net assets balance would indicate that the college had
more liabilities than assets and could indicate a potential financial problem.
Additionally, all college bank deposits were adequately insured or collateralized
at June 30, 2006. Article 95, Section 22 of the Annotated Code of Maryland
requires that deposits with financial institutions by local government units
(including community colleges) be fully collateralized. Full collateralization is
necessary to minimize the risk of loss of a deposit in the event of the default of a
financial institution.
Management Letters
Management letters for fiscal year 2006 included a total of 19
recommendations for improvement, including one recommendation
considered to be a material weakness in one college’s system of internal
controls.
We reviewed the management letters applicable to the audits of the community
colleges that were filed with MHEC for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006. Our
review disclosed that 7 of the community colleges did not receive any
recommendations, while the remaining 8 community colleges received a total of
19 recommendations, one of which was considered to be a material weakness in
the college’s system of internal control. The material weakness was found to
exist at Garrett College and was related to student loan proceeds from lenders not
being reconciled to the College’s records in order to verify that proper loan
disbursements were made to student accounts. As required by the Education
Article, Section 16-315(c) of the Annotated Code of Maryland, MHEC evaluated
the adequacy of the College’s response to the material weakness and determined
that appropriate follow-up action had been taken.
MHEC did not formally evaluate the adequacy of the colleges’ responses to the
18 non-material recommendations since, in accordance with MHEC’s guidelines,
comments and suggestions related to non-material weaknesses are not required.
5

--- Page 8 ---
When auditors include such items in the letters, the colleges’ follow-up actions
are subject to the auditors’ review during subsequent audits.
The following schedule provides a summary of the fiscal year 2006
recommendations by fiscal area. None of the 19 recommendations were repeated
from the preceding year.
Number of
Fiscal Area of Recommendation Recommendations
Financial aid 7
Fixed assets, inventory 4
Payroll 2
Cash receipts and disbursements 2
Other (for example, policy development) 4
Total 19
6

--- Page 9 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Robert A. Garman, CPA
Assistant Director
Nadine L. Forgenie
Senior Auditor