Title: Dorchester County Public Schools

NOTE: In accordance with Chapter 261, 2016 Laws of Maryland, this system has obtained an exemption from one audit which extends the time until the next audit from 6 years to 12 years.
Date: 11/15/2017
Type: Local School Systems
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d36cc9d72404c150a0e
Extracted: 2025-06-18T06:05:56.583928
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Financial Management Practices Audit Report
Dorchester County Public Schools
November 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse may
be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the Fraud
Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry,
color, creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The
Department’s Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the
nondiscrimination requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice
Regulations. Requests for assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-
946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 6
Statistical Overview 6
Oversight 6
External Audits 6
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report 7
Findings and Recommendations 8
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Finding 1 – Adequate accountability and control over cash receipts 9
had not been established. For example, collections were not
recorded upon receipt and there was no independent verification
that certain collections were deposited.
Federal Funds 10
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
 Finding 2 – DCPS did not monitor and restrict users’ capabilities on 12
its automated procurement and accounts payable system and
no compensating electronic or manual controls were
established over employees with incompatible capabilities.
 Finding 3 – DCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently 13
comprehensive, as they did not address the competitive
solicitation of services, justifications for sole source
procurements, or intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement contract documentation standards.
Finding 4 – DCPS did not always comply with certain State 14
procurement laws, justify the use of sole source procurements,
or verify amounts billed with the related contract terms.
Human Resources and Payroll
 Finding 5 – Human resources and payroll system user capabilities 17
were not adequately monitored and restricted. In addition,
independent documented reviews of personnel and payroll
transactions were not performed.
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
3

--- Page 6 ---
Inventory Control and Accountability
Finding 6 – Certain supervisory reviews of recordkeeping 19
transactions were not performed or documented, and
equipment additions and deletions were not always posted to
the inventory records.
Information Technology
* Finding 7 – DCPS lacked assurance that adequate information 20
technology security and operational controls existed over its
financial system that was hosted, operated, and maintained by
a service provider.
 Finding 8 – The student information system database was 22
generally not configured to log security activity. In addition,
password controls over that database and the student
information and finance applications were not adequate.
 Finding 9 – DCPS did not have a complete information technology 23
Disaster Recovery Plan for recovering computer operations.
Finding 10 – The DCPS computer network was not adequately 23
secured to assist in the detection/prevention of potential
security breaches and attacks, and restricted access to the
entire network.
Finding 11 – DCPS’ numerous active computers were at risk, as 24
DCPS did not verify that malware protection software was
installed and operational and that administrative rights were
properly limited.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Finding 12 – DCPS executed a 20-year power purchasing agreement 26
with a solar provider without a competitive process or a formal
analysis to ensure it received the most favorable terms.
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
4

--- Page 7 ---
Transportation Services
 Finding 13 – DCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing 29
procedures and did not periodically perform a system-wide
analysis of bus routes and the related bus capacities to maximize
the efficiency of its bus routes.
 Finding 14 – DCPS had not established a formal methodology to 30
calculate its per vehicle allotment rate, and payments to bus
contractors did not reflect market conditions, use actual costs, or
consider available fuel credits, resulting in higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
Finding 15 – DCPS did not adequately ensure the accuracy of 33
contractor reported manifest mileage, which was used to
compute certain payments to bus contractors.
Finding 16 – Internal controls over payments to bus contractors were 34
not adequate, as there was no independent review and approval
of payment calculations performed by one individual.
Food Services 34
School Board Operations
* Finding 17 – Required financial disclosure statements were not 35
always filed.
Other Financial Controls
 Finding 18 – Dependent eligibility documentation was not always 36
obtained as required by DCPS policy.
Finding 19 – DCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and 37
retiree health care claims paid, and did not verify that stop-loss
insurance was correctly applied and plan administrative fees
were properly charged.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology 39
Agency Response Appendix
 Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding audit report
5

--- Page 8 ---
Background Information
Statistical Overview
According to student enrollment records compiled by the Maryland State
Department of Education (MSDE), Dorchester County Public Schools (DCPS)
ranks 20th in student enrollment among the 24 public school systems in
Maryland. Fiscal year 2016 full-time student enrollment was 4,739 students.
DCPS has 13 schools, consisting of 6 elementary, 1 primary, 2 middle
schools, 2 high schools, and 2 other types of schools (including vocational
and special).
According to DCPS’ audited financial statements, fiscal year 2016 revenues
were $73.1 million and expenditures were $73 million. The largest
expenditure category was salaries and wages, including benefits, which
accounted for 74 percent of total expenditures during fiscal year 2016.
According to MSDE records, during the 2015-2016 school year, DCPS had
738 full-time equivalent positions, which consisted of 510 instructional and
228 non-instructional employees.
Oversight
DCPS is governed by a local school board, consisting of five elected voting
members and two non-voting student members. The State and the
Dorchester County government provide the vast majority of DCPS funding. In
addition, MSDE exercises considerable oversight through the establishment
and monitoring of various financial and academic policies and regulations, in
accordance with certain provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland. MSDE
also works with DCPS to comply with the requirements and mandates of
federal law. Dorchester County government exercises authority over the DCPS
primarily through the review and approval of DCPS’ annual operating and
capital budgets.
External Audits
DCPS engages a certified public accounting firm to independently audit its
annual financial statements. Additionally, the auditor conducts what is
referred to as a Single Audit of DCPS’ federal grant programs (as required by
federal regulations). We reviewed the resulting financial statement audit and
Single Audit reports for fiscal years 2011 through 2015, and examined the
6

--- Page 9 ---
related work papers for fiscal year 2015, which were the latest available at
the time we performed our audit fieldwork.
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the DCPS’ financial statements and conducted
the Single Audit, and the risks and scope of our audit in certain areas. As a
result, we reduced the scope of our audit work related to State and local
government revenues received via wire transfer, accounts receivable, and
federal grant activity.
Status of Findings From Preceding Audit Report
Based on our current audit assessment of significance and risk to our audit
objectives, our audit included a review to determine the status of 14 of the 22
findings contained in our preceding audit report dated January 10, 2011. We
determined that DCPS satisfactorily addressed 4 of these findings. The
remaining 10 findings are repeated in this report.
7

--- Page 10 ---
Findings and Recommendations
Revenue and Billing Cycle
Background
Dorchester County Public Schools (DCPS) revenues consist primarily of funds
received from Dorchester County, the State, and the Federal government.
According to the DCPS audited financial statements, revenues from all
sources totaled $73.1 million during fiscal year 2016. In addition, schools
collect funds for other purposes such as student activities, clubs, and school
publications. Because they are not considered school revenue, these school
activity funds are accounted for separately by each school and reported in
summary in the audited financial statements. Although this revenue is raised
through student related activities, DCPS has a fiduciary duty to safeguard
these funds. For fiscal year 2016, school activity fund collections totaled
$1.2 million and the June 30, 2016 balance was $364,000.
External Audits
There were similarities between the work of the independent certified public
accounting firm that audited the DCPS financial statements and the
objectives of our audit of certain revenue activities. As a result, we reduced
the scope of our audit work related to State and local government revenues
received via wire transfer and accounts receivable, for which the auditor’s
procedural review and testing disclosed no material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Reviews of School Activity Funds
The independent certified public accounting firm contracted by DCPS to
perform its annual financial audit also conducts a limited review of the school
activity funds (SAF). These reviews consist primarily of tests of SAF bank
reconciliations, and receipt and disbursement transactions at selected
schools (although all schools’ SAF were reviewed and tested in fiscal year
2015). The firm’s testing for fiscal year 2015 and 2016 did not identify any
improprieties or prevalent violations of DCPS policy.
Also, a Finance Department supervisory employee conducts SAF reviews to
determine whether proper controls have been established over collections
and disbursements, and funds have been properly accounted for. These
internal SAF reviews are performed at all schools annually and the related
findings are discussed with school principals and central administrative staff.
These reviews identified some control weaknesses at certain schools that
8

--- Page 11 ---
were addressed by school management. The resultant reports we reviewed
disclosed that internal control weaknesses identified were not prevalent.
Finding 1
Adequate accountability and control over cash receipts had not been
established. For example, collections were not recorded upon receipt and
there was no independent verification that certain collections were deposited.
Analysis
DCPS had not established adequate accountability and control over cash
receipts which according to its records, totaled $3.5 million in fiscal year
2016. These receipts consisted primarily of checks received through the mail
from various government sources (such as the Dorchester County government
for construction-related funds and the Maryland State Department of
Education), and the majority of these receipts were initially received in the
Finance Department. As a result, assurance was lacking that all collections
were deposited.
 Employees who initially received collections in the Finance Department,
and the employees of several other departments (primarily Special
Education and Human Resources) who transferred collections to the
Finance Department, did not record nor restrictively endorse checks
immediately upon receipt to establish initial accountability and control.
Specifically, no initial listing of checks received in the mail was prepared,
but rather the recordation and restrictive endorsement of checks was not
performed until the Finance Department prepared the bank deposit, which
could be the following business day or later.
 There was no independent verification to ensure all collections received
were properly deposited. We were advised by Finance Department
personnel that a verification was performed; however, the individual
performing the verification only included selected deposit items, and the
items selected were not documented. Furthermore, this individual was
not independent, as they had access to receipts prior to deposit, and as
previously commented upon, no record of initial accountability existed,
which is necessary to properly perform a deposit verification.
 The same Finance Department employee who recorded the collections in
the financial records, prepared and made the deposit, and was
responsible for any related billing and recording payments in the accounts
receivable records. Further, no independent verifications were performed
9

--- Page 12 ---
to ensure credit postings to the accounts receivable records were
supported by the bank deposits credited to DCPS. According to DCPS
records, this employee prepared approximately 570 billings totaling $2.2
million in fiscal year 2016. For example, billings were prepared for
reimbursement of certain capital project expenditures, bus services, and
health insurance premiums.
Immediate recording and endorsing of checks is necessary to protect assets
during processing and that recordation should be independently verified to
validated bank deposits to ensure all amounts received have been credited by
the bank to DCPS. Finally, adequate segregation of duties should exist
between the collection, deposit, and various accounts receivable functions.
Recommendation 1
We recommend that DCPS
a. immediately record and restrictively endorse all checks;
b. independently verify, through the comparison of initial receipt and
validated deposit documents, that all collections were subsequently
deposited; and
c. ensure that accounts receivable records are maintained by individuals
independent of the cash function; and that critical transactions are
subject to supervisory review and approval, at least on a test basis.
Federal Funds
Background
DCPS receives funds pertaining to federal government programs that are
generally restricted for use for a specific program (such as the School Lunch
Program or Special Education). According to the audited Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, fiscal year 2016 expenditures totaled $7.2
million, not including federally funded fee for service programs such as
Medicaid reimbursement for special education services.
Single Audit Report Disclosed No Reportable Conditions Regarding Federal
Grant Management
Due to work performed by the independent certified public accounting firm
that conducted the Single Audits of DCPS’ federal grants for fiscal years 2012
to 2016 and the objectives of our audit in this area, we reduced the scope of
our audit work related to federal grants. Besides expressing an opinion on
DCPS’ compliance with the terms of several grant programs, the auditor also
considered the existing internal control structure's impact on compliance and
audited the fiscal years 2012 to 2016 required Schedules of Federal Awards
10

--- Page 13 ---
(which includes claimed and reported grant expenditures). The related
reports stated that DCPS complied, in all material respects, with the
requirements applicable to its major federal programs. With respect to
internal controls over compliance with, and the operation of, major federal
programs, the auditors did not identify any material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies.
Medicaid Funds Were Requested for Eligible Services
DCPS had established a procedure to identify children eligible for Medicaid-
subsidized services and the services rendered. Medicaid is an entitlement
program for which certain service costs can be reimbursed to DCPS. Medicaid
activity is not covered by the Single Audit of federal grants. For 10 students
tested, we concluded that reimbursements were generally requested and
received for all eligible Medicaid-subsidized services. According to agency
records, DCPS received approximately $1.1 million in Medicaid funding during
fiscal year 2016.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Background
According to the audited financial statements and DCPS records, non-payroll
disbursements totaled $17.9 million during fiscal year 2016. Requisitions for
goods and services are computer generated by the requesting department
and must be approved electronically first by department supervisory
personnel and then by one of the Assistant Superintendents, before the
related purchase orders are printed and signed by the Comptroller. DCPS
written procurement policies require that certain procurements over $15,000
(such as school building, building improvements, supplies, and equipment) be
competitively bid and approved by the Board, with the exception of textbook
purchases and other materials of instruction and emergency items. Although
not included in its written policies, it is DCPS practice to also require the
solicitation of written quotes for all purchases of $1,000 or greater. Payments
are processed by the finance department through an automated system that
prints vendor checks and posts the payment to the financial records.
11

--- Page 14 ---
Finding 2
DCPS did not monitor and restrict users’ capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system and no compensating electronic
or manual controls were established over employees with incompatible
capabilities.
Analysis
DCPS did not adequately restrict users' capabilities on its automated
procurement and accounts payable system. Additionally, there were no
independent approvals of changes to users’ capabilities on the automated
system, and adequate compensating electronic or manual controls were not
established over employees with incompatible capabilities.
DCPS did not periodically reevaluate the system capabilities needed by
employees to perform their duties, assess the compatibility of employees’
duties, and make appropriate changes to restrict inappropriate or unneeded
capabilities. As a result, DCPS was unaware that six employees were
assigned system capabilities that allowed them to perform unnecessary and
incompatible functions.
 Three finance department employees had incompatible system access
capabilities that would allow them to add a vendor, enter invoices for
payment, and print and obtain disbursement checks. In addition, these
employees had access to the check stock. Further, the review of the
system-generated accounts payable batch listing (which includes invoices
entered for payment processing) performed prior to payment was not
independent, as the employee who reviewed it had unlimited procurement
and accounts payable system capabilities. Finally, there was no
subsequent review of the listing of printed checks to supporting
documentation.
 Two information technology employees had unnecessary system
administrator access that allowed them to add or change employee
accesses, including their own, and perform all procurement and accounts
payable system functions.
 The five employees mentioned above, along with another finance
department employee, had system access capabilities that would allow
them to both generate and approve accounts payable batches without
independent supervisory approval.
12

--- Page 15 ---
As a result, unauthorized purchases and disbursements could be processed
without detection, although our review did not disclose any inappropriate
transactions that were processed by the employees that had unnecessary or
incompatible access. We commented on the failure to segregate incompatible
functions and restrict system access to critical system functions in our
preceding audit report where we cited three of these same employees.
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DCPS strengthen its control over the automated
procurement and accounts payable system and related processes.
Specifically, we recommend that DCPS take appropriate action to
a. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform
incompatible duties (repeat),
b. restrict access to the automated procurement and accounts payable
system to individuals whose job duties require such access (repeat),
c. restrict access to check stock to individuals who are independent of the
check processing function (repeat), and
d. establish a process to ensure that a proper and independent review of
disbursement checks is performed (repeat).
Finding 3
DCPS’ procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive, as they did
not address the competitive solicitation of services, justifications for sole
source procurements, or intergovernmental cooperative purchasing
agreement (ICPA) contract documentation standards.
Analysis
DCPS’ formal procurement policies were not sufficiently comprehensive, as
they did not include requirements for the competitive solicitation of services,
justifications for sole source procurements, or ICPA contract documentation
standards. While the DCPS policies did address the competitive procurement
of certain purchases over $15,000 (such as school building, building
improvements, supplies, or equipment) they did not require the competitive
procurement of services over $15,000. In addition, the policies do not require
the preparation of a documented analysis of the benefits of utilizing an ICPA,
as required by State law, or the maintenance of related ICPA contract
documents on file. Finally, the policies do not require a documented
justification when using the sole source procurement method, which we
commonly find required by other school systems and the State government.
The need for more comprehensive procurement policies is demonstrated by
the results of our test of contract procurements, which are described in detail
13

--- Page 16 ---
in the following report finding. To summarize, our test of 19 procurements,
each over $15,000, for goods and services during fiscal years 2014 to 2016,
with contract awards totaling $48.1 million, disclosed that 7 of the contracts
totaling $1.4 million were procured through ICPAs that lacked a written ICPA
benefit analysis, as required by State law, and 2 contracts totaling $616,000
that were not competitively bid and lacked a written justification for the use of
the sole source procurement method. Finally, no contract agreement was on
file for 5 of the 7 aforementioned ICPA contracts.
Comprehensive procurement policies should ensure purchases are obtained
at the best value and, at a minimum, should specify the acceptable
procurement methods for all types of procurements and establish required
contract documentation, which is necessary for the verification of the
propriety of related contract billings. We commented on the lack of
comprehensive policies in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 3
We recommend DCPS enhance its existing procurement policy to
a. address all categories of goods and services purchased, including the
procurement methods to be used (repeat);
b. require documented justifications be prepared for all sole-source awards
(repeat); and
c. establish standards for the use of ICPAs that mandate the preparation of a
benefit analysis, as required by law, and the maintenance of ICPA
agreements on file.
Finding 4
DCPS did not always comply with certain State procurement laws, justify the
use of the sole source procurement method, or verify amounts billed with the
related contract terms.
Analysis
Our test of 19 procurements for goods and services for fiscal years 2014 to
2016 with contract awards totaling $48.1 million and fiscal year 2016
disbursements totaling $4.4 million, disclosed that certain State procurement
laws were not complied with, including publishing contract bid solicitations
and awards on eMaryland Marketplace. Furthermore, we found cases where
services were not competitively bid or supported by sole source justification
documentation, and vendor billings were not verified with the related contract
terms prior to payment.
14

--- Page 17 ---
 DCPS did not use eMaryland Marketplace to publish bids or awards for
seven procurements tested where a competitive procurement process
resulted in Board approved contract awards of greater than $25,000.
These awards totaled a collective $46 million with fiscal year 2016 vendor
payments of $2 million. State law requires a local school system to
publish a procurement solicitation or notice of award of greater than
$25,000 on eMaryland Marketplace.
 For seven contracts totaling $1.4 million that were awarded based on
ICPAs, DCPS had not prepared written documentation of the benefits of
utilizing an ICPA, as required by State law. Additionally, for four of the
ICPAs totaling $436,000, DCPS had not obtained copies of related price
lists to verify the propriety of vendor billings. For example, we selected for
testing invoices totaling $263,600 for roofing materials and gym
equipment related to two facility renovation contracts totaling $278,000.
However, we were unable to determine if DCPS was charged the
appropriate amount of discount or mark-up because DCPS was unable to
provide us with related price lists or subcontractor costs.
 For two vendors, each paid over $25,000, with collective contract awards
totaling $616,000, the services were either not competitively bid or
supported by sole source justification documentation. Additionally, for one
of these vendors (the County government), who was paid $559,500 in
fiscal year 2016 for providing school nursing staff to each school, the
description of the terms of the related contract were insufficient.
Specifically, the number of nurses, their professional licensing status,
specific services to be provided, required hours of service, billing rates and
maximum contract cost were not specified.1 Rather, DCPS was billed
quarterly based on an annual amount determined by the County.
Consequently, DCPS did not have a basis to assess whether all services
due were provided or the appropriateness of the amounts billed.
1 DCPS had executed a Memorandum of Understanding with the County that the Board
approved in 2012, but it did not include an expiration date and lacked the aforementioned
essential contract terms.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Recommendation 4
We recommend DCPS
a. comply with State procurement law by using eMaryland Marketplace for
contract procurement solicitations or awards and before deciding to
participate in an ICPA, prepare written documentation of the benefits of
utilizing the ICPA for Board review;
b. maintain contract pricing information on file, including the applicable
contracts, and verify the accuracy of prices on vendor billings;
c. procure contracts/purchases of over $25,000 through a competitive
bidding process, or document the justification of any sole source
procurements; and
d. execute written contracts for services procured and expected to exceed
$25,000 that include sufficient specificity, such as agreed-upon services
and related financial terms and conditions, to enable the subsequent
verification of related billings.
Human Resources and Payroll
Background
Payroll expense represents the largest single cost component in the DCPS
budget. According to DCPS records, fiscal year 2016 salary, wage, and
benefit costs totaled $55.1 million, or 74 percent of the $73 million total
operating expenditures. According to Maryland State Department of
Education reports, during the 2015 – 2016 school year DCPS had 738 full-
time positions, which consisted of 510 instructional positions and 228 non-
instructional positions.
DCPS uses an automated system to maintain human resources (HR)
information, record employee time, track leave usage, and to process and
record payroll transactions. Attendance reports are submitted by employees
semi-monthly and leave is recorded and adjustments processed on the
system by central payroll personnel. The system also generates payroll
checks and direct deposit advices. Payroll processing involves both
automated processes (such as compiling leave and running edit reports) and
manual processes (such as data entry of new employee information).
16

--- Page 19 ---
Finding 5
Human Resources (HR) and payroll system user capabilities were not
adequately monitored and restricted. In addition, independent documented
reviews of personnel and payroll transactions were not performed.
Analysis
User capabilities assigned to employees, which allowed them to perform
critical HR and payroll system functions, were not adequately monitored and
restricted. In addition, certain employees were assigned capabilities that
allowed them to perform incompatible functions and independent
documented reviews of personnel and payroll transactions were not
performed.
 DCPS had not established a formal process for granting or modifying HR
and payroll system user access capabilities that required documented
supervisory approval. Presently, the level of access was based upon either
electronic mail messages or verbal requests made by supervisors.
Furthermore, DCPS did not generate periodic system reports of employee
capabilities for supervisory review to ensure adequate separation of duties
and to confirm the continued need for assigned capabilities.
 Certain individuals were assigned incompatible HR and payroll system
access capabilities, such as changing employee salary and direct deposit
information, or were assigned capabilities that were not needed to
perform their job duties. For example, our review of the 14 DCPS
employees we deemed to have critical user access capabilities disclosed
that as of December 6, 2016, 13 could perform incompatible functions or
had unnecessary access, including 2 information technology (IT)
employees with unlimited system administrator access that allowed them
to perform all HR and payroll functions. Nine of the employees also had
access that allowed them to add employees, change salary and direct
deposit information, and process payroll payments.
 Critical HR and payroll transactions were not subject to an independent
review or comparison to supporting documentation. Specifically, we were
advised by DCPS management that HR and payroll personnel who process
transactions generally reviewed each other’s transactions prior to input,
but such reviews did not usually include a review of source documents and
were often not documented. Certain transactions, such as the recording
of leave and overtime were not subject to any review. A report of all
payroll changes (new hires, salary changes, payroll adjustments)
processed is generated after each payroll run, but is subject to only a
17

--- Page 20 ---
cursory review to ensure that no users changed their own payroll
information. Furthermore, the three supervisors who reviewed the payroll
change reports had HR and payroll transaction processing capabilities and
were therefore not independent, and did not review any source documents
to verify the validity of the report transactions.
For example, two employees were responsible for calculating and entering
payment amounts into the system for other earnings (such as teacher
workshops, extra duty, per diems, overtime, vacation and sick day
payouts) that totaled $980,000 in fiscal year 2016. However, these
transactions were not subject to a documented independent supervisory
review of supporting documentation. Our test of 10 other earnings
transactions totaling $163,000 disclosed one transaction in September
2012 where an employee was over paid by $8,025. The employee should
have been paid $1,287 for attending various summer program retreats
and meetings over several days, based on a daily per diem rate of
$282.18, but instead received $9,312, when the per diem was incorrectly
mistaken for an hourly rate and applied to the 33 hours of attendance.
Similar conditions regarding inappropriate access to critical system functions
and the lack of an independent review of HR and payroll transactions were
commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 5
We recommend that DCPS
a. perform a periodic documented independent review of user capabilities to
ensure access is properly granted,
b. limit access to critical functions to only those employees who require such
capabilities to perform their assigned job duties (repeat),
c. eliminate access to and segregate incompatible system functions (repeat),
d. perform a periodic documented independent review of personnel and
payroll transactions processed using supporting documentation (repeat),
and
e. take appropriate actions to recover the $8,025 overpayment.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Background
According to DCPS audited financial statements, the undepreciated value of
its capital equipment inventory totaled $4 million as of June 30, 2016. DCPS
uses an automated system maintained by its Finance Department to
capitalize inventory with a cost of $5,000 or more for financial statement
18

--- Page 21 ---
purposes. Additionally, all equipment items costing over $500 and computers
(desktops, laptops, tablets), which are deemed non-capital items, are
recorded in the same system for tracking and control purposes.
Finding 6
Certain supervisory reviews of recordkeeping transactions were not performed
or documented, equipment additions were not always properly recorded, and
deletions to the records were not always properly authorized.
Analysis
Supervisory review and approval of inventory transactions, including posting
of activity to the inventory records and equipment deletions, was not required
or infrequently performed. In addition, our tests indicated that equipment
inventory records were not complete or comprehensive.
 Certain supervisory reviews of inventory transactions were not performed
or documented. Specifically, three employees were primarily responsible
for recording additions, disposals, and adjustments to the inventory
records maintained on an automated system at the finance department;
however, the entries were not independently verified to supporting
documentation by supervisory personnel, even on a test basis. Also, the
disposal form to remove equipment from the records, which required
supervisory approval, was not always used. Our test of 10 technology
items removed from the inventory records during fiscal year 2016
disclosed that for 9 items, totaling $14,800, a disposal form with proper
supervisory approvals was not submitted, in violation of DCPS’ policies.
 DCPS did not always accurately maintain its equipment inventory records.
Our test of 20 technology items totaling $22,160 purchased in March
2016 disclosed that 12 items totaling $13,296 were not recorded in the
records, as of January 2017. In addition, our review of the complete
inventory listing, disclosed that as of that date there were 4,443 items
listed as technology items (laptops, desktop, scanners) in the inventory
records totaling $1.4 million, of which 2,932 had missing cost information
and 2,911 did not have a purchase date, even though the inventory data
base provides for the recordation of such information.
According to DCPS inventory records, as of January 2017, there were 4,632
equipment items totaling $3.6 million, which included capital and non-capital
items. However, as a result of the deficiencies cited above, equipment could
be misappropriated without detection and the accuracy of the records is
questionable.
19

--- Page 22 ---
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DCPS ensure
a. postings to the inventory records (such as, disposals and adjustments) are
properly supported and approved by independent supervisory personnel,
at least on a test basis;
b. equipment deletions are accompanied by a properly approved disposal
form; and
c. inventory records are properly maintained by recording all applicable
equipment purchases, including their cost and purchase date, as required.
Information Technology
Background
The DCPS Information Technology Department (ITD) provides information
systems services to all DCPS technology users. Specifically, the ITD maintains
and administers the DCPS student information application and computer
operations. The ITD also operates the DCPS network that links the individual
schools’ local networks to the Internet and to the computer resources located
at the DCPS Central Office in the DCPS Board of Education building. A
contractor hosts the DCPS’ financial information application on its servers and
supports the application.
Finding 7
DCPS lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its financial system that was hosted,
operated, and maintained by a service provider.
Analysis
DCPS lacked assurance that adequate information technology security and
operational controls existed over its financial system that was hosted,
operated, and maintained by a service provider. DCPS’ contract with the
service provider dated August 6, 2007 did not adequately protect DCPS
against certain significant information technology security and operational
risks. For example, this contract:
 contained a disclaimer of liability, on behalf of the service provider,
relating to service quality and availability;
 did not contain any provision requiring the service provider to submit to a
third party independent review. The American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants has issued guidance concerning examinations of service
organizations. Based on this guidance, service organizations (like the
20

--- Page 23 ---
aforementioned service provider) may contract for an independent review
of controls and the resultant independent auditor’s report is referred to as
a Service Organization Controls (SOC) report. There are several types of
SOC reports, with varying scope, levels of review, and auditor testing. One
type of report, referred to as a SOC 2 Type 2 report, includes the results of
the auditor’s review of controls placed in operation and tests of operating
effectiveness for the period under review and could include an evaluation
of system security, availability, processing integrity, confidentiality, and
privacy;2 and
 did not require the service provider to protect against data contamination
between customers.
As a result of these conditions, DCPS lacked assurance that adequate security
controls existed over its data and had limited remedies against inadequate
service quality and system downtime. Best practices established by the Cloud
Security Alliance, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to promote the
use of best practices for providing security assurance relating to service
providers, include detailing the specific responsibilities mentioned above in
clear and concise contractual language to limit operational and security risks.
Similar conditions were commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 7
We recommend that DCPS
a. ensure that the service provider contract excludes blanket disclaimers of
liability on behalf of the service provider (repeat);
b. ensure that the service provider contract includes provisions that address
the noted security and operational risks, including requiring the service
provider to regularly obtain SOC 2 Type 2 reviews pertaining to the service
provider’s information technology security and operational controls
(repeat); and
c. obtain and review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports from service
providers and ensure that the related independent reviews adequately
address all critical security and operational concerns and that the service
provider implements all critical report recommendations.
2 When performing our audit work in September 2016, we determined that the most-
recent audit report that DCPS had obtained from the service provider hosting the DCPS
financial application was a SOC 1 report, which does not address key security controls, that
covered the period from July 1 through December 31, 2012. In addition, we determined
that as of September 14, 2016, the aforementioned service provider had not undergone a
third party independent review (for example a SOC review) since the aforementioned review
covering the period ended December 31, 2012.
21

--- Page 24 ---
Finding 8
The student information system database was generally not configured to log
security activity. In addition, password controls over that database and the
student information and finance applications were not adequate.
Analysis
Monitoring controls over the student information system database were not
sufficient, and password controls over this database and the student
information and finance applications were not adequate.
 The student information database was not configured to log any database
security activity except for certain privileged operations. In addition, DCPS
was not reviewing any logs of the use of those privileged operations.
Consequently, there was no effective monitoring of security activities for
this database. Best practices identified in the State of Maryland
Information Security Policy require that information systems generate
audit records for all security-relevant events, including all security and
system administrator accesses and that procedures must be developed to
routinely (for example daily or weekly) review audit records for indications
of unusual activities, suspicious activities or suspected violations, and
report findings to appropriate officials for prompt resolution. A similar
condition was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
 Password controls were not sufficient, as the passwords controls over the
DCPS’ student information database and the student information and
finance applications did not meet the minimum recommended settings in
the State of Maryland Information Security Policy. For example, password
aging, length, and complexity were not enforced for DCPS’ student
information application. Similar conditions were commented upon in our
preceding audit report.
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DCPS implement best practices prescribed by the State
of Maryland Information Security Policy by
a. setting the student information database to log all critical security related
events, regularly review these logs, document these reviews, and retain
this documentation for future reference (repeat); and
b. establishing controls related to password aging, length, and complexity,
over the DCPS’ student information database and the student information
and finance applications (repeat).
22

--- Page 25 ---
Finding 9
DCPS did not have a complete information technology Disaster Recovery Plan
for recovering computer operations.
Analysis
DCPS did not have a complete information technology Disaster Recovery Plan
(DRP) for recovering computer operations from disaster scenarios (for
example a fire). The State of Maryland Information Technology Disaster
Recovery Guidelines provide best practices on the minimum required
elements needed for a DRP. DCPS’ DRP did not address several of these
minimum requirements. For example, the DRP did not contain an alternate
processing site, complete listings of hardware and software, or the restoration
of network connectivity. In addition, the DRP had not been tested and a copy
was not stored at an off-site location. Without a complete and tested DRP, a
disaster could cause significant delays (for an undetermined period of time) in
restoring information systems operations above and beyond the expected
delays that would exist in a planned recovery scenario. A similar condition
was commented upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that is in accordance with
the aforementioned Information Technology Disaster Recovery Guidelines
(repeat); and
b. periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the
documentation for future reference.
Finding 10
The DCPS computer network was not adequately secured to assist in the
detection/prevention of potential security breaches and attacks, and restrict
access to the entire network.
Analysis
The DCPS computer network was not adequately secured.
 Intrusion Detection Prevention System (IDPS) coverage for the DCPS
network did not exist. Although a host-based intrusion protection system
(HIPS) was available for use on all DCPS computers, we were advised that
DCPS did not install the HIPS on any of its computers. A properly
configured network based IDPS, supplemented by HIPS, can aid
significantly in the detection/prevention of, and response to, potential
23

--- Page 26 ---
network security breaches and attacks. Also, best practices identified in
the State of Maryland Information Security Policy require protection
against malicious code and attacks by using IDPS to monitor system
events, detect attacks, and identify unauthorized use of information
systems and/or confidential information.
 All DCPS students had unrestricted wireless network level access to the
entire DCPS network. In addition, because of the weak wireless
authentication method used and the lack of adequate network level
access controls, former faculty, staff, and students (including terminated
and expelled individuals) had network level access to the entire DCPS
network over all ports. Best practices prescribed by the University System
of Maryland’s IT Security Standards state that wireless networks should
authenticate the identity of all users, where necessary, and maintain
restricted access to critical resources.
Recommendation 10
We recommend that DCPS
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security
risks and identify how network based IDPS and HIPS coverage should be
best applied to its network. Based on this review and assessment, we
recommend that DCPS implement IDPS coverage as necessary;
b. use network based, individual authentication for wireless connections
made by its faculty, staff, and students; and
c. utilize access control lists on its network devices to limit authenticated
wireless users’ access to critical network devices based on each user’s
needs.
Finding 11
DCPS’ numerous active computers were at risk, as DCPS did not verify that
malware protection software was installed and operational and that
administrative rights were properly limited.
Analysis
Procedures for maintaining and securing DCPS’ 3,945 active computers were
not sufficient.
 DCPS did not periodically verify that malware protection software was
installed and operational on all of its 3,945 active computers. Our testing
as of December 20, 2016 noted that the console that DPSC used to
manage its malware protection software on the aforementioned
computers only identified 598 computers with operational malware
24

--- Page 27 ---
protection software. Therefore, DCPS lacked assurance that 3,347 of its
computers had malware protection software that was operational and
current.
 Local administrative rights were not properly restricted. Our test of 45
users noted that 9 users were inappropriately assigned local
administrative rights to their workstations. If these 9 workstations were
infected with malware, the malware would run with administrative rights
and expose these workstations to a greater risk of compromise than if the
workstations’ user accounts operated with only user rights. In addition,
the administrative rights would permit these 9 users to disable the
malware protection software on their workstations.
Best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland Information Security Policy
state that agencies, at a minimum, must “protect against malicious code
(viruses, worms, Trojan horses) by implementing anti-malware solutions that,
to the extent possible, include a capability for automatic updates.” Also,
Microsoft TechNet recommends that workstation accounts for regular
employees (non-administrators) run with standard user rights to lessen the
risk of compromise from malware.
Recommendation 11
We recommend that DCPS
a. ensure that all managed computers are running current, operational
versions of the malware protection software used by DCPS; and
b. limit the assignment of local administrative rights on DCPS workstations to
information technology network and system administrators and individuals
authorized in writing to have such rights, with documentation supporting
these authorizations retained for future reference.
Facilities Construction, Renovation, and Maintenance
Background
DCPS employs a staff of 64 employees to maintain its 13 schools and 2
administrative and support facilities. According to the fiscal year 2016 Capital
Improvement Plan, necessary construction, major renovations, and systemic
improvements to DCPS facilities over the next ten years were estimated to
cost $91.5 million.
25

--- Page 28 ---
DCPS Construction-related Contracts Were Properly Approved by the Board
Our review of eight construction-related procurements during fiscal years
2014 through 2017 totaling $46.1 million, disclosed that they were generally
properly procured and approved by the Board.
Processes are in Place to Minimize Energy Costs
DCPS employs an energy program manager and has processes in place to
minimize energy costs. For example, DCPS utilizes an energy management
system to monitor heating and air conditioning systems from a central
location to control temperature settings and lighting timers and photocells to
control outdoor lighting and occupancy sensors to control indoor lighting.
Furthermore, DCPS has written policies that encourage both students and
employees to be aware of and limit their energy use. Finally, DCPS
participates in a consortium with other Eastern Shore entities to purchase
energy at the best possible terms for members of the consortium. According
to documents provided by the consortium (which we did not audit), DCPS
saved over $817,000 through energy cost avoidance from fiscal years 2001
to 2015.
Finding 12
DCPS executed a 20-year power purchasing agreement with a solar provider
without a competitive process or a formal analysis to ensure it received the
most favorable financial terms.
Analysis
DCPS executed a power purchasing agreement (PPA) with a solar provider that
included a 20-year escalating rate schedule with an estimated cost of $2.4
million without using a competitive procurement process or formal analysis to
ensure it received the most favorable financial terms.
In an effort to reduce electricity supply costs, DCPS executed a solar PPA in
June 2012 that, according to the provider, could save DCPS approximately
$800,000 in reduced electricity bills over the 20-year life of the PPA.
Subsequently, the contractor installed a field of solar panels on DCPS property
at one location that would provide approximately 86 percent of the electricity
requirements for one DCPS school in exchange for a 20-year guarantee that
DCPS would purchase the electricity generated by that system from the
contractor at pre-established rates at an estimated cost of $2.4 million. The
solar provider retained ownership of all equipment, environmental credits,
financial incentives, and tax benefits associated with the systems. Under the
terms of the PPA, DCPS was simply making a commitment to purchase
electricity for a set period for defined rates, with an option to purchase the
26

--- Page 29 ---
equipment at the end of the 20-year period. This was the first PPA entered
into by DCPS.
DCPS did not conduct a competitive solicitation, claiming that it had instead
used an intergovernmental agreement, by piggybacking on an existing
agreement between the solar provider and another Maryland Eastern Shore
county government. However, the PPA made no mention of the use of an
intergovernmental agreement. Further, if DCPS had made use of such an
agreement, it had not prepared a written determination of the benefits of
using the other local government’s contract, as required by State law. This
law, which specifically states it is applicable to local education agencies,
allows the use of other local government contracts only after the using entity
has determined the use of such arrangements will promote efficiency or cost
savings.
Also, if an intergovernmental agreement was the basis for the PPA’s terms
and conditions, DCPS could not explain why they were paying a higher base
rate ($.0875 per kilowatt-hour) than that county government ($.080 per
kilowatt-hour). Although the annual escalation rate increase (2.5 percent
rate) was the same, the lower base rate for the county government would
have provided greater cost benefits. Based on the school’s estimated
electricity use and the differences in rates, additional costs to DCPS would
equate to approximately $8,300 for the first year of the contract and
$191,000 over the entire 20-year agreement.
In addition to the difference in rates between the source contract and DCPS’
PPA, we noted a variability in rates between DCPS’ PPA and the rates paid by
other Maryland school systems for solar generated electricity, indicating a
potential for rate flexibility that might have resulted in still lower rates if a
competitive process had been used instead of an intergovernmental
agreement. We have found that other Maryland school systems on the
Eastern Shore have negotiated PPAs during the same time-period with similar
arrangements regarding credits, tax benefits, and equipment ownership;
however, those systems had certain financial terms that were more favorable
than DCPS’. For example, one school system executed a PPA in March 2013
that had a fiscal year 2013 rate ($.08 per kilowatt) that was 8.6 percent lower
than the DCPS rate, and other Maryland school systems had recently obtained
even more favorable terms. For example, a second school system had
negotiated a rate ($.0490 per kilowatt) in a January 2015 PPA that was 48
percent lower than the fiscal year 2016 DCPS rate. More significantly, this
latter PPA did not have a yearly rate increase. In comparison, the two and a
half percent escalation factor in the DCPS PPA accounted for $500,000 of its
total estimated cost of $2.4 million for its 20-year life. Finally, we were
27

--- Page 30 ---
advised by legal counsel to the Maryland General Assembly that a public
school solar project funded under a PPA likely would be subject to the Board
of Public Works’ school construction regulations and that those regulations
establish a preference for competitive sealed bidding.
Recommendation 12
We recommend that DCPS
a. ensure that the procurement method (competitive procurement or
intergovernmental agreement) chosen for energy contracts provides the
most favorable financial outcome for DCPS, and
b. appropriately document the use of intergovernmental agreements and
comply with all related requirements in State law.
Transportation Services
Background
DCPS has approximately 4,300 students eligible to receive student
transportation services. These students were transported on 58 buses of
which 48 were owned and operated by contractors and the remaining 10 were
owned by DCPS. According to DCPS audited financial statements, fiscal year
2016 transportation costs totaled $3.6 million, with $2.6 million (72 percent)
representing payments for contracted bus services. DCPS reported that
995,000 route miles were traveled to transport students for the 2015-2016
school year.
Monthly payments to bus contractors include a per vehicle allotment (PVA),
which is intended as repayment of the full acquisition cost of a bus and an
additional payment as a rate for return on investment (ROI). In addition, the
monthly payments include funds for operational costs, such as hourly
reimbursements for drivers and attendants, a per-mile maintenance fee, fuel
costs, and an annual administrative fee. DCPS bus contracts are for a one-
year term and renew automatically over the 15-year useful life of the bus
unless terminated by either party by giving written notice not less than 30
days prior to the July 1st anniversary date.
28

--- Page 31 ---
Finding 13
DCPS did not establish comprehensive bus routing procedures and did not
periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and related bus
capacities to maximize the efficiency of its bus routes.
Analysis
DCPS bus routing procedures were not comprehensive, as they did not
address the planning, reviewing, and changing of existing routes, and they did
not specify ridership goals and student ride time limits. In addition, DCPS did
not periodically perform a system-wide analysis of bus routes and related bus
ridership to maximize efficiency. Although DCPS had purchased routing
software in December 2010, as of our audit, DCPS had experienced technical
difficulties with the software and it was still not fully operational.
Consequently, DCPS was not yet able to use it to significantly enhance the
efficiency of its bus operations.
Our analysis of student ridership disclosed that there might be opportunities
to increase ridership on individual bus routes. Our review of 77 regular routes
(48 buses) for the 2015-2016 school year disclosed that ridership on 42
routes (55 percent) was below 75 percent of computed capacity based on bus
sizes3. Of the 77 routes, 18 (23 percent) had a ridership of less than 50
percent capacity. We recognize that Dorchester County includes large rural
areas, which can make it difficult to achieve high bus capacity utilization in all
cases. However, as our analysis included all regular routes, the buses cited
were not isolated to only rural regions of the county.
Currently, DCPS uses existing routes and manually makes modifications as
needed to accommodate students’ school assignments. DCPS uses an
informal student ride time limit of 90 minutes in manually adjusting routes,
but does not have any ridership goals. DCPS purchased routing software in
December 2010 and used global positioning system devices provided by the
software vendor (on a temporary basis) to record its bus routes in the routing
software for the 2010-2011 school year. However, in July 2013 the routing
software system crashed with no available backups. Since this time, DCPS
has been working on re-entering the routes manually. Therefore, DCPS was
not yet able to use it to plan routes or generate system reports, such as
number of students per route and bus capacity, to assess the efficiency of bus
routes.
3 School bus capacities are lower than manufacturer stated capacities and differ depending
on the school level. For example, the capacity for high school and elementary school routes
is 48 and 61 students, respectively based on 72-passenger buses (manufacturer stated
capacity).
29

--- Page 32 ---
Using routing software is a recognized best practice that can be used to
reduce the time it takes to design efficient routes, reduce student ride time,
and help ensure that routes minimize the number of buses needed to
transport students. A similar condition regarding the lack of comprehensive
bus routing procedures to help plan more efficient services, was commented
upon in our preceding audit report.
Recommendation 13
We recommend that DCPS take steps to determine if buses can be used more
efficiently. Specifically, we recommend that DCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written procedures that include specific
bus ridership goals and student ride times (repeat);
b. take appropriate action to timely complete the recording of bus route data
in its existing routing software; and
c. use its automated bus routing software and periodically perform a system-
wide analysis of its bus routes, to maximize the ridership on its bus routes.
Finding 14
DCPS had not established a formal methodology to calculate its PVA rate, and
payments to bus contractors did not reflect market conditions, use actual
costs, or consider available fuel credits, resulting in higher payments than
necessary for student transportation services.
Analysis
DCPS had not established a formal methodology to calculate its PVA and
payments to bus contractors did not reflect market conditions, actual costs, or
available fuel credits, resulting in higher payments than necessary for student
transportation services. Our review of the contract payments disclosed the
following conditions:
 DCPS pays contractors an annual PVA for each bus. In accordance with
past studies, the PVA is intended to reimburse the bus contractor for the
cost of the bus with depreciation payments spread over the useful life of
the bus, and provide an annual return on investment (ROI) for using the
bus contractor’s funds to buy the bus. However, DCPS did not use the
methodology developed in the studies or any other formal methodology to
calculate its PVA. That methodology would have considered or included
various specific cost elements, such as the cost of the bus, an allowed
depreciation percentage, and ROI.
Instead, during each fiscal year from 2011 to 2016, DCPS either used the
previous year’s PVA (for which DCPS had no documented basis) or
30

--- Page 33 ---
increased the PVA. The determination of the annual PVA was purportedly
based on DCPS’ conversations with three local bus dealers to obtain sales
prices, after which DCPS calculated a collective percentage increase in the
PVA, if any. The proposed annual rate was discussed with the local bus
contractor association and then submitted to and approved by the Board.
For previous years, the PVA was based solely on negotiations with the local
bus contractor association after considering the PVA rates of neighboring
school systems. The annual PVA for each bus placed in service increased
from $16,850 (fiscal year 2011) to $18,700 (fiscal year 2016).
 Since there was no stated ROI in the PVA rates submitted to the Board, or
any explanation or calculation of the ROI being paid, we calculated, using
the actual purchase prices of the buses, the imputed ROI rate paid for
years 2011 to 2016. We determined the ROI for those years ranged from
10.02 percent to 11.49 percent.
To estimate the financial impact of DCPS using PVA rates that were not
based on actual costs or investment rates over the life of a bus, we
calculated the PVA for the 48 primary buses being used to transport
students during fiscal year 2016, which included buses placed into service
dating back to 2001. Using the prime interest rate4 (which ranged from
3.25 percent to 9.24 percent) for the ROI and DCPS’ 15-year estimated
useful life of a bus in the standard PVA formula, we compared our PVA
results to the DCPS PVA payments. This comparison showed that DCPS’
annual PVA payments per bus were $98 to $8,406 higher than the
payments would have been had the prevailing prime rate been used in the
calculation. The effect is that, over the 15-year life of these 48 buses that
were in service during fiscal year 2016, DCPS would pay out approximately
$3.7 million more than if a reasonable ROI had been used ($1.7 million
having already been paid and $2.0 million to be paid over the remaining
useful life). This analysis does not include the effect of any new bus
purchases that were made after the beginning of the fiscal year 2017
school year (September 2016) and the lost interest income that could
have been earned by DCPS on the excess amounts paid.
4 The use of the prime interest rate was recommended in a November 1999 study
commissioned by another Maryland school system. Also, in 1975 an MSDE study
recommended the prime rate as a reasonable ROI interest rate. The prime rate is actually a
lending rate that nearly always exceeds the available market investment rate: therefore, it
is deemed to be reasonable for the ROI calculation. In addition, a May 2010 MSDE PVA
Workgroup commented that the profit (or ROI) to be included in the PVA should reflect what
a reasonable investor or business person would expect on a long-term investment. As of
January 2017, current 10 and 30-year US Treasury Note rates, which could be reflective of
a reasonable long-term investment option, were 2.4 and 3 percent, respectively.
31

--- Page 34 ---
 DCPS could not show that the $0.81 per-mile fee paid to reimburse bus
contractors for maintenance costs was reasonable. We were advised that
bus maintenance fees paid to contractors were based on DCPS owned bus
maintenance costs, which we calculated to be $0.49 per-mile in fiscal year
2016. However, DCPS could not explain the rationale of the difference in
costs we calculated. In fiscal year 2016, DCPS paid $647,000 to
reimburse contractors for bus maintenance costs, which was $255,000
more than if our calculated rate of $0.49 per-mile was used.
 DCPS did not exclude federal fuel excise taxes from payments to bus
contractors for fuel.5 DCPS pays contractors for fuel usage using a
monthly average of diesel fuel prices, including taxes, and dividing by a
miles-per-gallon (mpg) rate established by DCPS. However, according to
federal law, DCPS contractors are exempt from the $0.244 per gallon
excise tax on diesel fuel and are able to receive a credit for federal fuel
taxes paid when they file their income tax returns. If DCPS had considered
the $0.244 exemption amount in its calculation, payments to the
contractors would have been $199,000 lower for fiscal years 2011
through 2016.
Additionally, the mpg rate used by DCPS to pay bus contractors for fuel
usage (6 mpg) was less than the national average per the American
School Bus Council. DCPS advised that longstanding 6 mpg rate was a
compromise, since the school system’s own smaller buses achieve 7 to 8
mpg, but that the contractors contended their buses achieve 5 mpg.
However, the 5 mpg had not been validated and we estimated that DCPS
payments to bus contractors would have been $182,000 less during fiscal
years 2014 through 2016, if the national average rate of 7 mpg had been
in effect.
Similar conditions regarding the appropriateness of the PVA, maintenance,
and fuel reimbursements were commented upon during our preceding audit.
Recommendation 14
We recommend that DCPS
a. use documented actual costs and reasonable market investment rates as
a basis for establishing contractor rates for the annual PVA (repeat),
5 Subsequent to the completion of our audit fieldwork, Chapter 397, Laws of Maryland 2016,
effective July 1, 2016, exempted a county board of education or a school bus operator
under contract with a county board of education, from State motor fuel taxes. In addition,
the law authorized county boards of education and a school bus operator to claim a refund
of State motor fuel taxes paid. Consequently, this exemption should be factored into future
payments.
32

--- Page 35 ---
b. use actual bus operating costs or develop supportable cost estimates as
the basis for establishing reasonable contractor rates for per mile
maintenance costs (repeat),
c. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments, and
d. document the basis for the mpg used in reimbursing bus contractors for
fuel usage and consider adopting the industry standard (repeat).
Finding 15
DCPS did not adequately ensure the accuracy of contractor reported manifest
mileage, which was used to compute certain payments to bus contractors.
Analysis
DCPS did not adequately verify the accuracy of contractor reported mileage.
Specifically, the mileage reported on the monthly manifests submitted by
each bus driver and used by DCPS to calculate the fuel and maintenance
components of the contractor's monthly pay was not compared to available
mileage from mapping software applications. Currently, at the beginning of
each school year, contractor manifests are compared to the previous year’s
manifest for reasonableness. If a manifest reflects significant time and
mileage differences, a transportation employee will ride on the bus to verify
the accuracy of the manifest. Payments for mileage-based fuel and
maintenance reimbursements totaled approximately $950,000 in fiscal year
2016.
Our test of January 2016 manifests for 10 bus routes disclosed that for 2
manifests, the amount of contractor reported miles exceeded the actual
routes’ mileage by a total of 13 miles per day, which represented
approximately 30 and 15 percent of individual reported route mileage. We
calculated the actual route miles using a mapping application available on the
internet and determined that since reported mileage remained constant
throughout the year, DCPS potentially overpaid for mileage for these 2 routes
by a total of $2,700 in fiscal year 2016. We noted similar issues for field trips
for which payments in fiscal year 2016 totaled $147,000.
Recommendation 15
We recommend that DCPS
a. independently verify bus contractor’s manifests to ensure that the
payments to be made to the contractors accurately reflect the actual bus
services provided;
b. document the verification process; and
c. review past payments and pursue discrepancies, including those we
identified.
33

--- Page 36 ---
Finding 16
Internal controls over payments to bus contractors were not adequate, as
there was no independent review and approval of payment calculations
performed by one individual.
Analysis
Payments for transportation services were not independently verified for
propriety. Specifically, one transportation employee was responsible for
entering data, including route miles, time, PVA, and fuel adjustments for each
of the 48 contractor-owned buses into a spreadsheet used to prepare a
summary report of the monthly bus contractor payments, which is submitted
to the finance department for payment processing. However, the spreadsheet
entries and payment amounts were not verified to supporting documentation
by independent supervisory personnel, either prior to or after the payments
were made by DCPS. Although the summary report was approved by a
supervisory employee within the transportation department, supporting
documentation was not reviewed as part of the approval process. Further, the
summary report was forwarded to the finance department for final processing
and payment without detailed information supporting the payments,
precluding a post-payment verification. Therefore, there is a lack of
assurance that payments are accurate.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that DCPS ensure that an employee independent of the
payment processing verifies the accuracy and propriety of bus contractor
payments, by performing a documented comparison of the amounts paid to
supporting documentation.
Food Services
Background
DCPS has 11 cooking cafeterias at its 13 schools. Food and related supplies
are received and stored at each school. In fiscal year 2016, DCPS had 45
food service positions (consisting of 43 cafeteria positions and 2
administrative positions). According to the audited financial statements, food
service operating revenue ($2,808,682) exceeded expenditures ($2,739,526)
for fiscal year 2016, and in four of the last five years. We noted that the
DPCS’ meal per labor hour was routinely calculated and tracked, and the cost
per meal was the lower than several similar-sized local school systems. We
also noted that controls over the cash sales process and the related deposit
practices were generally adequate.
34

--- Page 37 ---
School Board Operations
Background
The Board of Education of Dorchester County (the Board) is composed of five
elected members and two non-voting student representatives. In its oversight
responsibilities, the Board contracted with a certified public accounting firm
for independent audits of the DCPS financial statements and federal
programs. The Board has not established any special committees.
DCPS Adopted an Ethics Policy that Met the Requirements of State Law
In March 2012, the Board adopted a revised detailed ethics policy that
conforms to State Law and includes provisions for conflicts of interest and
financial disclosure and was approved by the State Ethics Commission.
Provisions of this policy are applicable to Board members as well as all DCPS
employees. DCPS established an Ethics Panel consisting of five members
who are appointed by the Board to interpret ethics policies and provide advice
on policy implementation. The Panel also reviews and rules on any reported
complaints of ethics violations. According to the ethics policy, annual financial
disclosure statements are required to be filed by Board members, candidates
for the Board, the Superintendent, and a number of other administrators
(Superintendents, Directors, Supervisors, Chief Financial Officer, Human
Resource Officer, Principals, and Vice-Principals) by April 30th of each year.
Finding 17
Required financial disclosure statements were not always filed.
Analysis
DCPS did not ensure that financial disclosure statements were filed by Board
members and certain employees by April 30th of each year and within 60 days
after leaving office, as required by its ethics policy. Our test of 63 Board
members and employees required to file ethics forms for calendar year 2015
disclosed that 38 individuals did not file the form as required, including 3
Board members. Specifically, one Board member last filed for calendar year
2011, while the other 2 last filed for calendar year 2013. During our testing,
we found that DCPS was not tracking employees required to file ethics
statements and was not properly following up on those that had not filed. We
commented on the failure to ensure that individuals subject to the
aforementioned policy comply with the requirements in our preceding audit
report.
35

--- Page 38 ---
Recommendation 17
We recommend that DCPS actively enforce its ethics policy to ensure that all
required disclosure statements are filed as required (repeat).
Other Financial Controls
Healthcare Background
DCPS is a member of a consortium of Eastern Shore governments and school
systems for employee and retiree health care. The Consortium members are
self-insured for healthcare costs up to the designated stop-loss amount of
$150,000 per participant per plan year. The Consortium contracts with a
third party administrator (TPA) for health care claims processing services for
employee medical (including vision), dental, and prescription costs and for the
stop-loss insurance coverage. The Consortium last bid out its health care
services for plan year 2013.
The TPA bills DCPS monthly subscription charges based on the number of
participants and their medical coverage and medical providers submit claims
to the TPA who pays them on behalf of DCPS. DCPS pays its TPA an
administrative fee for these services. In a year-end settlement process, which
segregates the participating agencies for the plan year ending August 31, the
TPA nets the amount of medical claims they paid against the monthly
subscription charges billed to and paid by DCPS to determine any excess
amount due from DCPS or to be reimbursed by the TPA to DCPS. According to
the TPA’s records for the plan year ended August 31, 2016, DCPS actual
health care expenditures totaled $7.5 million, including $399,000 for
administrative fees and $485,000 for stop-loss insurance coverage. As of
November 2016, DCPS provided health insurance benefits to 995 enrolled
employees and retirees.
Finding 18
Dependent eligibility documentation was not always obtained as required by
DCPS policy.
Analysis
Although DCPS requires all employees to provide appropriate documentation,
such as birth and marriage certificates, during the dependent enrollment
process and had established procedures to verify the receipt of this
documentation prior to the processing of related insurance coverage changes,
this was not always done. Our test of nine employees hired in fiscal year
2017 with dependent insurance coverage disclosed that four of the
36

--- Page 39 ---
employees had not provided the required supporting documentation for their
claimed dependents. According to the 2016 contract rates, the average cost
for each dependent added to DCPS’ plan was approximately $4,100 per year.
Recommended practices published by the Government Finance Officers
Association, state that health care cost containment is an important
component of long-term financial planning and budgeting. We commented on
the lack of verifying the authenticity of health care program participants and
their listed dependents in our preceding audit report.6
Recommendation 18
We recommend that DCPS ensure the eligibility of enrolled health care
program participants and their listed dependents by obtaining all required
supporting documentation (repeat).
Finding 19
DCPS did not ensure the propriety of employee and retiree health care claims
paid, and did not verify that stop-loss insurance was correctly applied and
plan administrative fees were properly charged.
Analysis
DCPS lacked procedures and controls to ensure that amounts paid to the TPA
were proper. Our review of DCPS’ procedures and controls over payments for
medical claims and administrative fees disclosed the following conditions:
 DCPS did not audit the propriety of the medical claims paid on its behalf
by the TPA to ensure that the services were actually provided, covered by
the health plans, appropriately priced, and accurately reported on the
year-end settlement. Furthermore, DCPS did not receive detailed claims
data from the TPA to verify the propriety of the aforementioned items and
the correctness of the year-end settlement.
 DCPS did not verify that claims exceeding the stop-loss limit were
reimbursed by the TPA under the stop-loss coverage. DCPS relies on the
administrator who notifies DCPS of any payments made above the stop-
loss limit as a line item in the annual settlement. The amount computed
6 In 2011, DCPS hired a consultant to verify the propriety of dependents covered by its health
care plans. Generally, all participants with dependents were required to submit
documentation to prove that each dependent was eligible under the criteria defined in
DCPS’ health care plan. During this review of 592 dependents, the consultant identified 27
ineligible dependents to be removed at an estimated savings of $110,388, and DCPS
advised us that it removed those ineligible dependents from the plans.
37

--- Page 40 ---
by the administrator to be in excess of the stop-loss amount reduces the
expenditure amount for which DCPS is responsible. Since DCPS did not
receive detailed documentation of all claims paid and stop-loss reductions
are not provided for in detail, DCPS lacks assurance that it did not pay
claims that should have been covered by the stop-loss insurance. We
verified that the claims in excess of the stop loss amount we identified per
detail claims information, which DCPS obtained from the TPA at our
request, were offset with the total claims included in the annual
settlement amount for plan year 2015.
 DCPS did not compare the number of plan participants billed against its
own payroll records to ensure that fees and premiums paid by DCPS were
for enrolled plan participants. We were advised that the only verification
performed was to ensure changes in coverage reported by the DCPS HR
Office were reflected on the monthly invoice, but this verification was not
documented. In addition, the monthly rates charged for the various
coverage categories (medical, vision, dental, and prescription drug) and
stop-loss insurance were not verified for agreement with the related
available contracts maintained on file. Our recalculation the
administrative fees and stop-loss insurance charges for plan year 2015
based on the listed participant counts on certain monthly invoices
reviewed and the related contract rates did not disclose significant
variances.
The State Office of Personnel Services and Benefits administers self-insured
health plans for state employees, and contracts for comprehensive reviews of
claims paid by plan administrators. According to the Office, improper
payments identified from these reviews have consistently exceeded the cost
of the reviews.
Recommendation 19
We recommend that DCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for
health insurance and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend that
DCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and ensure
audits of the claims paid by the TPA are conducted;
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the
stop-loss limit are reimbursed by the insurer (in this case the TPA); and
c. compare its records of enrolled employees, retirees, and dependents to
TPA invoices and contract rates to determine the propriety of all fees and
premiums billed.
38

--- Page 41 ---
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
We conducted a performance audit to evaluate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the financial management practices of the Dorchester County
Public Schools (DCPS). We conducted this audit under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1220(e) of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and performed it in accordance with generally accepted
government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We had two broad audit objectives:
1. Evaluate whether the DCPS procedures and controls were effective in
accounting for and safeguarding its assets.
2. Evaluate whether the DCPS policies provided for the efficient use of
financial resources.
In planning and conducting our audit of DCPS, we focused on 11 major
financial-related areas of operations as approved on September 14, 2004 by
the Joint Audit Committee of the Maryland General Assembly in accordance
with the enabling legislation. The scope of the work performed in each of
these areas was based on our assessments of significance and risk.
Therefore, our follow-up on the status of findings included in our preceding
audit report on DCPS dated January 10, 2011, was limited to those findings
that were applicable to the current audit scope for each of the 11 areas.
The audit objectives excluded reviewing and assessing student achievement,
curriculum, teacher performance, and other academic-related areas and
functions. Also, we did not evaluate the DCPS Comprehensive Education
Master Plan or related updates, and we did not review the activities, financial
or other, of any parent teacher association, group, or funds not under the local
board of education’s direct control or management.
To accomplish our objectives, we reviewed applicable State laws and
regulations pertaining to public elementary and secondary education, as well
as policies and procedures issued and established by DCPS. We also
interviewed personnel at DCPS and the Maryland State Department of
Education (MSDE), and staff at other local school systems in Maryland (as
39

--- Page 42 ---
appropriate).7 Our audit procedures included inspections of documents and
records, and observations of DCPS operations. We also tested transactions
and performed other auditing procedures that we considered necessary to
achieve our objectives, generally for the period from January 1, 2015 through
June 30, 2016. Generally, transactions were selected for testing based on
auditor judgment, which primarily considers risk. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, neither statistical nor non-statistical audit sampling was used to
select the transactions tested. Therefore, the results of the tests cannot be
used to project those results to the entire population from which the test
items were selected. For certain areas within the scope of the audit, we relied
on the work performed by the independent accounting firm that annually
audits DCPS’ financial statements and conducts the federal Single Audit.
We used certain statistical data—including financial and operational—
compiled by MSDE from various informational reports submitted by the
Maryland local school systems. This information was used in this audit report
for background or informational purposes, and was deemed reasonable.
We also extracted data from the DCPS automated financial management
system for the purpose of testing expenditure and payroll transactions. We
performed various audit procedures on the relevant data and determined the
data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes the data were used during the
audit.
DCPS’ management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control. Internal control is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance that objectives pertaining to the reliability of financial records,
effectiveness and efficiency of operations including safeguarding of assets,
and compliance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations are achieved.
Because of inherent limitations in internal control, errors or fraud may
nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any evaluation of
internal control to future periods are subject to the risk that conditions may
change or compliance with policies and procedures may deteriorate. In
addition to the conditions included in this report, other findings were
communicated to DCPS that were not deemed significant and, consequently,
did not warrant inclusion in this report.
We conducted our fieldwork from June 2016 to January 2017. The DCPS
response to our findings and recommendations is included as an Appendix to
7 During the course of the audit, it was necessary to contact other systems to identify policies
or practices for comparative purposes and analysis.
40

--- Page 43 ---
this report. As prescribed in the State Government Article, Section 2-1224 of
the Annotated Code of Maryland, we will advise DCPS regarding the results of
our review of its response.
41

--- Page 45 ---
Dorchester County Public Schools
Response to report comments and recommendations.
Draft report dated October 2017
Revenue/Billing Cycle
Recommendation 1
a. immediately record and restrictively endorse all checks,
b. independently verify that all collections were subsequently deposited, and
c. ensure that accounts receivable records are maintained by individuals independent of
the cash function.
Responses:
a. The Finance Department will restrictively endorse and record all checks immediately
upon receipt on a standard cash receipt log. Other Departments will be given
endorsement stamps and will be instructed to restrictively endorse and record all checks
on an excel standard cash receipts log immediately upon receipt. The cash receipts log
from other departments will be sent to Finance monthly for verification to deposit. This
process will be in place by 12/31/17.
b. Monthly, the A/P or Payroll specialist will compare the excel standard cash receipt log to
the deposit documentation on a sample basis. The reviewer will sign off on all
documents reviewed and the documents will be maintained in Finance. This process will
be in place by 12/31/17.
c. The Finance Department has five employees. Due to limited staffing it is not possible to
completely segregate the A/R and cash functions. However, mitigating controls have
been put in place to limit the risk associated with segregation of duties issues. For
example, deposit documentation is reviewed by the Assistant Comptroller. The Office
Manager enters the deposit data into the system – account codes and amounts. The
Assistant Comptroller reviews the system entries and compares it to the checks being
deposited. The Comptroller and Assistant Comptroller review the A/R reconciliations
completed by the Office Manager each month. System reports for the A/R accounts are
compared to the A/R excel reconciliations. Only the Comptroller can approve write‐offs
to the A/R accounts.
Procurement and Disbursement Cycle
Recommendation 2
We recommend that DCPS strengthen its control over the automated procurement and
accounts payable systems and processes. Specifically, we recommend that DCPS take
appropriate action to:
1

--- Page 46 ---
a. restrict users’ capabilities to eliminate the ability of users to perform incompatible
duties (repeat);
b. restrict access to the automated procurement and accounts payable system to
individuals whose job duties require such access (repeat);
c. restrict access to check stock to individuals who are independent of the check
processing function; and
d. establish a process to ensure that a proper and independent review of disbursement
checks is performed (repeat).
Responses: DCPS does not have a Purchasing Department. The Finance Office performs the purchasing
and a/p functions and is limited to five employees. Due to limited staffing it is not possible to completely
segregate all duties within the procurement and disbursement (a/p) cycle.
a. However, DCPS will review system users and their access rights to ensure access is
granted on a need basis only. This review will be complete by 12/31/17 and will be done
annually by the end of each fiscal year. Documents reviewed will be signed by the
reviewer(s) and will be maintained in the Finance Office.
b. However, DCPS will review system users and their access rights to ensure access is
granted on a need basis only. This review will be complete by 12/31/17 and will be done
annually by the end of the fiscal year. Documents reviewed will be signed by the
reviewer(s) and will be maintained in the Finance Office.
c. The Finance Office does not maintain check stock. Checks are printed on blank paper.
The check signer records bank account data and the Superintendent’s signature when
the checks are printed. The check signer is locked in a file cabinet in the Finance Office.
The Comptroller, Assistant Comptroller and Office Manager are the only staff who have
a key to this file cabinet.
d. The Payroll Specialist will review disbursement checks monthly and compare checks to
supporting documentation. This will be done on a sample basis. This process will be in
place by 12/31/17. Documents reviewed will be signed by the reviewer and will be
maintained in the Finance Office.
Recommendation 3
We recommend DCPS amend its existing procurement policies to
a. address all categories of goods and services purchased, including the procurement
methods to be used (repeat);
b. require documented justifications be prepared for all sole‐source awards (repeat); and
c. establish standards for the use of ICPAs that mandate the preparation of a benefit
analysis, as required by law, and the maintenance of ICPA agreements on file.
2

--- Page 47 ---
Responses a. through c.:
DCPS does not have a Purchasing Department. However, Finance is currently working on
a Purchasing Manual that will address the entire purchasing process including
procurement methods to be used, when to report sole source awards to the Board, how
to document sole source awards, ICPA standards, contract documentation and invoice
verification standards. DCPS will revise its Procurement policy to include procurement
methods, services, ICPA standards, sole source documentation and requirements to
report sole source awards to the Board. The Purchasing Manual and revised policies will
be complete by 6/30/18.
Recommendation 4
a. comply with State procurement law by using eMaryland Marketplace for contract
procurement solicitations or awards and before deciding to participate in an ICPA, prepare
written documentation of the benefits of utilizing the ICPA for Board review;
b. maintain contract pricing information on file, including the applicable contracts, and verify
the accuracy of prices on vendor billings (repeat);
c. procure contracts/purchases of over $25,000 through a competitive bidding process, or
document the justification of any sole source procurements (repeat); and
d. execute written contracts for services procured expected to exceed $25,000 that includes
sufficient specificity, such as agreed upon services and related financial terms and
conditions, to enable the subsequent verification of related billings.
Responses:
a. DCPS is now posting contract procurement solicitations to eMaryland Marketplace as
required by State law. DCPS is now preparing written documentation of the benefits of
using an ICPA and that documentation is being presented to the Board.
b. DCPS does not have a purchasing department. DCPS is training supervisors on the
necessity to maintain contract pricing information on file, including the applicable
contracts, and perform a documented verification to ensure the accuracy of prices on
vendor billings. Training will begin in the Spring of 2018 and will be on‐going.
c. DCPS does not have a Purchasing Department. However, DCPS is training supervisors on
the competitive bidding process and proper sole source documentation. Training will
begin in the Spring of 2018 and will be on‐going.
d. DCPS will execute written contracts for services procured that are expected to exceed
$25,000 that includes sufficient terms to evaluate the quality of services and
appropriateness of the rates billed.
3

--- Page 48 ---
Human Resources and Payroll
Recommendation 5
a. perform a periodic documented independent review of user capabilities to ensure access is
properly granted,
b. limit access of critical functions to those employees who require such capabilities to
perform their assigned job duties (repeat),
c. eliminate access to and segregate incompatible system functions (repeat),
d. perform a periodic documented independent review of critical personnel and payroll
transactions processed using supporting documentation (repeat), and
e. take appropriate actions to recover the $8,025 overpayment.
Responses:
a.‐c. Due to limited staffing within the Finance and Human Resources Departments it is not
possible to completely segregate all duties within the human resource and payroll
processes. However, DCPS will review system users and their access rights to ensure
access is granted on a need basis only. This review will be complete by 12/31/17 and will
be completed annually going forward.
d. Monthly, a review of HR and payroll changes as well as payroll transactions will be
performed by the Comptroller and Human Resources Manager. The review will include
reviewing supporting documentation of the change or transaction and will be done on a
sample basis. The change report will be generated electronically in excel. Transactions
will be filtered and sorted by specific attributes and dollar value to improve the accuracy
of the sampling process. This process will be in place by 12/31/17.
e. The Executive Team in place when this finding was brought to their attention reviewed
all information. They made the decision to not collect the overpayment. They based
their decision on the fact that more than 4 years had passed since the error was made
and discovered. This issue will be presented to the Board by 6/30/18. Board staff will
follow the Board’s decision regarding collection of this overpayment.
Inventory Control and Accountability
Recommendation 6
We recommend that DCPS ensure
a. postings to the inventory records (such as, disposals and adjustments) are properly
supported and approved by independent supervisory personnel, at least on a test basis;
b. equipment deletions are accompanied by a properly approved disposal form; and
c. inventory records are properly maintained by recording all applicable equipment purchases,
including their cost and purchase date, as required.
4

--- Page 49 ---
Responses:
a. Postings to inventory records require that invoices and disposal reports are scanned into
the database to support the addition or disposal. Mass updates to the system do not
allow for scanned items. Documentation to support mass additions or disposals will be
maintained in IT in paper format.
b. DCPS policy requires that disposal forms be completed for all disposals. The forms are
scanned into the inventory database when the disposal is done. If the form cannot be
scanned in it will be maintained in paper form in the IT or Finance Office. By 12/31 of
each fiscal year a disposal report will printed out of the inventory database and will be
reviewed by the Comptroller and IT Supervisor. The document will be signed by each
and maintained in Finance.
c. The majority of the items in the inventory database are IT related. As of 1/1/17 an
employee in the IT department is responsible for updating the inventory database for IT
related items. This employee has better access to the purchase and invoice
documentation necessary to ensure all fields are populated in the database accurately.
Information Technology
Recommendation 7
a. ensure that the service provider contract excludes blanket disclaimers of liability on behalf
of the service provider (repeat);
b. ensure that the service provider contract includes provisions that address the noted
security and operational risks, including requiring the service provider to regularly obtain
SOC 2 Type 2 reviews pertaining to the service provider’s information technology security
and operational controls (repeat); and
c. obtain and review copies of these SOC 2 Type 2 reports from service providers and ensure
that the related independent reviews adequately address all critical security and
operational concerns and that the service provider implements all critical report
recommendations.
Responses:
a. DCPS will negotiate with the service provider during the next contract renewal to ensure
that the service provider contract excludes blanket disclaimers of liability on behalf of
the service provider
b. DCPS will negotiate with the service provider during the next contract renewal to
include language requiring the service provider to submit regular SOC Type 2 reports
and to include language indicating the service provider will protect against data
contamination between customers
5

--- Page 50 ---
c. DCPS will review SOC 2 Type 2 reports received from the service provider to ensure that
the related independent reviews adequately address all critical security and operational
concerns and that the service provider implements all critical report recommendations
Recommendation 8
We recommend that DCPS implement best practices prescribed by the State of Maryland
Information Security Policy by
a. setting the student information database to log all critical security related events, regularly
review these logs, document these reviews, and retain this documentation for future
reference (repeat); and
b. establishing controls related to password aging, length, and complexity, over the DCPS’
student information database and the student information and finance applications
(repeat).
Responses:
a. The student information database does not have the auditing feature enabled in the
database due to the performance cost and space required.
b. The Password controls for the student information system have been set as follows:
 Administrator and teacher passwords must contain 1 uppercase, 1 lowercase, 1
number and 1 special character and must be at least 8 characters in length
 Administrator and teacher passwords are set to expire every 120 days
 Parent passwords must be reset at the beginning of each school year
 The last 10 passwords cannot be reused and accounts are locked after 4
unsuccessful attempts and can only be unlocked by a PS system administrator
(currently 2 IT staff members)
Password aging, length and complexity for the Financial applications is set as follows:
 All account passwords must contain 1 uppercase, 1 lowercase, 1 number and 1
special character and must be at least 8 characters in length
 Passwords are set to expire every 120 days
 The last 10 passwords cannot be reused and accounts are locked after 4
unsuccessful attempts
 Accounts can only be unlocked by the System Administrator (currently 1 IT staff
member)
6

--- Page 51 ---
Recommendation 9
We recommend that DCPS
a. develop and implement a comprehensive DRP that is in accordance with the
aforementioned Information Technology Disaster Recovery Guidelines (repeat); and
b. periodically test the DRP, document the testing, and retain the documentation for future
reference.
Responses:
a. and b.:
Our DRP has been updated some and will continue to be updated. A location has been
listed as the preferred alternate site. The DRP has been uploaded to SharePoint online
so that the IT staff can access it at any time from any place. A test will not be performed
until summer break when we do not have classes going on.
Recommendation 10
a. perform a documented review and assessment of its network security risks and identify
how network based IDPS and HIPS coverage should be best applied to its network. Based
on this review and assessment, we recommend that DCPS implement IDPS coverage as
necessary;
b. use network based, individual authentication for wireless connections made by its faculty,
staff, and students; and
c. utilize access control lists on its network devices to limit authenticated wireless users’
access to critical network devices based on each user’s needs.
Responses:
a., b. and c.:
We have purchased new next‐gen firewalls (2) to run in a HA scenario. These new firewalls
do have IDPS and HIPS has been installed on our external facing servers. We currently have
plans to utilize the coming e‐Rate window to purchase more wireless access points to have
all buildings on the same platform. Once that has been implemented, changes to the
wireless authentication and network access control will be implemented.
Recommendation 11
a. ensure that all managed computers are running current, operational versions of the
malware protection software used by DCPS; and
b. limit the assignment of local administrative rights on DCPS workstations to information
technology network and system administrators and individuals authorized in writing to have
such rights, with documentation supporting these authorizations retained for future
reference.
7

--- Page 52 ---
Responses:
a. Malware protection software has been addressed, group policy is pushing the client
install, rouge detection sensors are on all DCHP servers, and weekly system reports have
been set up.
b. Local admin rights that were found that were no longer needed have been removed, a
spread sheet has been created for IT staff to use to log the granting of admin rights.
Facilities Construction, Renovation and Maintenance
Recommendation 12
a. ensure that the procurement method (competitive procurement or intergovernmental
agreement) chosen for energy contracts provides the most favorable financial outcome for
DCPS; and
b. appropriately document the use of intergovernmental agreements and comply with all
related requirements in State law.
Responses:
a. A cost analysis will be documented for all energy contracts entered into in the future to
ensure the procurement method used provides DCPS with the most favorable outcome.
b. DCPS will document all intergovernmental agreements and consult with legal counsel as
needed to ensure it complies with State law regarding intergovernmental agreements.
Transportation Services
Recommendation 13
We recommend that DCPS take steps to determine if buses can be used more efficiently.
Specifically, we recommend that DCPS
a. develop formal, comprehensive written procedures that include specific bus ridership
ridership goals and student ride times (repeat);
b. take appropriate action to timely complete the recording of bus route data in its existing
routing software; and
c. use its automated routing software and periodically perform a system‐wide analysis of
its bus routes to maximize the ridership on its bus routes.
Responses:
a. DCPS will develop written procedures that include specific target bus capacities and
student ride times by 6/30/18.
b. The Transportation Office is limited to three employees. Staff are working towards
inputting all routes and related information into the routing system.
8

--- Page 53 ---
c. Annually, the Transportation Office will review its bus routes to ensure ridership is
maximized. The review will be documented, signed off on by the Transportation
Manager and review documentation will be maintained in the Transportation Office.
Recommendation 14
a. use documented actual costs and reasonable market investment rates as a basis for
establishing contractor rates for the annual PVA (repeat);
b. use actual bus operating costs or develop supportable cost estimates as the basis for
establishing reasonable contractor rates for per mile maintenance costs (repeat) and route
supplements;
c. exclude fuel excise taxes from contractor payments; and
d. document the basis for the mpg used in reimbursing bus contractors for the fuel usage and
consider adopting the industry standard (repeat).
Responses:
a. DCPS reviews and approves bus contractor rates as part of the annual budget process.
Documentation including proposed rates, approved rates and comparison of contractor
rates in other LEAs is shared with the Board of Education as part of the rate approval
process. DCPS will consider using market rates and actual costs in determining PVA
rates. It should be noted that the MSDE report “Per Vehicle Allowance Workgroup
Report, 2010” concluded that how to “fairly and equitably determine compensation to
school bus contractors… is the choice of the local jurisdiction as each best knows its own
unique transportation needs.”
b. DCPS reviews and approves bus contractor rates as part of the annual budget process.
Documentation including proposed rates, approved rates and comparison of contractor
rates in other LEAs is shared with the Board of Education as part of the rate approval
process. DCPS will consider using market rates and actual costs in determining per mile
maintenance rates and administrative fees.
c. DCPS will consider excluding the fuel excise tax from contractor payments during the
next budget cycle.
d. DCPS reviews and approves bus contractor rates as part of the annual budget process.
Documentation including proposed rates, approved rates and comparison of contractor
rates in other LEAs is shared with the Board of Education as part of the rate approval
process. DCPS will consider using market rates and actual costs in determining per mile
maintenance rates and administrative fees.
Recommendation 15
a. independently verify bus contractor’s manifests to ensure that the payments to the
contractors accurately reflect the actual bus services provided;
b. document the verification process; and
9

--- Page 54 ---
c. review past payments and pursue discrepancies, including those we identified.
Responses:
a. DCPS does currently verify routes by observation and limited use of routing software.
Once fully implemented the routing software will be utilized to verify manifests. This
process will occur by 6/30/18.
b. The DCPS Transportation Office will develop written procedures that will include
outlining the verification process and will document the verifications performed.
Written procedures will be complete by 6/30/18.
c. DCPS will continue to review past payments and research discrepancies identified during
this audit. Reviews will be complete by 6/30/18.
Recommendation 16
We recommend that DCPS ensure that an employee independent of the payment processing
verifies the accuracy and propriety of bus contractor payments, by performing a documented
comparison of the amounts paid to supporting documentation.
Response: The Transportation Office will reassign duties so that an independent review can be
completed on a sample basis monthly. This process will be in place by 6/30/18.
School Board Operations
Recommendation 17
We recommend that DCPS actively enforce its ethics policy to ensure that all required
disclosure statements are filed as required (repeat).
Response: The Assistant to the Superintendent now tracks all ethics forms in excel and follows
up on any forms not returned in a timely manner. All returned forms are maintained by fiscal
year in the Assistant’s office. This is done annually.
Other Financial Controls
Recommendation 18
We recommend that DCPS ensure the eligibility of enrolled health care program participants
and their listed dependents by obtaining the required supporting documentation (repeat).
Response: Due to the small staff in HR, follow up on lacking documentation is sometimes
driven by other priorities. DCPS will implement an independent review of supporting
documentation by another HR staff member. This review will be done on a sample basis and
the process will be in place by 12/31/17.
10

--- Page 55 ---
Recommendation 19
We recommend that DCPS establish procedures to verify the amounts paid for health insurance
and TPA service fees. Specifically, we recommend that DCPS
a. obtain documentation to support actual claim payments, and ensure audits of the claims
paid by the TPA are conducted;
b. use detailed claims payment data to ensure that claims paid above the stop‐loss limit are
reimbursed by the insurer (in this case the PVA); and
c. compare its records of enrolled employees, retirees, and dependents to invoices from the
TPA and determine the propriety of all fees and premiums billed.
Responses to a. through c.:
DCPS is one of six Eastern Shore school systems and one County government that collectively
purchase health insurance through the ESMEC Health Insurance Alliance. We will present this
recommendation to ESMEC and will strongly support a claims audit. In addition, through the
use of the ESMEC HIA consultant, we will annually verify the administrative fee and stop loss
amounts being charged by the insurance carrier by independently calculating the administrative
fee and obtaining claims data from the insurance carrier in order to calculate the stop loss
amount. This will then be compared to the calculations performed by the carrier and any
overpayment recovered from the carrier.
11

--- Page 56 ---
A T
UDIT EAM
Raymond G. Burton Jr., CPA, CFE
Audit Manager
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Stephen P. Jersey, CPA, CISA
Information Systems Audit Managers
Ken H. Johanning, CPA, CFE
Senior Auditor
Edward O. Kendall
Matthew D. Walbert, CISA
Information Systems Senior Auditors
Alice Z. Liu
Marc E. Merius
Joshua A. Naylor
Staff Auditors