Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2009
Date: 01/15/2010
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3dcc9d72404c150b6b
Extracted: 2025-06-18T09:04:47.513841
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2009
January 2010
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
• This report and any related follow-up correspondence are available to the public through the
Office of Legislative Audits at 301 West Preston Street, Room 1202, Baltimore, Maryland
21201. The Office may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5900, 301-970-5900, or 1-877-
486-9964.
• Electronic copies of our audit reports can be viewed or downloaded from our website at
http://www.ola.state.md.us.
• Alternate formats may be requested through the Maryland Relay Service at 1-800-735-2258.
• The Department of Legislative Services – Office of the Executive Director, 90 State Circle,
Annapolis, Maryland 21401 can also assist you in obtaining copies of our reports and related
correspondence. The Department may be contacted by telephone at 410-946-5400 or 301-
970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Karl S. Aro Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Executive Director Legislative Auditor xxx
January 15, 2010
Senator Verna L. Jones, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate Steven J. DeBoy, Sr., Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members of Joint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2009. Our review of closeout transactions disclosed
general compliance with the applicable laws, regulations, and policies. However,
we determined that certain transactions pertaining to the following agencies were
not in compliance:
Maryland State Department of Education
Department of State Police
Maryland Higher Education Commission
Comptroller of Maryland – Revenue Administration Division
State Board of Elections
Generally, the non-compliant transactions we identified suggest that additional
State funds may be required to eliminate potential deficits. For example, accrued
revenues totaling $14.5 million could not be substantiated. If the revenues are not
available for these accruals, general fund appropriations (or deficiency
appropriations) may be needed to eliminate the resulting deficits. A summary of
our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
Four State agencies reported a total of $22.5 million in unprovided for payables as
of June 30, 2009 (Exhibit 2). Our review disclosed additional unprovided for
payables related to two State agencies, totaling $6.4 million, which had not been
reported. The expenditures related to these unprovided for payables will have to
be funded with subsequent year appropriations (or through a deficiency
appropriation). According to an opinion of the Attorney General, this is not a
violation of State law if the General Assembly enacts a budget bill for the
subsequent year containing an appropriation that can be used to fund these
expenditures.

--- Page 4 ---
The agencies identified in this report generally agreed with our findings. The
primary purpose of this annual review is to alert the Maryland General Assembly
to significant financial and budgetary closeout practices that do not comply with
applicable laws, regulations, and policies. The issues identified during this
review, as well as relevant recommendations, will be fully addressed, as
appropriate, in our fiscal compliance audit reports on the applicable agencies. We
wish to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course of our
review by the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division and by the
various State agencies.
Respectfully submitted,
Bruce A. Myers, CPA
Legislative Auditor
2

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 7
Findings 9
Closeout Transactions
Revenue Transactions
* Finding 1 – Accrued Federal and Reimbursable Fund Revenues Totaling 10
$14.5 Million Could Not Be Substantiated by Two Agencies and One
Agency Overstated General Fund Accrued Revenues by $2.7 Million
* Finding 2 – A $5.4 Million General Fund Deficiency Appropriation May 11
Be Needed to Eliminate a Special Fund Deficit Balance
Finding 3 – Fiscal Year-End Special Fund Accounts Receivable of $2.6 11
Million Could Not Be Substantiated
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 4 – Unfunded Year-End Liabilities Totaling $6.4 Million Were 12
Not Reported to GAD as Required
Finding 5 – Excess General Fund Appropriations Totaling $2.4 Million Were 13
Not Cancelled at Fiscal Year-End
Other Issues
Finding 6 – Federal Expenditure Disallowances Totaling $14.4 Million 14
May Have to Be Paid With General Funds
* Finding 7 – Previously Reported Federal Audit Disallowances Totaling $32.8 15
Million Will Not Have to Be Paid With General Funds, and the State Is
Recovering $13 Million in Other Federal Sanctions from Local Education
Agencies
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2009 Closeout Review Findings by 16
State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables According 17
to the General Accounting Division
* Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closing transactions that have not been previously recorded in the State’s
accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR).
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the CAFR. In its
audit report dated December 11, 2009, applicable to the fiscal year ended June 30,
2009, the firm stated that the State’s basic financial statements presented fairly, in
all material respects, the respective financial position of the State of Maryland as
of June 30, 2009, and the respective changes in the financial position and cash
flows, for the year then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (referred to as GAAP).
The State’s CAFR states that the General Fund, on a budgetary basis, had a
balance of approximately $926 million as of June 30, 2009. This amount
represents a decrease of approximately $461 million from the balance reported at
the preceding fiscal year-end ($1.4 billion).
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2009. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 22
Departments and independent agencies to ascertain if the transactions were
properly supported and made in accordance with State budgetary laws,
regulations, and accounting policies. We also reviewed, on a limited basis,
transactions processed subsequent to June 30, 2009 to determine if the
transactions were properly recorded (such as charged or credited to the proper
fiscal year). Also, we assessed the status of the findings identified during our
review of the budget closeout transactions for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008,
which were reported to the Joint Audit Committee in a special report dated
January 16, 2009. As part of our current review, we contacted various officials of
State agencies, as well as the independent accounting firm under contract with the
State to express an opinion on its financial statements. Our review excluded
public colleges and universities and transactions processed through the
Transportation Trust Fund because the related financial activity does not involve
the State’s General Fund and/or because agencies have the authority to retain
unspent funds at year-end.
Our conclusions for the aforementioned objective are contained on page 9 of this
report. Our follow-up review of the two closeout transactions from the Statewide
Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2008 disclosed that both
exceptions are repeated in this report. Also, the status of the Federal audit
disallowances of Medicaid expenditures incurred by local education agencies is
updated in this report.
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. Our fieldwork was conducted during the period from September 2009
to January 2010.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings
Closeout Transactions
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that five departments or units thereof were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions either were not properly recorded or could not be
substantiated.
Revenue Transactions
Two State agencies could not substantiate certain revenue transactions totaling
$14.5 million. That is, the agencies could not provide evidence that they were
entitled to receive federal funding or funding from other sources for the specific
expenditures incurred. To the extent that these funds are not received, the
resulting deficits may require the use of general funds. In addition, one State
agency incorrectly calculated accrued revenue resulting in the overstatement of
general fund revenues by $2.7 million. Also, one State agency maintained a
deficit special fund balance of $5.4 million as a result of an improper closing
transaction recorded in a prior year. The use of general funds will likely be
required to eliminate the deficit. Finally, one State agency could not substantiate
fiscal year-end special fund accounts receivable of $2.6 million resulting in the
potential need for general fund appropriations to cover the uncollected revenues.
Expenditure Transactions
Two State agencies did not properly report unfunded liabilities totaling $6.4
million to GAD as required. Also, one State agency improperly encumbered
general fund appropriations totaling $2.4 million, which otherwise would have
been cancelled.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1 on page 16 of this
report.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
Accrued federal and reimbursable fund revenues totaling approximately
$14.5 million could not be substantiated and general fund accrued revenue
was overstated by approximately $2.7 million.
Analysis
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and the Department
of State Police (DSP) recorded unsubstantiated revenues of approximately $13.3
million and $1.2 million, respectively. Since revenues are not available for these
accruals, which were recorded to cover expenditures that had been previously
incurred, general fund appropriations (or deficiency appropriations) may be
needed to eliminate the resulting deficit. Both of these issues have been
commented upon in our three preceding annual budget closeout reports. In
addition, the Comptroller of Maryland – Revenue Administration Division
(RAD) overstated its revenue accrual by $2.7 million.
MSDE
MSDE recorded unsubstantiated federal fund revenues totaling $13.3 million at
June 30, 2009 related to the federal Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF) grant. This accrued revenue (that is, federal fund receivable) relates to
MSDE’s failure to recover TANF grant expenditures incurred during fiscal years
2002 and 2003. DHR, which processes the federal fund recoveries, advised that
the TANF federal fund grants for those years have already been fully used and are
no longer available to reimburse the MSDE expenditures. MSDE personnel
informed us that a deficiency appropriation will be requested to cover the
outstanding $13.3 million deficit.
DSP
DSP recorded unsubstantiated reimbursable revenues totaling approximately $1.2
million relating to unattained revenue from the Maryland Emergency
Management Agency (MEMA). DSP did not have adequate documentation to
support a reimbursable fund accrual of $1.2 million that during our past closeout
reviews DSP claimed was due from MEMA. However, DSP personnel have since
acknowledged that MEMA does not owe DSP the $1.2 million. DSP attempted to
obtain a deficiency appropriation in 2009 to resolve this situation; however, the
deficiency appropriation was not approved.
RAD
RAD overstated its fiscal year 2009 accrued revenue by $2.7 million.
Specifically, during the calculation of the 2009 fiscal year-end accrual, RAD
double counted the $2.7 million portion of the calculation that related to certain
10

--- Page 13 ---
revenues collected by the Maryland Clerks of the Circuit Court. The double
counting of the revenues resulted in the overstatement of general fund revenues
for fiscal year 2009.
Finding 2
A general fund deficiency appropriation will be required to eliminate a
special fund deficit balance of $5.4 million.
Analysis
The Department of State Police (DSP) may require a general fund deficiency
appropriation to eliminate a special fund deficit balance of $5.4 million that
existed as of June 30, 2009. Specifically, DSP mistakenly recorded certain
transactions as both accrued revenue and actual revenue during fiscal year 2005.
This resulted in a special fund surplus of $5.6 million being reflected in the
records which DSP transferred to the general fund during the fiscal year 2005
closeout because it did not have legal authority to retain any balance in this
special fund. When this mistake was discovered during fiscal year 2006, DSP
was left with a special fund deficit balance of $5.6 million at the end of fiscal year
2006 due to the transfer of the apparent surplus to the general fund and the
subsequent automatic reversal of the previously recorded accrued revenue
transaction at the beginning of fiscal year 2006. Since fiscal year 2006, excess
revenues of $200,000 were retained in the fund, which reduced the negative
balance to $5.4 million. DSP attempted to obtain a deficiency appropriation in
2009 to resolve this situation; however, the deficiency appropriation was not
approved. This condition has been commented upon in our three preceding
annual budget closeout reports.
Finding 3
Fiscal year-end special fund accounts receivable of $2.6 million could not be
substantiated.
Analysis
The Department of State Police’s (DSP) fiscal year-end special fund accounts
receivable balance could not be substantiated. Specifically, DSP’s special fund
accounts receivable balance at the close of fiscal year 2009 recorded on the
State’s general ledger totaled $5.2 million; however, the unpaid accounts
receivable according to DSP’s detail records totaled only $2.6 million. As a result,
$2.6 million of the accounts receivable may never be collected since a record of
the individual debts for this amount does not exist. Accordingly, to the extent
11

--- Page 14 ---
these receivables are not collectible, general funds appropriations may be needed
to cover the related DSP expenditures recorded in 2009 and prior years related to
these receivables.
DSP unsubstantiated receivables were commented upon in our two preceding
annual budget closeout reports. Specifically, DSP recorded fiscal year 2008 and
2007 year-end special fund revenue accruals (which resulted in establishing
accounts receivable) of $798,000 and $560,000, respectively, for services DSP
provided to other entities. However, for both these years, DSP was not able to
substantiate the accruals or identify the other entities who owed the amounts to
DSP, and these accruals have contributed to the unsubstantiated receivable that
existed at the end of fiscal year 2009.
DSP acknowledged that issues exist with their accounts receivable balance and
corresponding detail records and advised that it was attempting to rectify the
issues. DSP intended to offset part of the uncollectible accounts receivable using
the improperly encumbered general fund appropriations identified in Finding 5 of
this report.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s (GAD)
accounting procedures manual requires that adequate records be maintained to
account for billings and related collections.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 4
Unfunded year-end liabilities totaling approximately $6.4 million were not
reported to the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division
(GAD).
Analysis
The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) and the State Board
of Elections (SBE) did not report unfunded year-end liabilities of approximately
$4.4 million and $2 million, respectively, to GAD as required. General fund
appropriations in subsequent years (or deficiency appropriations) may be needed
to eliminate these liabilities.
MHEC
MHEC failed to report unfunded liabilities to GAD totaling $4.4 million during
the fiscal year 2009 budget closeout process. MHEC’s unfunded liabilities related
to amounts due to community colleges for employer retirement contributions and
fees for non-resident students (that is, the fee paid by the State for certain students
12

--- Page 15 ---
attending a community college in a county other than their county of residence).
However, MHEC did not have sufficient appropriations to fund certain of these
fiscal year 2009 expenditures. Although MHEC reported unfunded liabilities
totaling $6.8 million to GAD at the close of fiscal year 2009 related to employer
retirement contributions (see Exhibit 2), the amount reported was incomplete.
MHEC did not report an additional $200,000 unfunded liability in employer
retirement contribution costs incurred in June 2009. Furthermore, MHEC did not
report $4.2 million in expenditures incurred by community colleges for non-
resident students.
SBE
SBE failed to report unfunded liabilities to GAD totaling $2 million during the
fiscal year 2009 budget closeout process. SBE’s unfunded liabilities related to
unpaid vendor invoices. Specifically, at the end of fiscal year 2009, SBE had
unpaid vendor invoices totaling $5.1 million1. However, SBE did not have
sufficient appropriations to fund the entire amount due. In this regard, SBE
encumbered $3.1 million, but there were no remaining appropriations to pay for
the final $2 million of outstanding invoices.
Finding 5
Excess general fund appropriations totaling $2.4 million were not cancelled
at fiscal year-end.
Analysis
The Department of State Police (DSP) did not cancel excess general fund
appropriations totaling approximately $2.4 million at fiscal year-end. Instead,
DSP inappropriately encumbered the unused appropriation so that it could be
retained and used in future years (specifically, DSP intended to use these
appropriations to offset uncollectible accounts receivable previously noted in
Finding 3). DSP did not have expenditure obligations such as purchase orders or
contracts to support the encumbrance of these appropriations. This practice
violated the yearly closing instructions of the Comptroller of Maryland - General
Accounting Division (GAD) since the encumbrances did not represent actual
commitments by the State for goods or services and consequently would not
qualify as valid encumbrances.
1 After consultation with the Office of the Attorney General, SBE decided not pay the $5.1 million
of invoices due to a pending legal claim against the vendor.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Other Issues
Conclusion
Liabilities totaling approximately $14.4 million resulting from the disallowance of
federal expenditures have been recorded and may have to be paid with general
funds. A liability of $32.8 million reported upon in previous closeout reports
resulting from federal audit disallowances will no longer need to be repaid.
Federal Disallowances
Finding 6
Federal expenditure disallowances totaling approximately $14.4 million may
have to be paid with general funds.
Analysis
In fiscal year 2009 the Department of Human Resources (DHR) and the
Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) were informed by the United States
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) that certain Title IV-E grant
expenditures totaling $14.4 million were disallowed. To the extent that the
disallowances are not recovered, the Title IV-E expenditures in question will need
to be paid with State general funds.
The disallowances related to DHR totaled $9.6 million and were principally based
on the lack of a Title IV-E foster care pre-placement provision in DHR’s cost
allocation plan. Consequently, DHHS did not pay for foster care pre-placement
costs claimed on DHR’s Title IV-E reports for the quarters ending September 30,
2008 and December 31, 2008.
The disallowances related to DJS totaled $4.8 million and were principally based
on DHHS claiming that DJS and DHR violated Maryland State law by operating
separate Title IV-E programs and that a proposed agreement between DHR and
DJS permitting DJS to perform certain Title IV-E activities was deemed by
DHHS to be inconsistent with applicable laws. Consequently, DHHS did not pay
for DJS’ Title IV-E costs claimed on the DHR Title IV-E reports for the quarters
ending June 30, 2008, September 30, 2008, and December 31, 2008.
DHR and DJS disagreed with the DHHS’ disallowances and on December 19,
2008; March 19, 2009; and May 19, 2009 appealed DHHS’ decisions to the
DHHS Departmental Appeals Board (DAB). During the fiscal year 2009 closing,
DHR and DJS reported the $9.6 million and $4.8 million to the Comptroller of
Maryland - General Accounting Division (GAD) as liabilities with the appeal
pending, and the total amount was recorded as a decrease to general fund revenue
by GAD in the State’s fiscal year 2009 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.
14

--- Page 17 ---
As of December 31, 2009, there had been no final determination by DAB on the
appeal.
Finding 7
Previously reported federal audit disallowances totaling approximately $32.8
million will not have to be repaid, and the State is recovering $13 million in
other federal sanctions from local education agencies (LEAs).
Analysis
In our two previous closeout reports we disclosed two federal audits of school-
based Medicaid expenditures, which resulted in disallowed claims totaling
approximately $45.8 million. The federal sanctions from an audit report dated
May 2007 totaled $32.8 million and was appealed by the Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) and the Maryland State Department of Education
(MSDE) in June 2008. During the fiscal year 2009 closing, DHMH reported the
$32.8 million to the Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division
(GAD) as a liability with the appeal pending, and the full amount was recorded by
GAD in the State’s fiscal year 2009 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. In
November 2009 the United States Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) and DHMH, acting for the State, entered into a settlement agreement,
which resulted in DHHS withdrawing its $32.8 million disallowance. The
settlement agreement required DHMH to submit certain documentation and take
certain actions to address DHHS’ concerns in the future.
Other sanctions were imposed as a result of a March 2003 federal audit report.
DHMH and MSDE disagreed with the audit findings and appealed these
sanctions. Subsequently, the federal government reduced its claim from $19.9
million to $16.4 million, which was recovered by the federal government in July
2007 by reducing Medicaid reimbursements to DHMH. DHMH requested the
five applicable LEAs to reimburse DHMH $13 million for their respective
portions of the sanctions over a three-year period beginning in fiscal year 2009.
However, four of the five LEAs appealed DHMH’s request to the Office of
Administrative Hearings (OAH). Notwithstanding the appeal, DHMH began to
withhold a portion of the five LEAs’ medical assistance reimbursement payments
to fund the $13 million of sanctions. In March 2009, OAH ruled that DHMH and
MSDE had the legal authority to recover the overpayments from the LEAs.
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2009 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Agency Finding Finding Description
Number
Maryland State Department of 1 $13.3 million in unsubstantiated federal fund accrued
Education revenues were recorded.
1 $1.2 million in unsubstantiated reimbursable fund
accrued revenues were recorded.
2 $5.4 million special fund deficit balance exists, which
may require a general fund deficiency appropriation to
Department of State Police cover.
3 $2.6 million of special fund accounts receivable at
fiscal year-end could not be substantiated.
5 $2.4 million of excess general fund appropriations
were not cancelled at fiscal year-end.
Comptroller of Maryland – 1 $2.7 million of general fund accrued revenue was
Revenue Administration Division overstated.
Maryland Higher Education 4 $4.4 million of unfunded year-end liabilities were not
Commission reported to GAD as required.
State Board of Elections 4 $2 million of unfunded year-end liabilities were not
reported to GAD as required.
16

--- Page 19 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of Unprovided for General Fund Payables
According to the General Accounting Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Unprovided for Payables
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene $7,883,240
Maryland Higher Education Commission2 6,799,269
Department of Assessment and Taxation 5,958,347
Department of Juvenile Services 1,836,449
Total $22,477,305
2 As previously noted in Finding 4, the Maryland Higher Education Commission underreported its
unprovided for general fund payables to the General Accounting Division by $4.4 million. We
also noted that SBE did not report unprovided for payables of $2 million.
17

--- Page 20 ---
Audit Team
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Audit Manager
Ronnette L. Bailey, CFE
Lauren R. Crue
James M. Fowler
Terry S. Gibson
Nelson W. Hopkins, CPA
Roger E. Jaynes, III
Senior Auditors
Jonathan M. Bauman
Michael A. Horvath
Michael J. Murdzak
John F. Nogel, CFE
Amber M. Schon, CPA, CFE
Staff Auditors
OTHER STAFF WHO CONTRIBUTED TO THIS REPORT
Joshua S. Adler, CPA, CFE
Adam M. Auerback
Richard L. Carter, CISA
Paul R. Denz, CPA
Omar A. Gonzalez, CPA
Karen J. Howes
Julia M. King
Edwin L. Paul, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Brian S. Tanen, CPA, CFE