Title: Statewide Review of Budget Closeout Transactions for Fiscal Year 2016
Date: 01/25/2017
Type: Special Reports and Letters
URL: https://www.ola.state.md.us/umbraco/Api/ReportFile/GetReport?fileId=5a945d3ccc9d72404c150ac9
Extracted: 2025-06-18T11:04:13.736913
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 1 ---
Special Report
Statewide Review of
Budget Closeout Transactions for
Fiscal Year 2016
January 2017
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY

--- Page 2 ---
For further information concerning this report contact:
Department of Legislative Services
Office of Legislative Audits
301 West Preston Street, Room 1202
Baltimore, Maryland 21201
Phone: 410-946-5900 · 301-970-5900
Toll Free in Maryland: 1-877-486-9964
Maryland Relay: 711
TTY: 410-946-5401 · 301-970-5401
E-mail: OLAWebmaster@ola.state.md.us
Website: www.ola.state.md.us
The Office of Legislative Audits operates a Fraud Hotline to report fraud, waste, or abuse
involving State of Maryland government resources. Reports of fraud, waste, or abuse
may be communicated anonymously by a toll-free call to 1-877-FRAUD-11, by mail to the
Fraud Hotline, c/o Office of Legislative Audits, or through the Office’s website.
The Department of Legislative Services does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color,
creed, marital status, national origin, race, religion, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
or disability in the admission or access to its programs, services, or activities. The Department’s
Information Officer has been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 35.107 of the Department of Justice Regulations. Requests for
assistance should be directed to the Information Officer at 410-946-5400 or 410-970-5400.

--- Page 3 ---
DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AuDITS
MARYLAND GENERAL ASSEMBLY
arren G. Deschenaux ThomasJ.BarnickelIII, CPA
Executive Director LegislativeAuditor
January 25, 2017
Senator Craig J. Zucker, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Delegate C. William Frick, Co-Chair, Joint Audit Committee
Members ofJoint Audit Committee
Annapolis, Maryland
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have conducted a review ofthe State’s budget closeout transactions for the
fiscal year ended June 30, 2016. Our review ofcloseout transactions disclosed
general compliance with the applicable laws, regulations, and policies. However,
we determined that certain transactions pertaining to the following agencies were
not in compliance:
Department ofAging
Department ofGeneral Services
Department ofLabor, Licensing, and Regulation
Department ofState Police
State Board ofElections
Additionally, we noted a significant liability pertaining to the Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene at June 30, 2016.
A summary ofour findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
Generally, the non-compliant transactions we identified suggest that additional
State funds may be required to eliminate potential deficits. For example, two
State agencies recorded federal fund revenues totaling S10.4 million at fiscal year-
end; the recovery ofthese funds is uncertain. General fund appropriations (or
deficiency appropriations) may be needed to eliminate the resulting deficits ifthe
federal funds are not available.
Another agency inappropriately recorded certain fiscal year 2017 expenditures
and related federal fund revenues as fiscal year 2016 activity, furthermore, one
agency had special fund receivables of$2.9 million that may not be collected due
301 West Preston StreetS Room 1202 Baltimore, Maryland 21201
410-946-5900/301-970-5900 Fax 410-946-5999/301-970-5999
Toll Free in Maryland 877-486-9964 Fraud Hotline 877-FRAUD-il
.

--- Page 4 ---
to insufficient program revenues, and another agency retained $968,000 ofspecial
funds that should have been reverted to the General Fund.
Our review noted four state agencies had reported a total of$42.3 million in
unprovided for payables or other liabilities as ofJune 30, 2016 (Exhibit 2). The
expenditures related to these liabilities may have to be funded with subsequent
year appropriations (or through a deficiency appropriation). For example, one
agency reported a federal liability ofapproximately $34.2 million attributable to
the disallowance ofcertain claims by the federal government. A similar condition
was reported in our report on the review ofthe fiscal year 2015 closeout
transactions related to this agency.
The primary objective ofthis annual review is to alert the Maryland General
Assembly to significant financial and budgetary closeout practices that do not
comply with applicable laws, regulations, and policies and to highlight other
liabilities that existed at fiscal year-end. The issues identified during this review
will be fully addressed, as appropriate, in our fiscal compliance audit reports on
the applicable agencies, which will include relevant recommendations. We wish
to acknowledge the cooperation extended to us during the course ofour review by
the Comptroller ofMaryland’s General Accounting Division and by the various
State agencies.
Respectfully submitted,
72
Thomas 1. Barnickel III, CPA
Legislative Auditor
9

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Background Information 5
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope 7
Findings 9
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1 – The recovery of recorded federal fund revenues 10
totaling approximately $10.4 million is uncertain.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2 – Expenditures incurred during the first quarter of State fiscal 11
year 2017 and related federal fund revenues were recorded as fiscal
year 2016 activity by one agency.
Special Funds
Finding 3 – One agency had outstanding special fund accounts 12
receivable totaling $2.9 million that may not be collected
due to certain revenues being less than projected.
Finding 4 – One agency did not revert special fund revenues totaling 13
approximately $968,000 to the State’s General Fund at year-end.
Other Liabilities
Finding 5 – Four agencies reported a total of $42.3 million in unprovided 14
for general fund payables or other liabilities as of June 30, 2016.
Exhibit 1 – Summary of Fiscal Year 2016 Closeout Review Findings by 15
State Agency
Exhibit 2 – Schedule of June 30, 2016 Unprovided for General Fund 16
Payables and Other Liabilities Reported to the General
Accounting Division
3

--- Page 6 ---
4

--- Page 7 ---
Background Information
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division (GAD) annually
provides State agencies with instructions for completing the fiscal year-end
budget closeout process. State agencies individually report to GAD their fiscal
year-end closeout transactions that have not been previously recorded in the
State’s accounting records. GAD is responsible for closing the State’s accounting
records on a statewide basis and for preparing the State’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report (CAFR).
GAD contracts with an independent accounting firm for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the State’s basic financial statements contained in the CAFR. In its
audit report dated December 7, 2016, applicable to the fiscal year ended June 30,
2016, the firm stated that the State’s financial statements presented fairly, in all
material respects, the respective financial position of the State of Maryland as of
June 30, 2016, and the respective changes in the financial position and cash flows,
for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America (referred to as GAAP).
The State’s CAFR states that, on a budgetary basis, the General Fund had an
unencumbered balance of approximately $384.5 million as of June 30, 2016. This
represents an increase of approximately $63.2 million from the balance reported
at the preceding fiscal year-end ($321.3 million). The CAFR also states that the
State Reserve (primarily the Revenue Stabilization Account) balance totaled
$871.3 million as of June 30, 2016.
The budgetary General Fund balance does not reflect the effect of year-end
GAAP adjustments made to the State’s financial statements that were prepared on
a modified accrual basis of accounting. Certain GAAP adjustments, if recognized
on the budgetary basis, would have reduced the unencumbered budgetary General
Fund balance of $384.5 million. For example, two GAAP adjustments reduced
the Fund balance by $814.0 million for income tax collections that that are owed
to local jurisdictions as of June 30, 2016. These adjustments were a total of
$197.7 million smaller than a similar adjustment made for the fiscal year 2015
CAFR. Other GAAP adjustments totaling $42.3 million were made for liabilities
incurred by State agencies during fiscal year 2016 for which general fund
appropriations were not available to finance the expenditures (see Exhibit 2).
5

--- Page 8 ---
6

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction, Objectives, and Scope
We conducted a review of the State’s budget closeout transactions for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2016. This review was conducted under the authority of the
State Government Article, Section 2-1221 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The objective of our review was to determine whether budget closeout
transactions, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2016, were properly supported and
made in accordance with State budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting
policies and to determine if other significant liabilities existed at fiscal year-end.
Our review consisted of tests of significant year-end transactions for 22
Departments and independent agencies to ascertain if the transactions were
properly supported and made in accordance with State budgetary laws,
regulations, and accounting policies and to determine if other significant liabilities
existed at fiscal year-end. We reviewed, on a limited basis, transactions
processed subsequent to June 30, 2016 to determine if the transactions were
properly recorded (such as charged or credited to the proper fiscal year).
As part of our current review, we contacted various officials of State agencies, as
well as the independent accounting firm under contract with the State to express
an opinion on its financial statements. Our review excluded public colleges and
universities and transactions processed through the Transportation Trust Fund
because the related financial activity does not involve the State’s General Fund
and/or because agencies have the authority to retain unspent funds at year-end.
Our conclusions for the aforementioned objective are contained on page 9 of this
report.
We also assessed the status of the six issues (appearing in four findings) identified
in our February 2, 2016 report entitled Statewide Review of Budget Closeout
Transactions for Fiscal Year 2015. We determined that five of the six issues had
been resolved. The sixth issue is repeated in this report (see Exhibit 1).
Our review was limited to the procedures necessary to accomplish the
aforementioned objective. These procedures did not constitute an audit conducted
in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
Had we conducted an audit in accordance with GAGAS, those standards would
require the issuance of recommendations as part of our reporting process. In
addition, other matters may have come to our attention that would have been
reported. We advised the appropriate agencies of our findings. Formal responses
were not requested since this report contains no recommendations. Our fieldwork
was conducted during the period from September 2016 to January 2017.
7

--- Page 10 ---
8

--- Page 11 ---
Findings
Conclusion
Our review of State agencies’ budget closeout transactions disclosed that such
transactions were generally properly supported and made in accordance with State
budgetary laws, regulations, and accounting policies. However, we determined
that five departments or agencies were not in compliance primarily because
certain year-end transactions were not properly recorded, could not be
substantiated, or did not comply with budget closeout requirements. Additionally,
we determined that one agency had a significant liability at June 30, 2016 that
may require general funds.
Revenue Transactions
Two agencies recorded unsubstantiated revenues to offset federal fund deficits.
Specifically, the agencies recorded federal fund revenues totaling approximately
$10.4 million to cover expenditures even though the agencies could not document
that these funds would be received. To the extent these funds are not received,
general funds will likely be required to eliminate the deficits resulting from these
transactions.
Expenditure Transactions
Expenditures incurred during the first quarter of State fiscal year 2017 and related
federal fund revenues were recorded as fiscal year 2016 activity by one agency.
Special Funds
One State agency had $2.9 million of special fund receivables that may not be
collected due to insufficient program revenues, and another agency could not
adequately demonstrate that it was entitled to retain special funds totaling
$968,000 at fiscal year-end rather than reverting the funds to the General Fund.
Other Liabilities
Four state agencies reported a total of $42.3 million in unprovided for payables or
other liabilities as of June 30, 2016. For example, one agency, which had a
similar issue in our fiscal year 2015 closeout report, may require general funds of
approximately $34.2 million to cover an unfunded federal liability attributable to
the disallowance of certain claims. According to an opinion of the Attorney
General, unprovided for payables are not a violation of State law if the General
Assembly enacts a budget bill for the subsequent year containing an appropriation
that can be used to fund these expenditures.
A summary of our findings, by agency, is included in Exhibit 1.
9

--- Page 12 ---
Revenue Transactions
Finding 1
The recovery of recorded federal fund revenues totaling approximately $10.4
million is uncertain.
Analysis
The Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation (DLLR) and the State
Board of Elections (SBE) could not substantiate their ability to collect revenues
of approximately $9.9 million and $523,000, respectively, as of June 30, 2016. If
these agencies are unable to recover these funds, general funds may be needed to
eliminate the resulting deficits.
DLLR
DLLR recorded unsubstantiated federal fund revenues totaling approximately
$9.9 million. These federal fund revenues related to receivables recorded for
indirect costs to be recovered associated with several federal programs
administered by DLLR during fiscal years 2014, 2015, and 2016. Officials at
DLLR could not provide any documentation supporting how these amounts were
determined or what amount of the respective recorded revenues may eventually
be received. According to DLLR, it has been experiencing significant delays in
obtaining approval from the U.S Department of Labor for these reimbursement
rates due to significant turnover at the federal agency. Because of the length of
the reimbursement delays, the extent to which the amounts outstanding will be
received is uncertain.
As of January 10, 2017, DLLR had received federal approvals for the
reimbursement rates for indirect costs through fiscal year 2015 (which was
approved by the U.S. Department of Labor on May 9, 2016). However, none of
these indirect cost recovery revenues related to these rates had been collected.
According to DLLR management, it is in the process of working with the U.S.
Department of Labor to recover past costs and obtain approval for the
reimbursement rate that is required to recover these indirect costs for 2016. If
federal funds are not available for these amounts, general fund appropriations (or
deficiency appropriations) may ultimately be needed to eliminate uncollectible
indirect costs.
SBE
SBE recorded federal fund revenue totaling $523,000 to offset a deficit balance in
a related federal fund source. However, all of these revenues may not be received
from the federal government. SBE management explained that these revenues
related to funds received in a prior year as part of the Help America Vote Act that
10

--- Page 13 ---
had been recorded as special fund revenues and retained by SBE rather than being
recorded as federal funds and used to offset related expenditures. As of June 30,
2016, SBE had a remaining special fund balance of $181,000 under its Help
America Vote Act program, and claimed that other funds may be available to help
offset the $523,000 receivable. Therefore, general fund appropriations (or
deficiency appropriations) may ultimately be needed to eliminate any remaining
deficit.
Expenditure Transactions
Finding 2
Expenditures incurred during the first quarter of State fiscal year 2017 and
related federal fund revenues were recorded as fiscal year 2016 activity by
one agency.
Analysis
The Maryland Department of Aging (DOA) improperly recorded expenditures
and related federal fund revenues for the first quarter of fiscal year 2017 (that is,
July 1, 2016 to September 30, 2016) as State fiscal year 2016 activity. This
included actual and projected revenues and expenditures for the first quarter of
State fiscal year 2017.
We sighted multiple examples of the payment of invoices from local jurisdictions
related to the period from July 1, 2016 to September 30, 2016 that were charged
as State fiscal year 2016 expenditures. During the fiscal year 2016 closing, DOA
recorded $17.7 million and $19.2 million in federal fund revenues and
expenditures, respectively. Based on an analysis prepared by DOA at our request,
$6.1 million of the expenditures recorded during the fiscal year closing related to
fiscal year 2017 activity.
According to agency management, these revenues and expenditures were
recorded to reflect anticipated financial activity related to federal grants that were
awarded on a Federal fiscal year basis (which ends on September 30).
Management also represented that similar transactions were recorded during the
prior fiscal year-end. This practice may result in revenues and expenditures for
any given State fiscal year to be misstated for budgetary reporting purposes.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s closing
instructions state that accrued revenues should be recorded only when related
11

--- Page 14 ---
goods and services have been provided prior to July 1st; however, billings for the
revenue have not been prepared or submitted for collection. Furthermore, the
instructions state that accrued expenditures should be recorded only when related
goods and services have been received prior to July 1st; however, the related
invoices have not been received or paid. Therefore, accrued revenues and accrued
expenditures should not include activity related to revenues and expenditures
related to goods and services that are provided or received after June 30 since
these relate to following fiscal year.
Special Funds
Finding 3
One agency had outstanding special fund accounts receivables totaling $2.9
million that may not be collected due to revenues being less than projected in
a certain program.
Analysis
The Maryland Department of State Police (DSP) recorded special fund
accounts receivable transactions for costs intended to be reimbursed by revenue
distributions from the Work Zone Automated Speed Enforcement Program (or
SafeZones Program); however, it appears that actual revenues generated by the
program were not sufficient to cover these costs resulting in $2.9 million of
receivables that may not be collected.
Work zone speed camera revenues generated from issued citations are initially
collected by the Department of Transportation – State Highway Administration
(SHA). After reimbursement of program costs for all involved State agencies and
payments to the vendor that administers the speed cameras, any revenues
remaining are distributed to DSP in accordance with State law. Specifically,
according to Transportation Article, Section 12-118 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, after covering the actual operating costs of both DSP and SHA in
administering this program, at least $7 million was to be distributed to DSP
during each fiscal year 2016 through 2018 for the replacement of vehicles and
related equipment. However, according to DSP agency management, revenues
under the program were less than anticipated which resulted in reduced
distributions to DSP.
As of January 10, 2017, the total outstanding amount due to DSP as of June 30,
2016 was $4.7 million. Furthermore, DSP management anticipated using
revenues generated during subsequent fiscal years to offset this receivable
balance; however, there have been no funds distributed for amounts due for fiscal
12

--- Page 15 ---
year 2016 from SHA to DSP since May 2016. According to SHA management,
in relation to the outstanding amount due for fiscal year 2016, SHA anticipates
reimbursing DSP approximately $300,000 for personnel costs related to the
program and an additional $1.5 million in revenue distributions pending approval
from the Department of Budget and Management. General funds (or deficiency
appropriations) may ultimately be needed to eliminate any remaining deficit ($2.9
million).
Finding 4
One agency did not revert special fund revenues totaling approximately
$968,000 to the State’s General Fund at year-end.
Analysis
The Department of General Services (DGS) recorded deferred revenue totaling
approximately $968,000 to avoid reverting certain accumulated and unspent
special fund revenues.
State law allows for the collection of an administrative fee from bidders for the
use of electronic means to conduct procurements with the State if the Board of
Public Works approves the fee. In August 2011, DGS received approval from the
Board of Public Works to collect fees on these types of procurements to pay for
the costs incurred to operate the eMaryland Marketplace system. However, the
law does not specify that the special fund revenues from these fees are to be
retained in a nonlapsing fund, nor dedicate the fees collected for any specific
purpose. Accordingly, DGS did not have legal authority to retain the excess fees
collected during the year. Instead of reverting to the general fund fees collected
in excess of costs incurred, DGS retained the excess funds by classifying them as
deferred revenues to offset future years’ costs.
The Comptroller of Maryland – General Accounting Division’s closing
instructions state that deferred revenue should be recorded only when revenue has
been collected in the fiscal year, but will not be earned and recognized until the
next fiscal year. The instructions further require that all fund balances carried
over to the next fiscal year be done so in accordance with State statute, regulation,
or policy. However, DGS could not document that these deferred revenues were
being carried forward in accordance with State statute, regulation, or policy.
Furthermore, DGS could not document that these funds were necessary to pay
specific costs and expenditures associated with eMaryland Marketplace for fiscal
year 2016. In addition, the Department of Budget and Management advised us
that DGS should have reverted these year-end balances to the General Fund,
rather than recording deferred revenue.
13

--- Page 16 ---
Other Liabilities
Finding 5
Four agencies reported a total of $42.3 million in unprovided for payables or
other liabilities as of June 30, 2016.
Analysis
Four agencies had a total of $42.3 million in unprovided for payables or other
liabilities as of June 30, 2016 (see Exhibit 2). The expenditures related to these
liabilities may have to be funded with subsequent year appropriations (or through
a deficiency appropriation).
For example, the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH) had
unprovided for payables and other liabilities totaling $34.7 million at June 30,
2016 including a liability to the federal government of approximately $34.2
million for disallowed claims related to Developmental Disabilities
Administration (DDA) residential add-on services. Funding sources to pay this
liability have not been identified. DHMH reported the potential liability to GAD
and, GAD recorded a decrease to the General Fund in the State’s fiscal year 2016
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report to recognize these disallowances. The
claims were disallowed by the federal Department of Health and Human Services
– Office of the Inspector General in its June 2015 audit report which
recommended that DDA refund the overbilled amount to the federal government.
DDA is disputing the disallowed claims. Disallowed federal fund claims were
also commented upon in our preceding budgetary closeout report.
According to an opinion of the Attorney General, unprovided for payables are not
a violation of State law if the General Assembly enacts a budget bill for the
subsequent year containing an appropriation that can be used to fund these
expenditures.
14

--- Page 17 ---
Exhibit 1
Summary of Fiscal Year 2016 Closeout Review
Findings by State Agency
Finding
Agency Finding Description
Number
1 Recovery of $9.9 million in recorded
Department of Labor,
federal fund revenues is uncertain
Licensing, and Regulation
1 $523,000 in federal fund revenues were
State Board of Elections recorded even though related federal funds
may not be available
Maryland Department of 2 Certain fiscal year 2017 expenditures and
Aging related federal fund revenues were recorded
as fiscal year 2016 activity
3 Special fund receivables totaling $2.9
Maryland Department of
million may not be collected due to
State Police
insufficient program revenue
4 Special fund revenues totaling
Department of General
approximately $968,000 were not reverted
Services
to the State’s General Fund at year-end
5* A federal liability of approximately $34.2
Department of Health and
million may have to be funded with State
Mental Hygiene
general funds
∗ Denotes item repeated in full or part from preceding report
15

--- Page 18 ---
Exhibit 2
Schedule of June 30, 2016 Unprovided for General Fund Payables
and Other Liabilities Reported to the General Accounting
Division
Amount of Reported
Agency Unprovided for Payables /
Other Liabilities
As of June 30, 2016
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene $34,661,369
Office of the Public Defender 5,216,698
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 1,533,761
Department of State Police 925,582
Total $42,337,410
16

--- Page 19 ---
AUDIT TEAM
Mark S. Hagenbuch, CPA
Stephen C. Pease, CPA
Matthew L. Streett, CPA, CFE
Audit Managers
Jonathan H. Finglass, CPA
Brian S. Han, CPA
Edward J. Welsh, CFE
Senior Auditors
Matusala Y. Abishe
Anthony V. Calcagno
Steven A. Crocker
Lauren E. McLain, CPA
Daniel P. Nuccio, CPA, CFE
Timothy S. Rice
Syed M.A. Taqvi
Staff Auditors